 Lamins are nuclear intermediate filament proteins that are ubiquitously found in metazoan cells, where they contribute to nuclear morphology, stability, and gene expression. Lamin-like sequences have recently been identified in distantly related eukaryotes, but it remains unclear if these proteins share conserved functions with the lamins found in metazoans. Here, we investigate conserved features between metazoan and amoebozoan lamins using a genetic complementation system to express the Dictyostelium discoideum lamin-like protein NE81 in mammalian cells lacking either specific lamins or all endogenous lamins. We report that NE81 localizes to the nucleus in cells lacking Lamin A/C, and that NE81 expression improves nuclear circularity, reduces nuclear deformability, and prevents nuclear envelope rupture in these cells. However, NE81 did not completely rescue loss of Lamin A/C, and was unable to restore normal distribution of metazoan lamin interactors, such as emerin and nuclear pore complexes, which are frequently displaced in Lamin A/C deficient cells. Collectively, our results indicate that the ability of lamins to modulate the morphology and mechanical properties of nuclei may have been a feature present in the common ancestor of Dictyostelium and animals, whereas other, more specialized interactions may have evolved more recently in metazoan lineages. Full Text Availability The license terms selected by the author for this preprint version do not permit archiving in PMC. The full text is available from the preprint server. Article information Version 2. bioRxiv. Preprint. 2023 Jun 1. doi: 10.1101/2023.05.31.543154 PMCID: PMC10312578 PMID: 37398420 This is a preprint. It has not yet been peer reviewed by a journal. The National Library of Medicine is running a pilot to include preprints that result from research funded by NIH in PMC and PubMed. Jacob Odell, Ralph Gräf, and Jan Lammerding PMC Copyright notice Updated version available: A peer-reviewed version of this article, " Heterologous expression of Dictyostelium discoideum NE81 in mouse embryo fibroblasts reveals conserved mechanoprotective roles of lamins. ", has been published in Mol Biol Cell. The complete version history of this preprint is available at bioRxiv. Articles from bioRxiv are provided here courtesy of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Preprints