 We have previously described an automated system for measuring chemotactic movement of Dictyostelium amoebae in a folic acid gradient. In the ECIS/taxis system, cells migrate in an under-agarose environment, and their position is monitored by determining the impedance change caused by cells crawling onto the surface of an electrode. In this report, we show that chemotaxis of primary and immortalized leukocytes in response to complement could be measured using the ECIS/taxis system. Several modifications to the design of the target electrode were tested, and a linear electrode perpendicular to the direction of movement was found to increase the sensitivity and reliability of the assay. Using the optimized ECIS/taxis assay, the dose response of neutrophils and WBC 265-9C cells was established and compared to the Boyden chamber assay. The ECIS/taxis assay system can be used to compare the movement of different cell types, to assess the effect of complex chemotactic gradients, or to determine the effects of pharmaceuticals on chemotactic motility. Keywords: ECIS/taxis, Chemotaxis, leukocyte, complement, neutrophils, WBC 265-9C 1. Introduction Cell migration has been a focus of research for more than a century as a consequence of its involvement in several important physiological and pathological processes. Cell migration is observed during organogenesis in embryos as well as during the metastasis of primary tumors to secondary sites. Moreover, during the inflammatory response, immune cells migrate from the periphery into a site of injury in response to locally released chemotactic agents. This is usually a beneficial process, however, there can be negative consequences, such as when inflammation leads to a chronic immune response. Consequently, having recourse to pharmaceuticals that can modulate the immune response is advantageous. It is important to be able to test potential drugs in vitro using a sensitive and reproducible assay. The measurement of the chemotactic response of cells in vitro has been accomplished using several methods. Variations of the Boyden chamber assay are currently the most commonly used. In these assays, the cells are placed on a microporous membrane over a source of chemotactic agent. As the cells detect a concentration gradient of a chemotactic agent diffusing from below, they migrate through the membrane to its underside. Migrating cells are detected on the reverse side of the membrane after staining. Responding cells are usually counted as an endpoint assay at a predetermined time. An advantage of this technique is the ability to perform many simultaneous assays in parallel. A major limitation of the Boyden assay is that the counting of migrated cell on the stained filter can be time consuming, tedious and subject to error from one individual to another. Another disadvantage is the very steep and transient nature of the gradient that may not reflect the conditions which cells experience in vivo. The under-agarose chemotaxis assay provides a cellular environment different from other assays. First, the cells move in the space between the underlying substrate and the overlying agarose. Secondly, the chemotactic gradient is stabilized by the agarose allowing the gradient to span a larger distance and persist for a longer time. Using video microscopy, it is possible to continuously monitor the chemotactic response of individual cells as the whole population moves away from the source well. The disadvantage of this assay is that when running multiple samples, each sample would have to be examined microscopically at each time point. The ECIS/taxis system is adapted from the under-agarose assay but detects the movement of the cells using Electric Cell-substrate Impedance Sensing technology. In the ECIS assay, a small target electrode and a large electrode are lithographed on the surface of a slide and positioned within a chamber that holds aqueous media. A one volt AC current passes through the culture media electrolyte, and a lock-in amplifier measures the current flow through this circuit, detecting the resistance over time. Cell binding to the target electrode surface causes changes in the resistance of the circuit. In a previous report, we have shown that the ECIS/taxis system was able to measure the chemotactic response of Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae to increasing doses of a chemotactic agent. The resistance values, measured by the ECIS/taxis system, were proportional to the number of cells on the target electrode. The system is sensitive enough to detect the presence of a single cell on the target electrode. We now report that the ECIS/taxis system can also be used to monitor the chemotactic response of mammalian immune cells, including the response of primary and immortalized leukocytes to complement. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Mice C57BL/6J mice originally obtained as breeding stock from the Jackson Laboratory were bred and housed at the University of Connecticut animal facility in a pathogen free environment. The mice were kept at 12 hours light-cycle and fed water at libidum. On the day of the experiment, male mice were transferred to the laboratory and used according to the experimental procedures described in later sections. Animal care and use was in accordance with institutional guidelines, and was overseen by the University of Connecticut Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. 2.2. Cells WBC 265-9C cells are the fusion of a normal human neutrophil and a mouse macrophage cell line. WBC 265-9C cells were cultured in minimum essential media containing 10% heat inactivated FBS, and 50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol. Isolation of bone marrow cells Bone marrow cells were collected according to standard procedures from femur bones. The mice were euthanized with CO 2 and dissected to allow the removal of femur bones. The femurs were separated from the muscle and bone marrow was flushed out with MEM using a 27 gauge needle on a 5ml syringe. The single cell suspension was washed with incomplete MEM, counted and re-suspended at 2.2×10 7 cells/ml in MEM, containing 10% heat inactivated FBS. Isolation of thioglycollate elicited peritoneal cells C57BL/6J mice were injected intra-peritoneally with 1 ml sterile 3% thioglycollate. After 4.5 hours, the mice were euthanized with CO 2 and the peritoneal cavity of each animal was flushed with 10 ml of unsupplemented sterile MEM solution. The cells were then washed twice, counted and re-suspended at 2.25 × 10 7 cells/ml in MEM containing 10% heat inactivated FBS. 2.3. Agarose preparation Agarose was prepared by melting 1ml of 3% agarose in filter-sterilized water in an autoclave using the slow exhaust cycle for 2 min. The agarose solution was then mixed with 5 ml of pre-warmed MEM supplemented with 10% heat inactivated FBS, 40mM HEPES and 0.075% sodium bicarbonate to produce a 0.5% final agarose concentration. The agarose solution was then loaded into the ECIS/taxis arrays at 250 μl per well and allowed to gel. 2.4. ECIS/taxis system The current ECIS/taxis configuration was used as described previously by Hadjout et al with several modifications. Each ECIS/taxis array is composed of 8 chambers with lithographed paired surface electrodes within each chamber. Before addition of the 0.5% agarose solution to the ECIS/taxis array, the chambers were pre-treated with a 10 mM cysteine solution for 15 min at room temperature, washed three times with filter-sterilized dH 2 O and air dried at 37°C. Each of the chambers was then loaded with 250 μl of agarose solution. After the agarose had solidified, wells for chemoattractant and cells were cut in the agarose layer using a pair of 14-gauge cannulas mounted in a frame to create wells, spaced 1 mm on either side of the 250 μm diameter target electrode. The chambers were chilled to 4°C for 15 min, and the agarose plugs were removed by aspiration using a Pasteur pipette attached to a vacuum line. The agarose in the ECIS/taxis array was then saturated with complete culture media for at least 5 minutes and the excess media aspirated. Cells were added to the cell well and were acclimated in a humidified CO 2 incubator for one hour before addition of chemoattractant. The chemoattractant wells were then loaded with 7 μl of chemoattractant at the indicated concentrations. Guinea pig serum was used as a source of activated complement. The complement molecules present in serum become activated when they are exposed to agarose through the alternative pathway, allowing the formation of the chemotactic molecule, C5a. In some experiments, purified recombinant human C5a was used. Figure 1 Schematic configuration of ECIS/taxis electrode designs. The ECIS/taxis array was connected to the ECIS instrumentation and the resistance to 1 volt AC at 4000 Hz was measured at 60 second intervals. Resistance gradually decreases during the assay and cell arrival time is considered as the time at which the first increase in resistance is seen. The speed is then calculated as the distance between the cell well edge and the target electrode divided by the time of arrival of the first cells. The percent increase in resistance was calculated by dividing the highest value of normalized resistance by the normalized resistance of the control chamber at the same time point and then multiplying by 100. Figure 6 Chemotactic dose response of inflammatory neutrophils to human C5a 2.5. Boyden Chamber Assay A 48 well micro-Boyden Chamber apparatus with 3 μm pore polycarbonate PVP free membrane filters was used for these assays. The lower chambers were loaded with 29 μl of the chemoattractant-supplemented media or media alone. The polycarbonate membrane was then placed over the wells and the chamber assembled. Fifty microliters of cells at 2×10 6 cells/ml were added to the upper chambers. The apparatus was incubated for 35 min at 37°C, and then the filters were removed, fixed, stained using the HEMA 3 STAIN set, and placed on a glass slide. For each concentration of human C5a, three to four wells were tested and the mean of the number of cells in six fields of view at 400× magnification was determined. 2.6. Imaging The gold electrode and overlying photoresist are thin enough to be visually transparent. For some experiments, the target electrode was imaged during the collection of resistance data to confirm that the time of arrival of cells measured by the ECIS/taxis resistance data corresponded to the actual arrival of the first cells. The ECIS/taxis plate was placed on the stage of a Leica DM IL Microscope and a foam box was placed over the microscope. Heated air was blown into the box with Airtherm regulator to keep the stage temperature at 37°C. Images were captured every minute using a Dage CCD300 video camera and a Scion CG-7 frame grabber. Image capture was controlled and images processed using Scion Image software. In other experiments, the chambers of the ECIS/taxis plate were kept in the CO 2 incubator and imaged at the end of the experiment in order to verify the data obtained by ECIS measurements. 2.7. Differential cell staining The migrated cells in the ECIS/taxis array were fixed by adding 0.1% EM grade glutaraldehyde plus 1% EM grade formaldehyde in incomplete MEM to the well and incubating for 15 minutes at 37°C. The agarose layers were carefully removed by aspiration and the fixed adherent cells were washed twice with calcium- and magnesium-free phosphate buffered saline. The fixed cells were then stained using HEMA 3-stain as described by the supplier. 2.8. Statistics Data were analyzed by ANOVA using InStat software version 3 for Macintosh. 3. RESULTS The ECIS/taxis assay is a modified under-agarose chemotaxis assay in which a surface electrode is used to detect the movement of cells up a concentration gradient. The ability of the ECIS/taxis system to detect chemotactic motility using Dictyostelium discoideum cells was previously reported. In the original ECIS/taxis system, cells migrate out of the cell well under an agarose sheet in response to a chemotactic gradient, and their migration is monitored by the resistance changes measured at a small circular target electrode that they cross during their journey. The arrival of cells at the target electrode results in an increase in resistance of the circuit because the cells block the flow of electric current. The total change in resistance of the ECIS/taxis circuit is proportional to the number of cells on the electrode. To assess the ability of the ECIS/taxis system to detect chemotaxis of leukocytes, the response of bone marrow cells to activated complement was examined. C5a has been shown to have chemotactic activity for both neutrophils and macrophages. Using the ECIS/taxis assay, bone marrow cells exposed to media alone caused no increase in resistance over background but rather produce a smooth continuous decrease in resistance. This same resistance profile is seen when no cells are added to the chamber. In the presence of a gradient of guinea pig serum as a source of activated complement, the arrival of the migrating cells at the target electrode led to increased resistance to current flow. The time when resistance started to increase was used to indicate the arrival of the first of the responding cells. The arrival time and the measured distance between the cell well and the electrode was then used to calculate the average speed of the fastest cells. Microscopic observation of ECIS/taxis chambers confirmed the migration of many cells from the cell well to the chemoattractant well in chambers where there was a large resistance increase. Figure 2 Detection of chemotactic response of bone marrow cells to complement Several modifications of the original ECIS/taxis system were tested to improve the accuracy and reproducibility of the assay. Prior to the arrival of cells at the target electrode, the ECIS/taxis system detects a continuous decrease in resistance. This continuous decrease in resistance is independent of the effects of cells, since the same decrease was observed when cells were omitted from the chamber. One way to address this decrease in resistance would be the addition of a reference electrode to assess changes in agarose away from the path of the migrating cells. This design was tested by assessing the chemotactic response of bone marrow cells to guinea pig complement. In this experiment, the ECIS/taxis assay was done in parallel with live imaging of the chemotactic chamber. When migrating cells reached the electrode, a continuous increase in the normalized resistance at the target electrode was detected. When the reference electrode measurement was subtracted from the experimental values, the increase in resistance due to the arrival of cells was more evident. In addition, the increase in resistance was proportional to the number of cells on the electrode. Figure 3 Improvement of detection of bone marrow cells chemotaxis using reference and target electrodes While use of the reference electrode values was successful in eliminating the gradual background resistance change, it also reduced the number of chambers that could be analyzed because of the limited number of electrical contacts available in the current generation of ECIS hardware. As an alternative way to minimize the contributions of resistance changes caused by non-cellular effects, pre-loading the cells into the cell well one hour before addition of chemoattractant allowed equilibration of the chamber to the CO 2 environment. This modification produced a more stable background resistance. Therefore, the rest of the experiments described in this report were carried in the absence of a reference electrode but employing the pre-equilibration step before addition of the chemoattractant. During the analysis of ECIS/taxis data from early experiments, we observed variation in the arrival time of cells at the electrodes from chamber to chamber in response to the same dose of chemoattractant. Microscopic examination of the plate showed that a major source of these differences was the variation in distances between the cell well and the target electrode due to the difficulty of manually cutting the wells. For the chemotactic response of WBC 264 cells to 1×10 −7 M of recombinant C5a, the normalized resistance at 24 hours decreased from 4.5 to 2.7 and 1.35 when the distance increased by 360 and 680 μm, respectively. The same phenomenon was observed with neutrophils. Thus both the arrival time and the number of arriving cells was proportional to the distance that the cells have to travel to reach the target electrode. Thus, for the remaining experiments described in this report, we have kept the distance between the cell well and the target electrode to within ±100 μM. Figure 4 The distance between cell well and target electrode affects the resistance increase caused by migrating cells. In all experiments described so far, the cells had to migrate up the gradient and travel a significant distance before reaching the electrode. An alternative electrode design allows for the continuous monitoring of cell behavior during the chemotactic response. In this configuration the cells migrate along the long axis of the target electrode for the duration of the experiment. As the response to chemoattractant proceeds, an increasing number of cells come to cover the length of the electrode. This should result in increasing normalized resistance throughout the experiment. The chemotactic response of WBC 264-9C cells to complement was assessed with this electrode configuration. Before addition of chemoattractant, the resistance detected by the target electrode did not vary significantly. After chemoattractant addition, a continuous increase in the resistance was observed. In chamber 3, the cell well was slightly displaced from the linear electrode, thus the cells had to travel a short distance to reach the electrode, delaying the subsequent increase in resistance. An increase in resistance over time was detected after addition of chemoattractant, while the resistance in the control chamber remained far lower and reflected the baseline cellular activity of the cells placed on the electrode. Figure 5 Continuous monitoring of migration along a linear target electrode In replicate experiments using the circular target electrode, cells exposed to the same dose of chemoattractant would occasionally show different resistance responses. Microscopic examination of ECIS/taxis chamber revealed that this variability arose from the difficulties of accurately cutting the wells such that the target electrode was not positioned directly on the axis between the cell well and chemoattractant well. As a result, many migrating cells passed by the circular electrode. To minimize this problem, a linear electrode positioned perpendicular to the direction of cell movement was substituted for the circular target electrode. The linear target electrode was long enough that well cutting accuracy is much less critical and the probability that migrating cells will encounter the electrode is increased. The rest of the experiments described in this paper were done using ECIS/taxis arrays with a perpendicular linear electrode. The dose response of inflammatory peritoneal cells to a range of concentrations of human C5a was determined. While the greatest increase in normalized resistance was observed at 1 × 10 −6 M C5a, the speed of migration was similar at both 1 × 10 −7 M and 1× 10 −6 M C5a. At lower concentrations, both cell speed and resistance increases were significantly lower. The data shows that although the fastest cells respond equally well to gradients originating from 1×10 −6 and 1×10 −7 M, the higher concentration establishes a more robust gradient that supports the response of a larger percentage of the cell population. The identification of the cells that have reached the electrode using Hema stain indicated that the responding cells were primarily neutrophils. The migratory response of inflammatory neutrophils to human C5a using the micro-Boyden chamber was also examined. The results indicate that 1×10 −7 M C5a produced the greatest response of the doses tested, which correlates well with the ECIS/taxis data. However, ECIS/taxis enabled the identification of neutrophil subpopulations that respond differently to chemotactic gradients. Figure 7 Chemotactic dose response of inflammatory neutrophils to human C5a using Boyden assay: T he migratory response of cells is determined by counting the cells attached to the lower side of the filter, the error bars represent standard deviations. WBC264-9C cells are often used to measure chemotactic responses in the presence of agonists and antagonists. In order to optimize the ECIS/taxis assay for these cells, we performed a dose response curve for chemotaxis to human C5a. The highest increase in normalized resistance was observed at 1×10 −7 M C5a. Analyzing multiple experiments showed that the highest mean increase in resistance and the fastest mean speed of migration was in response to 1×10 −7 M C5a. Although the mean total increase in resistance at 1×10 −6 M C5a was similar to that of 1×10 −7 M, the mean speed of migration was significantly lower. Figure 8 Chemotactic dose response of WBC 264-9C cells to human C5a: 4. Discussion In a previous report, ECIS/taxis technology was used to measure the chemotactic response of a eukaryotic amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum. The chemotactic response was detected using a circular target electrode that monitors the changes in resistance to a one volt current flow in the ECIS/taxis chamber. In this report, the ability of ECIS/taxis to monitor the chemotactic response of mammalian primary and immortalized leukocytes was examined, and the system was optimized to improve the reliability and accuracy of the system by testing several mammalian cell types and a variety of electrode designs. The ECIS/taxis data from a heterogeneous leukocyte population, murine bone marrow cells, to agarose activated guinea pig complement showed three phases. First, a lag phase characterized by a continuous decrease in resistance as a consequence of the absence of cells on the target electrode and changes in the chemical and physical properties of agar. In the second phase, a small number of fast moving cells reached the electrode causing the appearance of transient changes in resistance values; “micro-transients”. These are presumed to be the first cells to exit the cell well and the cells most responsive to the chemotactic gradient. The third phase consists of a continuous increase in resistance as more cells arrive at the electrode. Time-lapse video microscopy shows that in general, cells are not trapped on the electrode, and most cells move off the electrode and continue on toward the chemoattractant well. The overall resistance increase is due instead to a wave of cells following the leaders to the electrode. However, the increase in resistance was variable for chambers tested simultaneously in response to equivalent doses of complement, due to misplacement of cell and chemoattractant wells relative to the circular target electrode. Despite the small overall decrease in resistance due to changes in the agarose, the presence of cells on the electrode was easily determined due to the increased resistance and larger fluctuations in resistance that only occur when cells are on the electrode. The continuous decrease in resistance might make the data analysis more difficult to interpret when comparing different chambers. In order to monitor resistance changes caused solely by migrating cells, a reference electrode was added in each chamber along with the target electrode. This electrode design was shown to eliminate the resistance changes caused by changes in the agar. However, when using the ECIS/taxis arrays with a reference electrode, the number of chambers that could be tested at once was reduced from 8 to 4 chambers. A simpler solution was to pre-incubate the cells in the ECIS/taxis array for one hour before adding the chemoattractant. Another modification of the ECIS/taxis target electrode involved replacing the circular electrode by a linear electrode perpendicular to the anticipated cell path. The linear electrode increases the probability of cells encountering the electrode during their migration. Although aiming points were added to the bottom of each ECIS/taxis chamber to facilitate the positioning of the cannulas, the current manufacturing of the ECIS/taxis arrays is done manually and the position of the linear electrode relative to the aiming point varies slightly from chamber to chamber. Consequently, the distance between the cell well and the target linear electrode is still not constant from chamber to chamber. This is problematic because a reduced number of cells reach the electrode as the migration distance increases. This problem could be overcome by mechanized production of electrode arrays. In the meantime, the distance between the cell well and the target electrode was kept as small as possible and only wells with similar distances were compared to analyze a specific treatment of cells. Another possible solution to this problem was to place the cells on a linear electrode running between the two wells. The chemotactic cells migrated along the electrode and caused an increase in resistance that was significantly higher than that of the cells exposed to media alone. This design would be particularly useful for detection of chemotaxis in cells known for not being very motile. Also, since the cell's interaction with the electrode can be constantly measured throughout the experiment, the effect of drugs or mutations on the cell's capacity to migrate and/or interact with the underlying substrate could be continuously assessed. The newly configured ECIS/taxis arrays and optimized experimental conditions were used to detect the chemotactic dose response of both inflammatory peritoneal cells and WBC264-9C cells in response to a wide range of concentrations of purified human C5a. The absolute resistance increase over time was cell type-specific. While neutrophils caused only small changes, WBC 264-9C cells caused up to a 3-fold increase in resistance. Neutrophils are smaller than WBC 264-9C cells and probably less tightly adhered so may act as smaller insulators to current flow when compared to WBC 264-9C cells. Overall, the differences in resistance values measured by ECIS/taxis may reflect differences in cell size as well as the strength of interaction between the migrating cells and the electrode. Finally, the chemotactic response of neutrophils was measured using the Boyden chamber assay, and the dose response of cells was compared to that measured by ECIS/taxis assay. The results indicate that the optimal chemotactic response was obtained using 1×10 −7 M. These concentrations are not directly comparable due to the difference in the design of the assays. In the Boyden chamber, the cells are directly exposed to a steep and high concentration of C5a and have to move only a short distance to be counted as responding. However, in ECIS/taxis assay, the cells are exposed to a gradient of C5a that exponentially declines away the chemoattractant well such that the cells actually respond to a much lower concentration than what is actually added in the chemoattractant well. This report describes a novel assay to detect the chemotactic response of different type of leukocytes including neutrophils and a macrophage like cell line in response to activated complement and purified C5a. The sensitivity and reproducibility of data generation using ECIS/taxis technology has been improved by modifying original ECIS/taxis arrays as well as the experimental conditions. The system is capable of detecting inhibitory effects of drugs on neutrophils' chemotaxis. Using ECIS/taxis, a leukotriene B4 receptor antagonist was found to interfere with neutrophil chemotaxis to leukotriene B4 but not to guinea complement. This ability to screen for inhibitory effects of drugs, using the ECIS/taxis assay, could be extended to detect changes in cell movement caused by genetic mutations. Moreover, the technology is applicable to studies of spatial, temporal, and/or compositional chemokine gradient complexity, the identification of new chemotactic activities, and the molecular mechanisms of chemotactic cell movement. Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge the invaluable contributions of Laboratory Animal Care Technician Marie Joyner. This work was supported in part by grants to MAL and DAK from NIEHS, NIBIB and NIGMS. Abbreviations ECIS electric cell substrate impedance sensor Footnotes Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. Article information J Immunol Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 Mar 30. Published in final edited form as: J Immunol Methods. 2007 Mar 30; 320: 70–80. Published online 2007 Jan 12. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2006.12.005 PMCID: PMC1934897 NIHMSID: NIHMS20336 PMID: 17275834 Nacima Hadjout, a Xiuyun Yin, David A. Knecht, a and Michael A. Lynes a, * Nacima Hadjout a Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Connecticut, 91 North Eagleville Road, Storrs, CT 06269-3125 Find articles by Nacima Hadjout David A. Knecht a Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Connecticut, 91 North Eagleville Road, Storrs, CT 06269-3125 Find articles by David A. Knecht Michael A. Lynes a Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Connecticut, 91 North Eagleville Road, Storrs, CT 06269-3125 Find articles by Michael A. Lynes a Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Connecticut, 91 North Eagleville Road, Storrs, CT 06269-3125 * Corresponding author. Tel.: -486-4350; fax: -486-4331. Email: ude.nnocu@senyl.leahcim PMC Copyright notice Publisher's Disclaimer The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at J Immunol Methods Literature Cited Aksamit RR. A human-mouse hybrid cell line that stably expresses chemotaxis to N-formylmethionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1986; 138 :1001–8. Boyden S. The chemotactic effect of mixtures of antibody and antigen on polymorphonuclear leukocytes. J Exp Med. 1962; 152 :453–66. Broughton G, 2nd, Janis JE, Attinger CE. The basic science of wound healing. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2006; 117 :12S–34S. De Lucca GV, Kim UT, Vargo BJ, Duncia JV, Santella JB, 3rd, Gardner DS, Zheng C, Liauw A, Wang Z, Emmett G, Wacker DA, Welch PK, Covington M, Stowell NC, Wadman EA, Das AM, Davies P, Yeleswaram S, Graden DM, Solomon KA, Newton RC, Trainor GL, Decicco CP, Ko SS. Discovery of CC chemokine receptor-3 antagonists with picomolar potency. J Med Chem. 2005; 48 :2194–211. Hadjout N, Laevsky G, Knecht DA, Lynes MA. Automated real-time measurement of chemotactic cell motility. Biotechniques. 2001; 31 :1130–8. Keese CR, Giaever I. A whole cell biosensor based on cell substrate interactions. IEEE Eng Med Bio. 1990; 12 :0500–1. Kishimoto S, Oka S, Gokoh M, Sugiura T. Chemotaxis of human peripheral blood eosinophils to 2-arachidonoylglycerol: comparison with other eosinophil chemoattractants. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2006; 140 :3–7. Klein A, Talvani A, Cara DC, Gomes KL, Lukacs NW, Teixeira MM. Stem cell factor plays a major role in the recruitment of eosinophils in allergic pleurisy in mice via the production of leukotriene B4. J Immunol. 2000; 164 :4271–6. Kowolenko M, Keese CR, Lawrence DA, Giaever I. Measurement of macrophage adherence and spreading with weak electric fields. J Immunol Methods. 1990; 127 :71–7. Moser B, Willimann K. Chemokines: role in inflammation and immune surveillance. Ann Rheum Dis. 2004; 63 :ii84–ii89. Nelson RD, Quie PG, Simmons RL. Chemotaxis under agarose: a new and simple method for measuring chemotaxis and spontaneous migration of human polymorphonuclear leukocytes and monocytes. J Immunol. 1975; 115 :1650–6. Norman MU, Kubes P. Therapeutic intervention in inflammatory diseases: a time and place for anti-adhesion therapy. Microcirculation. 2005; 12 :91–8. Ratajczak HV, Lewis MG, Duggal K. Increased chemotaxis of leukocytes from mice bearing tumors. Cancer Res. 1986; 46 :2225–9. Snyderman R, Pike MC, McCarley D, Lang L. Quantification of mouse macrophage chemotaxis in vitro: role of C5 for the production of chemotactic activity. Infect Immun. 1975; 11 :488–92. Yin X, Knecht DA, Lynes MA. Metallothionein mediates leukocyte chemotaxis. BMC Immunol. 2005; 6 :21. Zieziulewicz TJ, Unfricht DW, Hadjout N, Lynes MA, Lawrence DA. Shrinking the biologic world--nanobiotechnologies for toxicology. Toxicol Sci. 2003; 74 :235–44. J Immunol Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 Mar 30. Published in final edited form as: J Immunol Methods. 2007 Mar 30; 320: 70–80. Published online 2007 Jan 12. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2006.12.005 Copyright/License Request permission to reuse PMC Copyright notice Figure 1 Open in a separate window Schematic configuration of ECIS/taxis electrode designs. Enlarged top view of a single ECIS/taxis chamber. Each chamber contains a target electrode and a large common electrode. Agarose is added to the chamber, and then the cell and chemoattractant wells are cut 2 mm from the target electrode. Circular electrode design as shown in panel A modified by the addition of a reference electrode on the side away from the cell well. Cell and chemoattractant wells are placed on the linear electrode such that cells migrate along the long axis of the electrode In this configuration, the circular target electrode was replaced by a linear electrode with cells migrating across the electrode. J Immunol Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 Mar 30. Published in final edited form as: J Immunol Methods. 2007 Mar 30; 320: 70–80. Published online 2007 Jan 12. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2006.12.005 Copyright/License Request permission to reuse PMC Copyright notice Figure 2 Open in a separate window Detection of chemotactic response of bone marrow cells to complement The chemotactic response of bone marrow cells to media or guinea pig serum as a source of activated complement was examined using ECIS/taxis chambers with the circular target electrode configuration. The arrival of cells to the target electrode is indicated by an increase in the normalized resistance over background. J Immunol Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 Mar 30. Published in final edited form as: J Immunol Methods. 2007 Mar 30; 320: 70–80. Published online 2007 Jan 12. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2006.12.005 Copyright/License Request permission to reuse PMC Copyright notice Figure 3 Open in a separate window Improvement of detection of bone marrow cells chemotaxis using reference and target electrodes : Bone marrow cells were placed in the cell well in the ECIS/taxis chamber. Guinea pig serum was then added to the chemoattractant well. The target electrode measured changes caused by the cell's arrival where as the reference electrode measures the resistance changes in the chamber that are unrelated to the arrival of cells on the electrode surface. The resistance data was collected every 30 seconds starting one hour after addition of complement. The reference-corrected resistance values were calculated by subtracting the normalized resistance values measured by the reference electrode from normalized resistance values measured by the target electrode. Images of cells on the target electrode at the times indicated on the normalized resistance graph in panel B. The graph shows the correlation between the number of cells on the electrode and the normalized resistance. J Immunol Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 Mar 30. Published in final edited form as: J Immunol Methods. 2007 Mar 30; 320: 70–80. Published online 2007 Jan 12. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2006.12.005 Copyright/License Request permission to reuse PMC Copyright notice Figure 4 Open in a separate window The distance between cell well and target electrode affects the resistance increase caused by migrating cells. The chemotactic response of WBC 264-9C to human C5a was assessed using the linear target electrode. The cell wells were placed at increasing distances from the linear target electrode ; the resistance values were measured for 24 hours. The resistance increase over time was inversely proportional to the distance between the cell well and the target electrode. J Immunol Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 Mar 30. Published in final edited form as: J Immunol Methods. 2007 Mar 30; 320: 70–80. Published online 2007 Jan 12. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2006.12.005 Copyright/License Request permission to reuse PMC Copyright notice Figure 5 Open in a separate window Continuous monitoring of migration along a linear target electrode The chemotactic response of WBC 264-9C cells was assessed using the parallel linear target electrode configuration. The cell wells were placed on the end of the linear electrode or outside the linear electrode. The resistance values were monitored for 5 hours by ECIS/taxis before addition of guinea pig serum to chambers 1, 2, and 3. After addition of chemoattractant, normalized resistance increases, reflecting an increase in the number of cells migrating on the electrode. J Immunol Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 Mar 30. Published in final edited form as: J Immunol Methods. 2007 Mar 30; 320: 70–80. Published online 2007 Jan 12. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2006.12.005 Copyright/License Request permission to reuse PMC Copyright notice Figure 6 Open in a separate window Chemotactic dose response of inflammatory neutrophils to human C5a ECIS/taxis resistance measurement of the chemotactic response of inflammatory neutrophils to increasing concentrations of human C5a, 1×10 −7, 1×10 −8, 1×10 −9, and 0 M ) using the perpendicular linear ECIS/taxis target electrode. The no-cells control chamber data is shown in orange. The resistance tracings are from chambers with percent resistance increase values closest to the mean of 3 different experiments. The same data as panel A, replotted on a narrower resistance scale in order to visualize the small changes that occur when the cells first reach the electrode. Percent increase in resistance caused by migrating cells in response to human C5a. The asterisks indicate the results of statistical analysis of the data done using ANOVA comparing all doses to 1×10 −6 M. The difference was considered significant when the p value was less than 0.05.. Migration speed of neutrophils in response to human C5a. The asterisks indicate the results of statistical analysis of the data using ANOVA comparing all doses to 10μg/ml. The difference was considered significant when the p value was less than 0.05. *: p<0.05, **:p<0.01, ***: p<0.001. J Immunol Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 Mar 30. Published in final edited form as: J Immunol Methods. 2007 Mar 30; 320: 70–80. Published online 2007 Jan 12. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2006.12.005 Copyright/License Request permission to reuse PMC Copyright notice Figure 7 Open in a separate window Chemotactic dose response of inflammatory neutrophils to human C5a using Boyden assay: T he migratory response of cells is determined by counting the cells attached to the lower side of the filter, the error bars represent standard deviations. J Immunol Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 Mar 30. Published in final edited form as: J Immunol Methods. 2007 Mar 30; 320: 70–80. Published online 2007 Jan 12. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2006.12.005 Copyright/License Request permission to reuse PMC Copyright notice Figure 8 Open in a separate window Chemotactic dose response of WBC 264-9C cells to human C5a: : ECIS/taxis resistance measurement of the chemotactic response of WBC 264-9C cells to increasing concentrations of human C5a using the linear ECIS/taxis target electrode. The resistance tracings are representative of 3 different experiments. : Percent increase in resistance caused by migrating cells in response to human C5a. The asterisks indicate values that are significantly different from 1 × 10 −7 M. : Migration speed of WBC 264-9C cells in response to human C5a. The asterisks indicate values that are significantly different from 1 × 10 −7 M.