PLA2 and PI3K/PTEN pathways act in parallel to mediate chemotaxis You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF PLA 2 and PI3K/PTEN pathways act in parallel to mediate chemotaxis Dev Cell. 2007 Apr; 12: 603–614. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Developmental cell Author Manuscript HHS Public Access PLA 2 and PI3K/PTEN pathways act in parallel to mediate chemotaxis Lingfeng Chen, Miho Iijima,, and Peter N. Devreotes Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials 01. NIHMS28902-supplement-01.pdf GUID: 543E2E8E-8FB8-4DE8-9B4B-CE13E5AC370F 02. NIHMS28902-supplement-02.avi GUID: 5A7AE67E-B416-4831-B1BE-38BE6CE9F197 03. NIHMS28902-supplement-03.avi GUID: 2D8B82BF-5F7C-4A30-BF9A-45738FCC63A6 04. NIHMS28902-supplement-04.avi GUID: 7EE7EA24-140B-4033-8579-0CB838E08685 05. NIHMS28902-supplement-05.avi GUID: 27F5A2A6-EA73-463A-AAC4-A11B76FB06FE 06. NIHMS28902-supplement-06.avi GUID: FE1D44DF-A8A8-4597-A455-F643DCF827F0 07. NIHMS28902-supplement-07.avi GUID: B90F70FC-2D4D-4372-AB55-5C224B45780D 08. NIHMS28902-supplement-08.avi GUID: 6CAD740B-2022-4144-B412-06E667B05BA2 09. NIHMS28902-supplement-09.avi GUID: E099F640-BF86-429E-BB4E-15EACF720FC0 10. NIHMS28902-supplement-10.avi GUID: BF140FF7-6372-4888-ACBC-2EBFA2EB174D 11. NIHMS28902-supplement-11.avi GUID: D63AF1D3-04AF-4FA8-8F34-77E588B811B4 12. NIHMS28902-supplement-12.avi GUID: E3C0A3D3-4233-4F5E-BA48-75BB6670A2BD 13. NIHMS28902-supplement-13.avi GUID: 82D0AC05-C510-48F6-84B0-2C21DC43BC61 14. NIHMS28902-supplement-14.avi GUID: 1E00CBBB-4C65-4B47-87E8-669A28B60E2F 15. NIHMS28902-supplement-15.avi GUID: AE9220A8-5884-4697-A935-22814895E480 16. NIHMS28902-supplement-16.avi GUID: 3A473E7A-BE81-43DB-BCA8-126D1F374366 17. NIHMS28902-supplement-17.avi GUID: D722D3F2-4F64-4D12-ABC9-E97FCD0A685F 18. NIHMS28902-supplement-18.avi GUID: 7D07571C-957D-400D-82F6-9E22ECA8D849 19. NIHMS28902-supplement-19.avi GUID: BE81107D-CFAA-4866-B968-CADB73370524 20. NIHMS28902-supplement-20.avi GUID: D9C143F0-A3B2-4286-B55B-BED069F8D0E2 Summary Directed cell migration involves signaling events that lead to local accumulation of PIP 3 but additional pathways act in parallel. A genetic screen in Dictyostelium discoideum to identify redundant pathways revealed a gene with homology to patatin-like phospholipase A 2. Loss of this gene did not alter PIP 3 regulation, but chemotaxis became sensitive to reductions in PI3K activity. Likewise, cells deficient in PI3K activity were more sensitive to inhibition of PLA 2 activity. Deletion of the PLA 2 homologue and two PI3Ks caused a strong defect in chemotaxis and a reduction in receptor-mediated actin polymerization. In wild type cells, chemoattractants stimulated a rapid burst in an arachidonic acid derivative. This response was absent in cells lacking the PLA 2 homologue and exogenous arachidonic acid reduced their dependence on PI3K signaling. We propose that PLA 2 and PI3K signaling act in concert to mediate chemotaxis and arachidonic acid metabolites may be important mediators of the response. Keywords: Chemotaxis, PLA 2, PIP 3, arachidonic acid, D. discoideum Introduction Chemotaxis, the directed movement of cells along extracellular gradients, is an intriguing and critical cell biological response. A variety of chemoattractants direct cells to proper locations in developing embryos and guide the connections between cells of the nervous system. Following embryogenesis, directed cell movements mediate morphogenetic processes such as remodeling of the vascular system and wound healing. Moreover, leukocytes traffic between the vascular and lymphatic systems and migrate from the blood towards sites of infection. In addition to these roles in normal physiology, inappropriate cell migration is the basis for pathological conditions including cancer metastasis and chronic inflammatory diseases such as atherosclerosis, asthma, and arthritis. The chemotactic response encompasses cell motility, polarity, and directional sensing, all events that involve local phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate P 3 ) production and degradation at the plasma membrane. The levels of PIP 3 are regulated by PI 3-kinases, the PI 3-phosphatase, PTEN and PI 5-phosphatases, or SHIPs. When D. discoideum cells are exposed to a gradient of chemoattractant, PI3Ks and PTEN bind to the membrane at the front and rear, respectively, PIP 3 selectively accumulates at the leading edge, and new F-actin filled pseudopodia are extended at corresponding sites. Unable to degrade PIP 3, pten - cells fail to sharply localize the phosphoinositide and extend projections in multiple directions at once, which impairs polarity and chemotaxis. These observations have established a link between local plasma membrane PIP 3 levels, actin polymerization, and pseudopodia extension. This role for local PIP 3 in polarity and directional sensing appears to be conserved throughout phylogeny in cells such as D. melanogaster hemocytes, human neutrophils and fibroblasts, neurons, and a variety of embryonic cells. In spite of these observations, an essential requirement for local PIP 3 accumulation has been surprisingly difficult to establish. In D. rerio, PIP 3 is uniformly elevated around the entire perimeter of chemotaxing primary germ cells. Abrogation of PI3K activation has no effect on migration of D. melanogaster border cells. Migration of PI3Kγ −/− mouse macrophages in response to chemokines is only partially impaired, with inhibition ranging from 50–90%, depending on the chemokine examined. T-cells and B-cells have been reported to be sensitive to PI3K inhibitors, but under more physiological conditions, T-cells are reported to be relatively insensitive to PI3K inhibitors. In D. discoideum, while over production of PIP 3 disrupts chemotaxis, loss of PI3K activity leading to more than 95% reduction of PIP 3, hardly affects the ability of cells to sense and orient in chemotactic gradients. Taken together, these studies in different systems suggest that, although local PIP 3 plays an important role in chemotaxis, there are likely redundant mediators. Our studies of chemoattractant-mediated actin polymerization, one of the primary biochemical responses underlying pseudopod extension, have also pointed to alternative pathways. We examined the biphasic responses of PIP 3 accumulation and actin polymerization during perturbations that decreased or elevated PIP 3 levels in D. discoideum. In cells with deficient PI3K activity, the second phase of actin polymerization was blocked, but the first phase was unaffected. Similar results were obtained with EGF stimulation of breast carcinoma cells. Taken together, these observations suggest that the second phase of actin polymerization is mediated by PIP 3, but the first phase is regulated differently. Based on these findings, we have speculated that there are additional pathways, not merely additional PI3Ks, downstream of G-protein activation, which act in parallel with the PI3K/PTEN system, controlling actin polymerization, pseudopod extension, and directional movement. Parallel pathways could explain why elevation of PIP 3 causes a dramatic defect while its removal does not. Lowered PIP 3 would not be expected to cause a significant phenotype unless the parallel pathways are also inhibited. Accordingly, we designed a screen to search for mutants where chemotaxis is selectively impaired when PI3K is inhibited. This procedure uncovered a gene with homology to a patatin-like phospholipase A 2, suggesting that this enzyme acts in parallel with PI3K pathways to mediate chemotaxis. Figure 1 A model for regulation of chemotaxis. The dashed line shows a putative pathway that acts in parallel with the PI3K/PTEN pathway. Scheme of the genetic screen. After mutagenesis, individual phenotypically wild-type colonies were separately plated... Experimental Procedures Cell culture, development, and mutagenesis D. discoideum cells were cultured in HL5 medium and allowed to differentiate for 5 hours, unless otherwise indicated, in development buffer as previous described. To isolate mutants sensitive or resistant to LY294002, wild type cells were mutagenized and genes identified using restriction enzyme mediated integration method. Live cell imaging and quantification Fluorescent images of living cells expressing GFP fusion proteins and chemotactic movements of cells towards cAMP containing micropipettes were performed as previously described. IP lab, Image J and the Matlab imaging tool box were used to collect and process data. Cellular responses to chemoattractant stimulation PH domain translocation, actin polymerization, and calcium influx assays were performed as previously described. Protein purification and phospholipase A 2 assays Wild type cells expressing PLA 2 A-FLAG were cultured to a density of 3-8 × 10 6 cells/ml. Typically, 500 ml of cells were collected and starved at 2 × 10 7 cells/ml for 2 hours, collected and filter-lysed in 50 mM HEPES at a density of 1 × 10 8 cells/ml. Cell lysates were subjected to two rounds of centrifugation at 15 Krpm for 20 minutes and the supernatant was centrifuged at 55 Krpm for 20 minutes. The final supernatant was loaded on an ion exchange column. The Q column was washed with 0.1 M NaCl with 50 mM HEPES and then eluted with 0.5 M NaCl with 50 mM HEPES. The eluted fraction was incubated with 200 μl Flag-agarose for 2-3 hours at 4°C. Agarose beads were collected, washed and incubated at 4°C for 10 minutes with 400 μl of 200 ng/μl FLAG-peptide in 100 mM HEPES, 0.1% Triton X-100. After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and subjected to further analysis. In some experiments, 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer was used instead of 50 mM HEPES. Phospholipase A 2 assays were performed as previously described with minor modifications. Extracted products were separated on a Silica gel 60 TLC plate in chloroform: methanol: acetic acid: water. Then TLC plate was sprayed with 3 H enhancer and exposed to HyBlot film at -80°C for two days. 3 H-arachidonic acid labeling assay Cells were starved for 3 hours in DB and labeled with 3 H-arachidonic acid for another 2 hours. Labeled cells were resuspended at 3 × 10 7 cells/ml in DB and shaken at 200 rpm at room temperature. At various time points after adding 500 nM cAMP, 300 μl of cells were collected into 1ml of chloroform: methanol: acetic acid to stop the stimulation. Lipids were extracted and subjected to TLC analyses as described in the previous section. Results Isolation of mutants defective in aggregation in the presence of PI3K inhibitors We screened for components in pathways that act in parallel with PI3K/PTEN, as outlined in Figure 1A and 1B. Restriction enzyme mediated insertional mutagenesis was used to generate random insertions in a population of wild type cells. Mutagenized cells were clonally plated onto bacteria lawns and cells from phenotypically wild type single colonies were transferred into 96-well plates. These were grown to confluency, triplicated, then switched to non-nutrition buffer containing no, low, or high concentrations of the PI3K inhibitor, LY294002, respectively. During starvation, untreated cells begin to sense and secrete cAMP which directs chemotactic migration into large, tight aggregates containing several million cells. The low concentration of inhibitor does not significantly alter this process, while the high concentration blocks it, causing the cells to remain as a monolayer, or form small, loose aggregates. Phenotypes were visually inspected under a dissection microscope after 24 hours. Of 7043 insertional mutants, we found ten mutants that were unable to aggregate in the presence of the low concentration of inhibitor and six mutants that were able to resist the high concentration. The wild type cells did not show an aggregation defect until 80 μM LY and completely failed at 120 μM. We were able to identify the insertion site on two sensitive and one resistant mutant. Sensitive clones, S1 and S2, formed small aggregates at 20 to 40 μM LY and failed completely at 80 μM while resistant clone R1 aggregated normally up to 160 μM. Consistent behavior was observed when each of the clones was retested with another PI3K inhibitor, wortmannin. In this report, we focus on characterization of mutant S1. A patatin-like phospholipase A 2 homologue is required for aggregation in the presence of LY We recovered the tagged sequence integrated into the genome of S1, and determined the position of the insertion site. It was found to be 191 bp upstream of the start codon of a predicted ORF that shared sequence homology with the group VI phospholipase A 2 family of proteins. These enzymes are found both in plants, where they are known as patatin or patatin-related phospholipase A 2, and in animals where they are referred to as Ca 2+ -independent PLA 2. The family includes enzymes that use triacylglycerol as well as phospholipids as substrates. We suggest the names plaA and PLA 2 A for the new gene and its product. We found thirteen additional predicted patatin-like or group VI PLA 2 s homologues in the D. discoideum genome. Based on sequence analyses, there are no secreted or cytosolic PLA 2 s in this organism. By sequence comparison, the fourteen PLA 2 s can be roughly divided into three groups. At least two additional ORFs are closely related to plaA. Some of the ORFs have additional domains, including pleckstrin-like, protein kinase-like and growth factor motifs. To confirm that the LY-sensitive phenotype was caused by inactivation of plaA, we targeted it by homologous recombination, thereby replacing part of the gene with a blasticidin resistance marker. The disruption of plaA recapitulated the phenotype of the original insertional mutant. On bacteria lawns, individual plaA − cells proliferated to form wild-type size plaques that differentiated normally to form fruiting bodies. Similarly, the plaA − cells were able to aggregate normally and form fruiting bodies like wild type cells after 24 hours on non-nutrient agar. However, in the presence of low LY in the under-buffer aggregation assay, the plaA − cells displayed an aggregation defect while wild type cells were not affected. Therefore, the phenotypes of the plaA − cells were similar to those of the original mutant, proving that a deficiency in plaA causes the LY-sensitive phenotype. Figure 2 PLA 2 A and PI3K actin parallel to mediate aggregation. Under-buffer assay of indicated cells in the absence or presence of 60 μM LY or 5 μM BEL are shown. Complementation of plaA − cells by GFP tagged wild type and inactive... When treated for 5 minutes with 5 μM bromoenol lactone, a iPLA 2 inhibitor, the pi3k1 - /2 - cells failed to aggregate while both treated wild type and plaA − cells still aggregated normally in under buffer assays. Thus, cells lacking plaA require PI3K activity for aggregation and, conversely, those deficient in PI3K1 and PI3K2 require PLA 2 activity. PLA 2 A and PI3K act in parallel to mediate aggregation If PLA 2 A and PI3K are in redundant pathways as suggested, a combined deficiency would be expected to display a severe defect compare to either single disruption. We disrupted plaA in cells lacking two of the five “class I-like” PI3K using a hygromycin resistance marker. As predicted, the plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells were unable to aggregate on non-nutrient agar while wild type, plaA − and pi3k1 - /2 - cells developed normally and formed fruiting bodies. Upon closer examination, we noticed that the plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells formed loose aggregates on non-nutrient agar after 24 hours, suggesting they were motile. Similar results were observed in the under-buffer assays where wild type and plaA − cells aggregated normally, pi3k1 - /2 - cells formed small aggregates, but plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells remained as a monolayer. Thus whereas neither PLA 2 A nor PI3K1/PI3K2 are essential, each becomes indispensable in the absence of the other. To further explore the interdependence of PLA 2 A and PI3K signaling, we made an expression construct of PLA 2 A tagged with GFP at the C-terminal. When expressed in plaA − cells, this construct was able to rescue the LY-sensitive phenotype in the under-buffer aggregation assay. At 20 μM LY, aggregation of plaA − cells was inhibited, but when PLA 2 A-GFP was expressed in the plaA − cells, they aggregated normally. The rescue was partial since PLA 2 A-GFP/ plaA − cells failed to aggregate at 60 μM LY, a concentration that did not block the aggregation of wild type cells. We also expressed an inactive version of PLA 2 A-GFP in which the catalytic site was mutated. Based on fluorescence and immuno-blot of GFP, S61A was expressed at the same level as wild type PLA 2 A-GFP, but it completely failed to rescue the LY-sensitive phenotype in the presence of 20 μM LY. When PLA 2 A-GFP was expressed in plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells, it restored the capacity of cells to aggregate in the under buffer assay. PLA 2 A-GFP appeared to localize largely in the cytosol in both wild type and plaA − cells and its distribution did not change upon cAMP stimulation. The phenotypes observed in the plaA − and plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells are not due to defects in development. Since the plaA − cells formed fruiting bodies at the same time after starvation as wild type cells both on non-nutrient agar and on bacteria lawns, the developmental program is not altered. Similar sensitivity to LY was observed whether it was added at start or after 5 hours of starvation. As a further indicator of development, the time course of expression of the chemoattractant receptor, cAR1, was examined by immunoblot. cAR1 levels start to increase at 3 to 4 hours after starvation and reached a peak at 5 to 6 hours, when chemotactic phenotypes are typically assessed. Wild type and plaA − cells had essentially identical patterns of expression of cAR1. Although the pi3k1 - /2 - and plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells expressed a slightly lower amount of cAR1, the time course was similar to wild type. Therefore, the non-aggregation phenotype of the plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells was more likely due to a defect in chemotaxis or cell-cell signaling than a failure to differentiate. PLA 2 A is not required for PIP 3 production To monitor the dynamics of PIP 3 production, PH crac -GFP was expressed in wild type, plaA −, pi3k1 - /2 -, and plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells. PH crac -GFP binds to PIP 3 and translocates to the plasma membrane upon cAMP stimulation. In response to a uniform cAMP stimulus, PH crac -GFP in plaA − cells displayed a biphasic response, as previously reported for wild type cells. PH crac -GFP was recruited to the entire plasma membrane within seconds and returned to the cytosol after 30 seconds, then a second phase, localized to membrane extensions, ensued for the next several minutes. When cells were pretreated with 30 μM LY and stimulated with cAMP, the first phase of PIP 3 accumulation was still detectable while the second phase was nearly absent, indicating a similar extent of inhibition in each case. In the pi3k1 - /2 - and plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells, PH crac -GFP did not translocate to membrane upon cAMP stimulation. Quantitative results were obtained when the translocation of the PH crac -GFP was assessed by pelleting of membranes from cell lysates. The extent of inhibition with 20 and 100 μM LY was essentially identical in the wild type and plaA − cells. Thus, neither the dynamics of PIP 3 production nor its sensitivity to inhibition was altered by the loss of PLA 2 A, indicating that the enzyme does not regulate the PI3K/PTEN pathway. Figure 3 PIP 3 accumulation in wild type, plaA −, pi3k1 - /2 - and plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells. Chemoattractant-induced translocation of PH crac -GFP to the plasma membrane is observed by epifluorescence microscopy. Images were captured at the indicated... PLA 2 A is required for chemotaxis in the absence of PI3K activity To directly observe the chemotactic responses, cells were exposed to chemoattractant gradients created by a cAMP-filled micropipette and directed migration was observed by phase contrast microscopy. Both wild type and plaA − cells were examined in the presence and absence of 30 μM of LY. During ten minutes of observation, wild type cells polarized in the cAMP gradient and moved towards the tip of the micropipette, forming streams by attaching to each other during the directional movement. When cells were treated with LY, they initially lost polarity, then recovered within a few minutes, extended pseudopods, and started to move towards the source of chemoattractant. The LY-treated cells did not form streams in the course of the experiment. The plaA − cells were able to polarize and carry out chemotaxis, similar to wild type cells. However, addition of 30 μM of LY to the plaA − cells severely inhibited chemotaxis and movement. In the presence of LY, only a fraction of plaA − cells were motile and even fewer moved towards the micropipette. These observations suggest that the migration of the plaA − cells is sensitive to inhibition of PI3K activity. Figure 4 Chemotactic responses towards a micropipette filled with 10 μM cAMP. Cells were observed at 10-second intervals for 10 minutes. There was a random distribution of cells at the onset and images at 10 minutes are shown. Chemotaxis of wild type... We next examined the chemotaxis of the plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells. As we observed previously, wild type cells and plaA − cells were well polarized, formed streams and moved towards cAMP. Although the pi3k1 - /2 - cells were less polarized, they did line up and migrate towards the micropipette efficiently. Furthermore, treatment of pi3k1 - /2 - cells with LY did not significantly impair their chemotactic response. In contrast, the plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells showed strong defects in maintaining cell shape and in directed migration. While the polarities of these cells were similar to those of the pi3k1 - /2 - cells, many of them ignored the direction of the gradient, moved randomly, and changing direction frequently. A few cells very close to the micropipette moved in the correct direction, although sometimes they subsequently turned away. For each experimental condition, we quantified the speed and chemotactic index from three sets of independent experiments. The mean chemotactic indexes showed differences. In wild type cells, the mean was close to one, indicating that the cells moved straight towards the needle. In plaA − and pi3k1 - /2 - cells, the indicies were slightly lower, indicating a fraction of cells were unable to chemotax as well as wild type cells. In plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells, the index was low and standard deviation was large. About 40% of the cells appeared to be more or less chemotactic while the others moved randomly. Unlike the plaA − cells treated with LY, the speed of random movement of the plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells was not significantly reduced compared those of wild type cells. These observations suggest that the chemotaxis of the plaA − cells is sensitive to inhibition of PI3K activity. Then we asked whether pi3k1 - /2 - cells were more sensitive to inhibition of PLA 2 activity than wild type cells. Cells were treated with different concentration of BEL, for 5 minutes, then washed. In chemotaxis assays, this treatment did not affect the directed movement of wild type cells whereas it caused a strong reduction in chemotaxis of the pi3k1 - /2 - cells. PLA 2 A and PI3K act in parallel to regulate cAMP-induced actin polymerization As outlined in the Introduction, evidence suggests that the first phase of actin polymerization is regulated by events that act in parallel with the PI3K/PTEN pathway. To characterize the role of PLA 2 A, we carried out biochemical assays of actin polymerization in the plaA − and plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells. In the absence of LY, wild type and plaA − cells displayed similar responses upon cAMP stimulation. An initial peak occurred at 4 to 8 seconds. Since these were highly polarized cells, a defined second peak was not obvious, but the F-actin level remained above baseline for several minutes as previously described. Treatment with LY reduced this signal during the prolonged second phase as expected. The initial peak in the plaA − cells appeared to be slightly decreased as well. As previously determined, the first peak of actin polymerization was identical in wild type and pi3k1 - /2 - cells. Compared to the pi3k1 - /2 - cells, the first phase of actin polymerization in the plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells was clearly decreased. When treated with LY, a further decrease to 50% of the wild type level was observed. Therefore, in the plaA − background, the loss of PI3K activity had a detectable consequence on the initial peak of actin polymerization. These results suggest that either the PI3K or the PLA 2 pathway can support the initial actin polymerization response and inhibition is only observed when both pathways are inhibited. Figure 5 Chemoattractant-induced actin polymerization assay. Wild type and plaA − cells. plaA − cells in the absence or presence of 30 μM LY. pi3k1 - /2 -... Purified PLA 2 A converts PC to arachidonic acid and is inhibited by calcium To verify that PLA 2 A had PLA 2 activity, we tagged it with a FLAG sequence at the C-terminal and purified the protein from D. discoideum cells. In the under-buffer assay, PLA 2 A-FLAG was able to rescue the LY-sensitive phenotype of the plaA − cells as did PLA 2 A-GFP. We purified the recombinant protein by ion-exchange chromatography followed with affinity chromatography. The protein was expressed at low levels, but the recovery from the purification was over 50% and we were able to obtain a sufficient amount of purified protein for in vitro PLA 2 assays. The purified PLA 2 A-FLAG was able to produe arachidonic acid in buffer containing EGTA or EDTA using phophatidylcholine as substrate. The specific activity of the purified PLA 2 A was similar to that of PLA 2 from snake venom at a substrate concentration of 10 -9 M. The PLA 2 activities of previously reported iPLA 2 s, with the exception of the patatin-related PLA 2 s, are not activated by Ca 2+, and thus they have been called Ca 2+ -independent PLA 2. The PLA 2 activity of PLA 2 A-FLAG did not require Ca 2+, in fact it was inhibited in buffer containing very high CaCl 2. The purified enzyme bearing the active site S61A mutation displayed no activity under any condition, consistent with its inability to rescue the mutant phenotype. We did not assess whether the enzyme displayed activity against triacylglycerol and this have not ruled out that it can also function as a triacylglycerol lipase. Figure 6 Conversion of phosphatidylcholine to arachidonic acid by purified PLA 2 A-FLAG. PLA 2 A-FLAG was affinity purified. Coomassie Blue stained gel and immuno-blot shows cell lysate and eluted fractions prepared from PLA 2 A-FLAG expressing cells... Altered arachidonic acid metabolism underlies phenotype of cells deficient in PLA 2 A To further elucidate the defect in the plaA − cells, we examined the profiles of lipids visualized by steady-state labeling with 3 H-arachidonic acid. After several hours of incubation, cells were washed, stimulated with chemoattractant, and lipids were extracted for thin layer chromatography analyses. Both wild-type and plaA − cells displayed similar levels of the major labeled components, presumably phosphatidylcholine, phosphotidylethanolamine and other lipids. The wild-type cells also displayed a prominently 3 H-labeled component which co-chromatographed near arachidonic acid on thin-layer chromatography. Chemoattractants induced a rapid two to three fold increase in the level of this 3 H-arachidonic acid derivative that peaked within 30 seconds and declined more slowly. The levels of the 3 H-arachidonic acid derivative were reduced by more than 70% in the plaA − cells and chemoattractant-induced increases were undetectable. The Rf of the compound was somewhat variable, usually running slightly faster than or with arachidonic acid. We excised the spot and chromatographed it in an independent TLC system. In the second system, the compound co-chromatographed with arachidonic acid and was widely separated from the methyl ester. These observations suggest that this component is 3 H-arachidonic acid or a very closely related, perhaps unstable, derivative. Figure 7 We wondered whether the severely depressed levels of the arachidonic acid derivative in the plaA − cells might underlie the defect in chemotaxis. We tested whether exogenous arachidonic acid might mitigate the defect. Similar to previous under-buffer assays, wild-type cells were unaffected by 10 μM LY whereas plaA − cells were unable to aggregate in the presence of this inhibitor. However, addition of 5 to 20 μM arachidonic acid partially reversed this defect. Exogenous arachidonic induced the plaA − cells to aggregate at concentrations LY as high as 40 μM whereas wild-type cells were able to aggregate up to 80 μM. Oleic acid did not have the same effect as arachidonic acid. These results suggest that the observed deficit in the arachidonic acid derivative may underline the chemotactic defect. Published reports have implicated arachidonic acid as a regulator of calcium influx in a variety of cells, including D. discoideum. However, as shown in Figure 7D, basal and chemoattractant-mediated Ca 2+ influxes were very similar in wild type and plaA − cells. These observations suggest that the effects of PLA 2 A on chemotaxis and arachidonic acid metabolism are unlikely to be mediated through effects of calcium uptake. Discussion We have found that pathways involving PLA 2 and PI3K act in parallel to mediate chemotaxis. Neither loss of PLA 2 A nor significant lowering of PIP 3 above has a dramatic effect on chemotaxis. However, simultaneous inhibition of both activities caused a severe defect in chemotaxis. The absence of PLA 2 A does not affect PIP 3 production indicating that PLA 2 A is not upstream of PI3K. Thus, PLA 2 A and its metabolites appear to be part of a parallel pathway regulating chemotaxis and actin polymerization. These signaling events are involved in the first and second phases of actin polymerization. The second phase is absent in pi3k1 - /2 - cells, indicating that PIP 3 is the important regulator for the second phase. Our current results suggest that PI3Ks and PLA 2 A are equally important for the rapid initial peak; when both are inhibited the response is significantly decreased. A portion of the initial phase remains even in LY treated plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells, possibly due to our inability to completely remove PLA 2 or PI3K activity, as there are multiple homologues of each enzyme. Alternatively, yet another pathway is involved. It is likely that the decrease in the first peak of actin polymerization contributes to the defect in chemotaxis. However, other events which play a role in chemotaxis may also be defective. PLA 2 A is more likely to function in the response to chemoattractant gradient than motility per se. The plaA − / pi3k1 - /2 - cells exhibit poor chemotaxis but actively form pseudopods and move randomly at the same speed as wild type cells. LY treatment is apparently not equivalent to deletion of PI3Ks. When first added, LY causes cells to round up but when exposed to a chemoattractant gradient, wild type cells recover within a few minutes, start to extend pseudopods, and move towards the micropipette. Similar results have been observed in several laboratories. However, when treated with LY, the plaA − cells remain rounded for at least 20 minutes and do not respond to the applied gradient. With longer recovery these treated cells regain random motility. Thus PLA 2 A may also be involved in the mechanism by which the applied gradient overcomes the LY-induced motility block. There are parallel pathways in the chemotaxis network and each pathway contains multiple redundant components. First, the network is branched after G-protein, with PI3K/PTEN regulating one branch and PLA 2 A being involved in the other. Inhibition of either pathway does not block chemotaxis since the remaining pathway can compensate. Second, within each pathway, there are several isoforms of the key enzymes. It has been shown that more than two PI3Ks control PIP 3 levels and we might expect several PLA 2 s also act in concert. These layers of redundancy may in part explain why chemotaxis has been difficult to inhibit specifically. We have identified a specific PLA 2 homologue and have shown that its ability to generate an arachidonic acid derivative may be required for chemotaxis. The observed rapid chemoattractant-induced increase in the levels of the 3 H-arachidonic acid derivative does not occur in plaA − cells. The transient burst of this compound in response to uniform stimulation of wild type cells is identical to the behavior of other molecules such as PIP 3 that have been implicated in directional sensing and found at the cell’s leading edge when the stimulus is applied as a gradient. Further studies are required to precisely identify the derivative and determine its location in chemotaxing cells. The strong defect in arachidonic acid metabolism is remarkable considering that there are 14 patatin-like PLA 2 s in D. discoideum. It is possible that PLA 2 A targets a specific phospholipid substrate or phospholipids within a specific compartment. The chemoattractant regulation and specific defect in the mutant indicates that PLA 2 A plays more than a “housekeeping” role. Exogenous arachidonic acid can compensate for the loss of PLA 2 A, indicating a specific requirement for an achidonic acid metabolite. Uniform application of arachidonic acid can decrease sensitivity to PI3K inhibition even though it would not be expected to produce an internal gradient within the cell. Perhaps arachidonic acid enhances the activity of another signaling molecule which is asymmetrically localized. While normally a localized increase in arachidonic acid synergizes with the other component to produce optimal response, uniform levels may be able to partially function by enhancing the other activity. Alternatively, other products of PLA 2 A such as a lyso-phospholipid may also be required for full rescue. We have as yet no insight as to the target of the PLA 2 A metabolites. Studies in mammalian cells have suggested that arachidonic acid may regulate store-operated calcium channels. Furthermore, previous studies in D. discoideum have suggested that products of PLA 2, arachidonic acid and platelet activation factor, affect chemoattractant-induced Ca 2+ influx and can trigger Ca 2+ influx directly. Ca 2+ influx stimulated by cAMP was blocked with PLA 2 inhibitors and then bypassed by arachidonic acid and related components. However, we found that specific genetic disruption of PLA 2 A that leads to a chemotaxis defect and altered arachidonic acid metabolism does not affect Ca 2+ uptake. Other studies have also not supported a role for Ca 2+ in chemotaxis. Cells lacking a putative IP3 receptor homolog, in which Ca 2+ influx in response to cAMP is abolished, displayed no chemotaxis defect. Consistently we found that iplA - cells were not more sensitive than wild type cells to inhibitors of PI3K. Our studies provide genetic evidence that PLA 2 and PI3K activities act in parallel. Similar mechanisms might exist in other organisms. Arachidonic acid releasing phospholipases are enriched in nerve growth cones and have been implicated in neurite outgrowth. Studies of chemotaxis in monocytes revealed requirements for cPLA 2 and iPLA 2 with distinct characteristics. Inhibition of cPLA 2 could be overcome by exogenous arachidonic acid as shown in our studies. It is likely that such parallel pathways are conserved and that PLA 2 is a central regulator of chemotaxis along with PI3K/PTEN. Consideration of the parallel roles of these pathways may help to resolve some of the conflicting results observed by inhibition of PI3K in other systems. Supplementary Material 01 Click here to view. 02 Click here to view. 03 Click here to view. 04 Click here to view. 05 Click here to view. 06 Click here to view. 07 Click here to view. 08 Click here to view. 09 Click here to view. 10 Click here to view. 11 Click here to view. 12 Click here to view. 13 Click here to view. 14 Click here to view. 15 Click here to view. 16 Click here to view. 17 Click here to view. 18 Click here to view. 19 Click here to view. 20 Click here to view. 