 The bacterial signaling molecule cyclic diguanosine monophosphate is only synthesized and utilized by the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum among eukaryotes. Dictyostelium cells undergo a transition from a unicellular to a multicellular state, ultimately forming a stalk and spores. While Dictyostelium is known to employ c-di-GMP to induce differentiation into stalk cells, there have been no reports of direct observation of c-di-GMP using fluorescent probes. In this study, we used a fluorescent probe used in bacteria to visualize its localization within Dictyostelium multicellular bodies. Cytosolic c-di-GMP concentrations were significantly higher at the tip of the multicellular body during stalk formation. Keywords: c-di-GMP, signal transduction, fluorescence microscopy, cell differentiation, Dictyostelium 1 Introduction Cyclic diguanylate monophosphate is a critical signaling molecule involved in diverse cellular processes including biofilm formation, motility, virulence factor production, and cell-cycle progression in prokaryotes. In bacteria, intracellular c-di-GMP levels are tightly regulated to control the transition between the motile planktonic and the sessile biofilm states. Whereas c-di-GMP is a major signaling molecule in prokaryotes, it is rarely utilized in eukaryotes; it is an external stimulus in the innate immune response acting through the cyclic GMP–AMP synthase –stimulator of interferon genes pathway. On the other hand, the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum is the only eukaryote known to synthesize c-di-GMP and use it as an intercellular signal. It normally grows in a unicellular state and feeds on surrounding bacteria. However, when starved, its single cells aggregate by chemotaxis toward cAMP signals to form a multicellular body consisting of 10 4 to 10 5 cells. The anterior and posterior regions of this body differentiate into prestalk and prespore cells, respectively; after a short migration, the slug go through a period of a culminant, eventually differentiates into a fruiting body composed of a stalk and spores. During this process, c-di-GMP is produced by DgcA synthase, localized to the anterior region of the multicellular body. It contributes significantly to the differentiation of stalk cells by acting on adenylate cyclase A to stimulate the synthesis of cAMP, which in turn activates PKA and induces the expression of stalk-specific genes. While DgcA is widely expressed in the prestalk region, AcaA is expressed only in the tip region. It is unclear what mechanisms are responsible for this difference in spatial distribution. D. discoideum is a model organism for the study of signal transduction, and sensitive fluorescence measurements of second messengers, including Ca 2+, cAMP, and inositol phospholipids, have been reported. However, c-di-GMP has never been observed using fluorescence techniques in Dictyostelium. Several probes have been developed to detect intracellular c-di-GMP in living bacteria. YcgR, a PilZ domain-containing protein, undergoes a conformational change upon c-di-GMP binding, functioning as a brake on the bacterial flagellar motor. A probe that changes FRET efficiency in a c-di-GMP concentration-dependent manner has been constructed by fusing yellow fluorescent protein and cyan fluorescent protein to the N- and C-termini of YcgR from Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, respectively, to visualize asymmetric intracellular concentrations during cell divisions of Caulobacter crescentus. Fluorescent probes utilizing the PilZ protein MrkH, c-di-GMP-dependent dimerization of BldD, and a BRET probe fusing a YFP, Venus, and Split RLuc to YcgR have also been developed to visualize c-di-GMP in bacterial cells. In this study, we have shown that the c-di-GMP probe YFP-YcgR-CFP also works in Dictyostelium cells to allow live imaging of c-di-GMP signaling in multicellular stages. 2 Materials and methods 2.1 Cell strains and culture conditions D. discoideum strains used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table S1. Cells were grown axenically in HL5 medium including glucose in 90-mm culture dishes at 21°C. Cells for fluorescence imaging were grown in low-fluorescence axenic medium containing 1 mL 1000 × FM salts 1, 1 mL 1000 × FM salts 2, 0.1 mL 10000 × FM trace elements, 11 g glucose·1H 2 O, 5 mL 1 M K 2 HPO 4 and 5 g casein peptone per liter, and the pH was adjusted to 6.5 as described in DictyBase. 1000 × FM salts 1 contains 500 mM NH 4 Cl, 200 mM MgCl 2 and 10 mM CaCl 2. 1000 × FM salts 2 is 50 mM FeCl 3. 10000 × FM trace elements is 100 mM Na 2 -EDTA·2H 2 O, 130 mM ZnSO 4 ·H 2 O, 140 mM H 3 BO 4, 25 mM MnCl 2 ·4H 2 O, 7 mM CoCl 2 ·6H 2 O, 6 mM CuSO 4 ·5H 2 O, and 0.18 mM 6Mo7O 24 ·4H 2 O. Transformants were maintained in medium containing 20 μg/mL G418. 2.2 Plasmid construction and genetic manipulation Plasmids used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table S2. pDM304/mYpet-YcgR-mCypet was constructed by insertion of a mYpet-YcgR-mCypet fragment from addgene plasmid #90102 into the Bgl II and Spe I sites of pDM304. The R118A point mutation was introduced to pDM304/mYpet-YcgR-mCypet plasmid by site-directed mutagenesis method using DNA polymerase and primers. The wild-type AX2 strain was transformed with ∼1.5 μg plasmid using a electroporator ; transformants were selected with 20 μg/mL G418. 2.3 Fluorescence spectrophotometry Cells expressing the FRET sensor were starved in developmental buffer at a density of 1.0 × 10 7 /mL for 3 h and lysed in ice cold lysis buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5, 0.2 mM EGTA, 200 mM sucrose as described by Bagorda et al.. The fluorescence intensities with or without 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, or 10 µM c-di-GMP were measured with excitation 430 nm and emission 460 and 520 nm using fluorescence spectrophotometer. The ratio of CFP/FRET values were calculated the emission value at 460 nm divided by the emission value at 520 nm. 2.4 Image acquisition and analysis In all experiments, cells were observed at 21°C. Microscopic images were taken using an inverted microscope equipped with an sCMOS camera and objectives. The c-di-GMP sensor was excited by a 130 W mercury light source system with a fluorescence mirror unit CFP-2432C-OFF for CFP images and a customized mirror unit for FRET images. All images were processed and analyzed using Fiji. Background intensity was defined as the mean pixel intensity of the ROI without cells. For ratiometric imaging, the fluorescence intensity of the CFP image was divided by the intensity of the FRET image using the CFP and FRET images subtracted the background intensity, respectively. 2.5 FRET imaging To induce development, cells at the exponential phase were harvested and washed three times in reverse osmosis water. Multicellular bodies were allowed to form on agar plates and observed as described. Multicellular bodies were imaged using inverted fluorescence microscopy. 3 Results 3.1 Expression of the c-di-GMP fluorescent sensor The FRET-based c-di-GMP sensor utilized in bacteria was expressed under the constitutive act15 promoter in D. discoideum AX2. It consists of mYpet and mCypet fused to the N- and C-termini of Salmonella YcgR, respectively. Prediction of the sensor protein structure was performed using a machine-learning model AlphaFold2. Since the FRET efficiency of the sensor decreases when bound to c-di-GMP, an increase in c-di-GMP concentration decreases FRET efficiency. To confirm that the FRET sensor is functional, cells expressing it were lysed and the dependence of the FRET efficiency on c-di-GMP concentration for the sensor produced in Dictyostelium cells was examined. Changes in fluorescence intensity with or without 0.1, 0.5, 1.0 or 10 µM c-di-GMP were measured using spectrophotometry. Increasing concentrations of c-di-GMP added to the lysate decreased FRET efficiency and increased the CFP/FRET ratio, confirming its utility as a sensor. Since the 118th arginine residue of YcgR is conserved and known to be critical for c-di-GMP binding, the single-residue substitution R118A was made to YcgR, yielding mYpet-YcgR-mCypet, and the lysate of cells expressing it were tested, but no significant FRET changes for c-di-GMP were observed. Considering that Dictyostelium responds to more than 1 µM external c-di-GMP stimulation for gene expression and that c-di-GMP functions at concentrations ranging from tens of nM to tens of µM in bacterial cells that utilize c-di-GMP, this sensor is suitable for intracellular c-di-GMP monitoring. FIGURE 1 FRET c-di-GMP sensor. Structure of mYpet-YcgR-mCypet predicted by AlphaFold2. The sensor is a fusion of mYpet, Salmonella YcgR and mCypet. c-di-GMP sensor have decreased FRET efficiency when c-di-GMP... 3.2 Fluorescent imaging of c-di-GMP in multicellular bodies The fluorescence of c-di-GMP in single cells could be measured, but its brightness was not high; moreover, the FRET changes were not very large. To better capture subtle changes in intracellular FRET, it was necessary to suppress autofluorescence. Utilizing a medium that has been shown to reduce autofluorescence described in DictyBase, the autofluorescence of multicellular bodies could be reduced at the emission wavelength. Cells expressing the c-di-GMP sensor were cultured in this low-fluorescence medium and then starved to initiate development. In culminant stages, the c-di-GMP signal was observed to be greater in the tip region, where the boundary between the prestalk and prespore regions can be distinguished by a neck. However, we observed no difference in signal between the prespore region and the prestalk regions, except for the tip. This high concentration in the tip is not consistent with the reported distribution of its synthetic enzyme DgcA, but is consistent with the distribution of the induced adenylyl cyclase AcaA, thought to be activated by c-di-GMP. Since the K d of the c-di-GMP sensor is 195 nM, we infer that the tip area has a concentration of at least several hundred nM. FIGURE 2 Representative images of c-di-GMP in Dictyostelium multicellular bodies of CFP, FRET, and DIC. Ratiometric FRET image created by dividing the CFP image by the FRET image. Ratios are shown in pseudocolor. Scale bars, 100 µm.... 3.3 Time-lapse measurement of c-di-GMP during development To determine at what point during development the concentration of c-di-GMP in the tip begins, its signal was monitored during development from initial multicellularity to the formation of fruiting bodies. Immediately after slug formation, there was no clear localization of c-di-GMP, but a strong signal at the tip was observed when stalk formation was confirmed inside the multicellular body. Figure 2, showing c-di-GMP localization, also shows stalk formation. Although cellular autofluorescence increases with fruiting body formation, we observed no significant difference between the tip and other regions in AX2 multicellular bodies not expressing fluorescent sensors. The mYpet-YcgR-mCypet does not respond significantly to c-di-GMP. Time-lapse measurements of the development of cells expressing this probe showed no significant change in FRET efficiency. The faint but non-significant difference in the tip region after 18.5 h may be due to the weak affinity of the YcgR mutant, which has been reported to be K d of 14 µM. These results suggest that a large amount of c-di-GMP is synthesized during stalk formation at the tip of the culminant. FIGURE 3 Transition of c-di-GMP synthesis during development. CFP/FRET ratios for each region within the multicellular body at each time point. Means ± standard errors are shown ; * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01 -mCypet during development. CFP/FRET ratios of mYpet-YcgR-mCypet for regions of the multicellular body at each time point. Means ± standard deviations are shown. Data were assessed using... 3.4 c-di-GMP in the dgcA mutant D. discoideum, DgcA synthase is primarily responsible for the synthesis of c-di-GMP. The dgcA mutant does not form fruiting bodies because c-di-GMP does not induce stalk-cell differentiation, but they do progress to the slug stage. FRET in the dgcA mutant was performed after multicellular body formation, with no significant difference between the regions. This indicates that the wild-type c-di-GMP signal 3A ) depends on the c-di-GMP synthesized by DgcA synthase. FIGURE 5 No localization of c-di-GMP in a dgcA mutant. CFP/FRET ratios for each slug region are shown as box plots. Anterior is defined as the prestalk region minus the tip region. Posterior is the prespore region. Data were assessed with ANOVA with Tukey’s... 4 Discussion In D. discoideum, stalk cell differentiation is induced by c-di-GMP and DIF-1. Since this differentiation also induces cell death, it provides information on cell-death mechanisms. The presence of c-di-GMP activates AcaA in tip cells and cAMP synthesized by AcaA in turn activates PKA to induce the differentiation of prestalk cells into stalk. Conversely, ammonia acts on RegA via DhkC, which suppresses cAMP signaling, thereby inhibiting stalk differentiation. Our observation of c-di-GMP accumulation in the tip during stalk formation 3 ) is consistent with the localization of AcaA, supporting the previous spatiotemporal model. On the other hand, the fact that the distribution of the synthetic enzyme DgcA did not match the distribution of c-di-GMP may indicate that DgcA is activated only in tip cells, or that c-di-GMP synthesis is suppressed in prestalk cells except for the tip. The activity of some bacterial diguanylates are known to be regulated by partner proteins. There are proteins that are expressed only at the tip or prestalk region of Dictyostelium multicellular bodies ; it is possible that they include regulatory partners for DgcA activity. Alternatively, since acidification is known to act on stalk differentiation, differences in the cellular environment, such as intracellular pH, may regulate DgcA activity spatially and temporally. Cells not expressing the sensor, or expressing a probe that did not bind c-di-GMP, had normal stalk development at 16 h or more after starvation; however, in cells expressing the c-di-GMP sensor, stalk formation was delayed to 21 h or more after starvation. 4 ). This is likely due to the binding of c-di-GMP to the sensor reducing intracellular free c-di-GMP. This is also an indication that c-di-GMP is important for stalk formation. This study visualized c-di-GMP signaling in eukaryotes for the first time. To elucidate more of the spatiotemporal dynamics of c-di-GMP at the single-cell or single-local levels, it is necessary to increase sensor sensitivity. The K d of the sensor used in this study is approximately 195 nM, making it suitable for Dictyostelium because c-di-GMP stimulations above 1 µM induce expression of stalk-specific genes ; however, we only observed significant differences during stalk-cell formation, which is considered to have the highest intracellular c-di-GMP concentration. DgcA is widely expressed in prestalk cells and may function at lower concentrations; alternatively, it may be produced at an earlier time point. PilZ domain protein PA3353 from Pseudomonas aeruginosa has two binding sites, one of which with a K d of 88 nM, and may be used as a sensitive c-di-GMP sensor. As development progresses to multicellular and fruiting bodies, autofluorescence increases, which affects the fluorescence ratio imaging. The BRET sensor may be useful for measurement with high signal-to-noise ratio, because it can greatly decrease artifacts caused by autofluorescence. The c-di-GMP sensor used in this study was not bright enough and required intense excitation, making it difficult to measure at the single-cell level. Since c-di-GMP acts as an extracellular signal, measurement of signal dynamics upon stimulation is important. Recently, multiple stable fluorescent proteins have been developed, and their use in sensors may enable measurement of responses to external c-di-GMP stimulation. D. discoideum synthesize and utilize c-di-GMP signal by themselves using lateral gene transfer from bacteria. Therefore, D. discoideum is the only known eukaryote species that uses c-di-GMP as a signal. In mammalian cells, c-di-GMP is recognized as a bacterial signal by the STING pathway and innate immunity functions. The use of Dictyostelium cells as a model for measuring c-di-GMP signaling in eukaryotic cells would provide a model for immunological studies. 