 The efficient delivery of lysosomes is essential for many cell functions, such as the degradation of unwanted intracellular components by autophagy and the killing and digestion of extracellular microbes within phagosomes. Using the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, we find that cells lacking Katnip have a general defect in lysosomal delivery and although they make autophagosomes and phagosomes correctly, cells are then unable to digest them. Katnip is largely unstudied yet highly conserved across evolution. Previously studies found that Katnip mutations in animals cause defects in cilia structure. Here we show that Katnip plays a more general role in maintaining microtubule function. We find that loss of Katnip has no overall effect on microtubule dynamics or organization, but is important for the transport and degradation of endocytic cargos. Strikingly, Katnip mutants become highly sensitive to GFP–tubulin expression, which leads to microtubule tangles, defective anaphase extension, and slow cell growth. Our findings establish a general role for Katnip in regulating microtubule function, beyond the roles previously described in cilia. We speculate this is via a key function in microtubule repair, needed to maintain endosomal trafficking and lysosomal degradation. INTRODUCTION Endocytic trafficking is highly complex and dependent on a wide range of cellular machinery to generate vesicles at the correct place and time, with the correct composition, and then deliver them to where they are needed. Consequently, many elements and regulatory mechanisms remain poorly understood. Autophagy is a key endocytic pathway that allows cells to capture and digest unwanted cytosolic components. This is important for the removal of damaged or superfluous proteins and organelles and also allows cells to recycle their cytosol to regenerate energy and nutrients during starvation. Autophagy therefore plays a broad range of physiologically important roles, such as preventing the accumulation of damaged components that can cause neurodegeneration and cancer and allowing cells to survive starvation. Autophagosomes form by the generation of a cup-shaped structure in the cytosol, called an isolation membrane or phagophore. This expands and encircles a portion of the cytosol to generate a characteristic double-membraned vesicle. These then fuse with lysosomes leading to acidification and digestion of the captured contents. While much of the basic machinery required for autophagosome generation has now been identified, our understanding of all the regulatory components and additional factors needed to complete the process is incomplete. A useful model system to investigate the autophagy pathway is the soil amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. Like mammalian cells, Dictyostelium uses autophagy to survive starvation and remove pathogens, but also requires it during its developmental cycle when ∼200,000 individual cells come together and differentiate to form a multicellular fruiting body consisting of a spore head held aloft by a stalk. The autophagy machinery in Dictyostelium closely resembles that in mammalian cells, as both form isolation membranes adjacent to the ER, in contrast to the organelle-independent phagophore assembly site found in yeast. Dictyostelium possesses several genes required for autophagy in animals that have been lost in the classical genetic system S. cerevisiae. To identify new components of the autophagy machinery, the Kessin group took advantage of their observation that upon starvation, autophagic degradation causes cells to deplete their cytosol and shrink over time. Therefore, wild-type Dictyostelium change buoyancy on a Percoll density gradient upon starvation, whereas autophagy-deficient mutants do not. This allowed mutants unable to digest their cytosol to be isolated from a library by Percoll separation. A secondary test for defective development led to the identification of several mutants sharing both autophagy-associated phenotypes. One of these was the previously unstudied gene DDB_G0275861, which we validate and characterize in this study. DDB_G0275861 has highly conserved orthologues throughout the eukaryotes, with the notable exceptions of all fungi and the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. Orthologues can easily be recognized by the presence of a unique and highly conserved domain of unknown function, DUF4457. DUF4457 domains always occur as three or four tandem repeats and are not found in any other proteins. The rest of the protein is more divergent, with no clear homology to any other proteins. FIGURE 1: Disruption of KatA causes autophagy-deficient phenotypes. Schematic representation of the structure of Dictyostelium and human Katnip orthologues. Blue boxes indicate the positions of the DUF4457 domains unique to this protein. Development of... Loss-of-function mutations of the human orthologue were previously identified as a cause of Joubert’s syndrome, an inherited developmental disorder caused by defective cilia. Cilia are microtubule-based structures that protrude from the cell surface and are involved in extracellular fluid motility, signaling, and mechanosensation. KIAA0556 was subsequently shown to bind the microtubule-severing protein Katanin and renamed Katnip. We will therefore also use Katnip to refer to the Dictyostelium protein, with katA for the corresponding gene. Katnip was completely unstudied before the discovery of its role in ciliopathies, and its molecular function remains unknown. In vertebrates, GFP-Katnip localizes to the centrosome and cilia basal body, with the primary phenotype of Katnip-deficient animals being mild disruption of cilia organization; mutant cells still form the same overall structure but have more variation in the number of microtubules within cilia, which appear slightly elongated and form at lower frequency. Consistent with a role in microtubule regulation, Katnip directly interacts with both tubulin and Katanin and high levels of overexpression cause accumulation of acetylated microtubules in retinal pigment epithelial cells. How Katnip contributes to microtubule and/or cilia activity remains unknown. As Dictyostelium and many other organisms that possess Katnip do not produce cilia, this indicates a broader functional role that remains unexplored. Here we describe the role of Katnip in Dictyostelium, indicating a new, general function in microtubule maintenance required for effective lysosomal trafficking and degradation of both autophagosomes and phagosomes. RESULTS Katnip mutants exhibit multiple autophagy-deficient phenotypes The original screen was performed using a library of insertional mutants generated in the DH1 genetic background. We therefore started by generating new katA knockouts by homologous recombination to recapitulate and confirm the reported phenotypes. Multiple independent mutants were isolated in both Ax2 and Ax3 genetic backgrounds and had comparable phenotypes. All data presented are from the Ax2 mutant strains JSK14 and 15, referred to as katA –1 and katA –2 respectively. We started by confirming the developmental phenotype originally used to identify katA – null cells as potential autophagy-defective mutants. Mutant cells and wild-type controls were therefore plated on filters and allowed to develop overnight. While wild-type cells robustly formed fruiting bodies with long stalks and large sori, fruiting body formation was much weaker in katA mutants, with much shorter or collapsed stalks and almost no sorus. This is not as severe as the complete loss of aggregation observed upon disruption of the single Atg1 orthologue that is essential for autophagosome formation, but is similar to that found in less penetrant autophagy mutants, such as upon disruption of Atg5 or one of the two Atg6 alleles. We then tested the ability of both katA – mutants to survive starvation, as an additional key autophagy phenotype. Recycling of nutrients by autophagic degradation of the cytosol is critical to survive starvation, and autophagy-deficient cells rapidly lose viability upon amino acid starvation. Consistent with this, katA – mutants also begun to lose viability almost immediately following arginine and lysine starvation, although not as rapidly as cells lacking Atg1. Katnip-null cells are therefore deficient in both development and surviving amino acid starvation, consistent with a functionally important role for Katnip in the autophagic pathway. Katnip mutants have a specific defect in autophagosome degradation To investigate where in the autophagy pathway the defect arises, we directly examined autophagosome formation using the canonical autophagy reporter GFP-Atg8a. By fluorescence microscopy, Katnip-null cells still formed a number of autophagosomes comparable to that in wild-type controls, which accumulated at a normal rate after addition of protease inhibitors to block degradation. FIGURE 2: Autophagosome formation and digestion in katA null cells. Images of cells expressing GFP–Atg8 before and after 1 h treatment with protease inhibitors. Maximum-intensity projections of confocal volumes, bar = 10 μm. The numbers... As autophagosome number appeared normal, we then tested whether there was a defect in degradation. This can be determined by the accumulation of free GFP cleaved from GFP-Atg8a in autolysosomes, as the compact GFP structure makes it relatively protected from lysosomal degradation. By Western blot, a clear free GFP-band could be observed in wild-type cells that was almost completely blocked by protease inhibitors. GFP–Atg8a cleavage was significantly decreased in katA – cells under all conditions, despite the cells having comparable numbers of autophagosomes. We therefore conclude that loss of Katnip causes defective autophagosome proteolysis. To follow individual autophagosomes in more detail, we observed GFP-Atg8a expressing cells compressed under agar by high-resolution time-lapse microscopy. This mechanically stimulates autophagosome formation as well as reducing the Z-depth of the cells, enabling individual autophagosomes to be followed over time. This allows direct observation of phagophore expansion through to complete autophagosome formation. Subsequent lysosomal fusion and acidification is then indicated by disappearance of the GFP-signal as it becomes quenched at low pH. While the autophagosomes formed by Katnip-deficient cells appeared indistinguishable from controls, both formation and acidification phases were significantly slower, taking almost three times longer to complete the cycle. This confirms that loss of Katnip does not prevent autophagosome formation per se, but perturbs the underlying dynamics sufficiently to inhibit proper function and flux. Download video file. Movie S1 Movie S1 Autophagosome formation in wild-type and katA −1 cells. Cells expressing GFP-Atg8aimaged by spinning disc after compression under agarose. Loss of Katnip causes a general defect in lysosomal delivery We next tested whether the observed defects are due to a specific role for Katnip in autophagy or a general trafficking defect. Dictyostelium amoebae are professional phagocytes and also rely on lysosomal delivery to degrade extracellular material engulfed in phagosomes. Phagosomal proteolysis can be directly measured using reporter beads which increase in fluorescence upon hydrolysis and dequenching of conjugated DQ-bovine serum albumin. This showed that disruption of Katnip also caused a 70% loss in phagosomal proteolysis compared with controls. This was not due to deficient total lysosomal capacity, as proteolysis in cell-free lysates was unaffected and cells contained comparable levels of the acid hydrolase cathepsin D. We therefore conclude that loss of Katnip causes a general defect in lysosomal degradation due to inefficient delivery to nascent phagosomes and autophagosomes. FIGURE 3: Phagosomal proteolysis is also perturbed in katA – cells. Proteolysis of DQ-BSA conjugated beads after phagocytosis, indicating severely inhibited digestion in katA – mutants. Total cathepsin D protein levels are unaffected, as measured... Dictyostelium Katnip has conserved localization to the centrosome and microtubules To further understand the function of Katnip, we examined its localization by expression as a GFP fusion. Unfortunately, due to the presence of a large number of repetitive sequences encoding polyglutamine and -asparagine tracts at the N-terminus of the gene, we were unable to clone the full-length Dictyostelium discoideum gene. We therefore took advantage of the recently sequenced genome of the closely related species D. lacteum, which lacks the propensity to polyN/Q repeats that so often confounds molecular biology in D. discoideum. Expression of GFP fused to D. lacteum Katnip in D. discoideum showed a significant cytosolic pool and enrichment at a single punctum near the nucleus. Additional puncta were also occasionally observed in highly expressing cells, although the perinuclear spot was always clearest. This was confirmed as the centrosome by colocalization with the marker CP224. Centrosomal localization was maintained during mitosis, as well as additional weaker recruitment to the spindle. Serendipitously, during extended live-cell imaging, we found that photodamage caused a dramatic relocalization of GFP–dlKatnip to large numbers of bright puncta throughout the cell with simultaneous reduction of the cytosolic background. This was reproduced by treating cells with 5 mM hydrogen peroxide without imaging for 30 min, indicating that this response was due to photooxidative damage induced by imaging. FIGURE 4: GFP-Katnip localizes to centrosomes and puncta on microtubules upon oxidative damage. Wild-type cells expressing GFP–dlKatA fixed and stained for the centrosomal marker CP224, tubulin, and nuclei. An equivalent cell during mitosis,... Download video file. Movie S2 Movie S2 Photo-induced relocation of GFP-dlKatnip. Confocal movie of wild-type cells under continuous illumination on a spinning disc microscope. The induced GFP-dlKatnip puncta appeared to associate along filamentous structures that resembled microtubules. To confirm this, we sought to enhance this localization by shortening the microtubule network with the microtubule depolymerizing drug nocodazole before imaging. This shortened the microtubules and increased the density of GFP-dlKatnip puncta labelling, clearly highlighting the microtubule network. The physiological significance of and mechanism driving this relocalization are unclear, but a similar localization of GFP–Katnip puncta along microtubules was described in mammalian cells upon high levels of overexpression, and Katnip binds directly to tubulin. This implies conserved microtubule binding function and suggests a potential conditional ability to bind along microtubules that becomes constitutive upon extreme overexpression as a GFP fusion and/or oxidative damage. Download video file. Movie S3 Movie S3 Photo-induced relocation of GFP-dlKatnip after 30 μM nocodazole treatment. Cells were images as in movie 2. Note the more dense localisation to the shortened microtubules. Katnip is needed to tolerate GFP–tubulin expression We next investigated how loss of Katnip affected the microtubule cytoskeleton by expression of GFP-α-tubulin. Dictyostelium microtubules are highly stable and form exclusively from the centrosome to generate a single array that is evenly distributed throughout the cytosol. In katA – null cells, GFP–tubulin overexpression revealed a general disruption of the microtubule organization, with 30% of cells exhibiting highly stable tangles and/or a collapsed array that left the majority of the cytosol microtubule-free. Surprisingly, however, this phenotype appeared to be specifically induced by GFP-fused α-tubulin, as katA – cells stained for endogenous tubulin had no significant increase in aberrant microtubule arrays. FIGURE 5: GFP–α-tubulin causes the formation of microtubule tangles in katA – null cells. Maximum-intensity projections from confocal sections of cells expressing GFP–α-tubulin. Three sections from each field of view are... Download video file. Movie S4 Movie S4 Dynamics of GFP-α-tubulin in wild-type and katA −1 cells. Maximum intensity projection from a confocal timelapse. GFP–α-tubulin expression is used widely and had no significant effect on the growth or microtubule organization of wild-type Dictyostelium. Untransformed katA – cells also grew at a normal rate, but GFP–α-tubulin expression caused their generation time to increase from 15 to 48 h. This defect was not due to a defect in cytokinesis, as all the cell lines had comparable levels of multinucleate cells. FIGURE 6: GFP–α-tubulin specifically disrupts both growth and anaphase in katA – cells. Growth rate of cells with and without GFP–α-tubulin expression in standard HL5 axenic medium. Time spent in mitosis, estimated... Download video file. Movie S5 Movie S5 Mitosis of wild-type cells, expressing GFP-α-tubulin. Download video file. Movie S6 Movie S6 Mitosis of Katnip null cells expressing GFP-α-tubulin. The threefold decrease in growth rate induced by GFP–α-tubulin cannot be due solely to the 30% of katA – cells that contain tangles. Tangles are therefore likely to be extreme manifestations of a general GFP-α-tubulin intolerance across the population. Despite the presence of the bulky fluorescent tag, GFP–α-tubulin is generally well tolerated in most organisms. However, high expression levels have been reported to induce mild cold-intolerance in S. cerevisiae and a decrease in microtubule number in Dictyostelium. The increased sensitivity of Dictyostelium cells lacking Katnip to GFP–α-tubulin indicates either a general role for Katnip in microtubule regulation or a more specific role in tolerating microtubule stress. GFP–tubulin causes a specific defect in spindle elongation in Katnip-null cells To better understand how GFP-α-tubulin expression affects microtubule dynamics and growth of Katnip mutants, we examined mitosis as a classical microtubule-driven process. Using brightfield imaging to observe division with minimal phototoxicity indicated that most cells still successfully divided, but expression of GFP–α-tubulin specifically increased the variability and average time spent in mitosis in cells lacking Katnip. More detailed analysis, observing GFP–α-tubulin dynamics by confocal microscopy, indicated a specific defect during anaphase, when the microtubule spindles pull the centrosomes apart. While spindles in control cells extended in a steady and highly reproducible manner, spindles in katA – null cells frequently stalled mid-elongation and either paused or retracted. This resulted in a significantly longer and more variable time in anaphase and an overall doubling of the average time in mitosis, confirming our observations with brightfield microscopy. These experiments demonstrate that Katnip is required for cells to tolerate GFP-α-tubulin. While this is particularly apparent during anaphase, when microtubules are most mechanically active, the short proportion of time spent in mitosis means this will only make a minor contribution to the overall threefold increase in generation time. Katnip must therefore also play a general role in maintaining microtubule activity during interphase. Katnip does not regulate microtubule stability or dynamics Microtubules are highly dynamic and their rates of polymerization and depolymerization are carefully controlled by a host of regulatory factors. Dictyostelium microtubules are relatively stable and rarely undergo the classical catastrophe/repolymerization cycles prominent in their mammalian counterparts. However, they still undergo dynamic instability and rapidly depolymerize in the presence of free tubulin–sequestering drugs such as nocodazole. We therefore measured sensitivity to nocodazole to test whether loss of Katnip affects the underlying microtubule polymerization dynamics. Nocodazole sensitivity was tested by measuring changes in the proportion of the cell area covered by the microtubule array over time. Using GFP–α-tubulin–expressing cells, the proportion of the cell area covered by the microtubule array was reduced from 67 ± 2.3% to 35 ± 12% within 10 min of 30–µM nocodazole addition in wild-type cells. The effects of nocodazole are reversible, and the size of the microtubule array was fully restored within 10 min of drug removal. Loss of Katnip had no effect on either the depolymerization or regrowth of microtubules in this assay. To ensure that any defects were not obscured due to excessive drug concentrations, the lack of effect was confirmed under conditions of partial depolymerization using 10 µM nocodazole. FIGURE 7: Katnip does not affect general microtubule stability. Schematic for calculating the proportion of the cell area occupied by the microtubule array. Both the cell perimeter and the extent of the microtubules were manually drawn from maximum-intensity... As a parallel approach, we tested whether loss of Katnip affected the proportion of polymerized tubulin by fractionating polymerized and free tubulin by centrifugation and subsequent western blotting. The predominantly soluble Wiskott Aldrich syndrome protein was used as a fractionation control. In this assay, loss of KatA had no significant impact on the levels of either total or polymerized endogenous α-tubulin. Upon transformation, both cell lines expressed GFP–α-tubulin at comparable levels, and consistent with previous reports, GFP–α-tubulin was less efficiently incorporated into microtubules than endogenous tubulin. However, no significant changes in the polymerized fraction of either endogenous or GFP-tagged tubulin were observed in katA – cells. Katnip therefore does not appear to be a general regulator of microtubule assembly or disassembly and must maintain lysosomal function and tolerance of GFP-α-tubulin through an alternative mechanism. Katnip is required for efficient microtubule-based trafficking Because the overall structure and stability of the microtubule array were unperturbed by loss of Katnip in the absence of exogenous GFP–α-tubulin, we next investigated whether microtubule function also remained intact. The primary role of microtubules is to act as tracks for molecular motors such as dyneins and kinesins to transport cargo around the cell. This is particularly important for endocytic trafficking and is required for lysosomal delivery to both autophagosomes and phagosomes. The ability of phagosomes to move along microtubules can be directly observed by time-lapse microscopy of 1µm latex beads after engulfment and compression of the cells to prevent migration. During early maturation, phagosomes move in a bidirectional manner with runs of fast movement. We therefore performed time-lapse imaging of cells from 10 min after addition of beads and measured the average speed of phagosome movement. This showed that average speed was halved in katA – cells from 0.24 ± 0.015 µm/s in controls to 0.12 ± 0.04 µm/s. To visualize these changes over time, the data were also plotted as a heat map. This showed that while phagosomes in katA – cells were able to reach peak speeds similar to those in wild-type controls, this was rarely maintained for longer than a few seconds, and much of the time the phagosomes remained virtually immobile. FIGURE 8: Katnip is important for efficient phagosome and autophagosome transport. Quantification of the average speed of phagosomes moving within the cell, measured from time lapse movies after engulfment. More than... Download video file. Movie S7 Movie S7 Example of phagosome movement within control and KatA −1 cells. Cells were allowed to engulf 1μm beads for 10 minutes prior to compression under agarose and imaging by DIC microscopy. To establish whether autophagosome movement was also affected, we tracked their movement from the movies of compressed GFP–Atg8a-expressing cells shown in Figure 2 and Supplemental Movie 1. This showed that autophagosomes also had a comparable decrease in motility in Katnip-deficient cells. Therefore, absence of Katnip causes a general defect in endocytic transport, even without GFP–α-tubulin. Although how Katnip maintains microtubule-based transport remain unclear, this provides a clear mechanism for the defective lysosomal degradation of both autophagosomes and phagosomes observed in Katnip-null cells. We therefore describe a new, universal role for Katnip in microtubule function and lysosomal degradation. DISCUSSION Although initially identified in a screen for autophagy-related genes, the experiments above indicate that Katnip plays a general role in ensuring lysosomal delivery to multiple compartments. Previous studies implicate Katnip as a key regulator of cilia function, and in this paper we extend this to outline a general role in microtubule function. Although the exact role of Katnip remains unclear, an inability to use microtubules to transport vesicles to where they are needed offers a clear mechanism for the observed defects in digestion when Katnip is lost. What role might Katnip play in microtubule transport? Similar microtubule tangles and cytokinesis defects have also been reported when the activity of the dynein motor complex is perturbed. As dynein also accumulates at the centrosome, it may functionally interact with Katnip in Dictyostelium. However, although these phenotypes are constitutive in dynein-deficient cells, microtubule organization is only disrupted in Katnip mutants upon expression of GFP–tubulin. The major trafficking defects in katA – cells therefore occur in the absence of any of the dynein-like phenotypes. This, combined with the absence of any observable changes in microtubule growth or stability, indicates that Katnip may be more important in maintenance rather than general microtubule dynamics. However as there is no clear Dictyostelium orthologue of the microtubule severing AAA-ATPase Katanin that is proposed to be the key effector of Katnip in other cells, the mechanism for this remains unclear. Katnip localization also hints at a general role in microtubule maintenance: whilst low levels of GFP–Katnip expression primarily localize to the centrosome in both Dictyostelium and mammalian cells, it can also bind along the length of the microtubule upon either overexpression or oxidative damage. In highly expressing RPE1 cells, GFP–Katnip microtubule localization also led to increased microtubule stabilization and acetylation. While the physiological relevance of overexpressed GFP fusions or oxidative relocation is unclear, this does indicate a conditional capacity to bind the tubule body. The clearest evidence for a role in maintaining microtubule integrity is the strikingly increased sensitivity to GFP–α-tubulin expression observed when Katnip is disrupted. Microtubules are formed of a highly organized lattice of α/β tubulin dimers. It is perhaps surprising that attachment of a large GFP moiety to these subunits is generally tolerated so well, as to our knowledge, no deleterious effects of GFP–α-tubulin overexpression have been reported in mammalian cells. No functional defects have previously been described in Dictyostelium either, despite the less efficient integration of GFP–α-tubulin into microtubules and reduced microtubule number. In contrast, GFP–α-tubulin overexpression has reported to be deleterious in both S. cerevisiae and S. pombe. Like all fungi, both lack Katnip orthologues due to secondary loss through evolution. Our observations are consistent with the hypothesis that GFP–α-tubulin expression disrupts microtubule structure, but in a way that is normally tolerated in a Katnip-dependent manner. Recent studies have highlighted that the microtubule lattice often becomes damaged when exposed to physical force, including motor walking, bending and shear forces. This manifests as defects in the microtubule lattice such as the formation of holes and changes in protofilament number. Importantly, it has also been proposed that defects in the lattice structure will cause motors to stall or fall off, inhibiting endocytic transport. However, while there is now clear evidence that microtubules can be repaired through insertion of new GTP–tubulin molecules, how this is regulated remains poorly understood. One proposed mechanism is to sever damaged filaments using the activity of Katanin, a direct binding partner of Katnip. Cilia represent some of the most mechanically exposed and long-lived microtubules in animals. This is consistent with why structural defects in these are the primary phenotype in Katnip-deficient patients and animal models. Microtubules are also under their greatest strain during anaphase in mitosis, where they need to pull the chromatids apart. This is again where we observe the most significant defect in Dictyostelium. The unusually high microtubule stability and lack of catastrophes in Dictyostelium may also contribute to damage accumulation over time and cause these cells to be particularly dependent on Katnip for repair. Studies of microtubule damage and repair are in their infancy, and current lack of tools to observe microtubule ultrastructure and damage in cells makes testing these hypotheses challenging. Nonetheless, the data presented here demonstrate a conserved role for Katnip in regulating microtubule function beyond just cilia. We show this is important in maintaining microtubule-based endocytic trafficking and in particular the digestion of autophagosomes and phagosomes. While there remain very few studies of Katnip function, it has a growing association with human disease. In addition to several studies finding Katnip mutations in patients with Joubert’s syndrome, reduced expression was also found to be associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Heterozygous mutations in Katnip were also recently associated with hypothalamic hamartoma tumors. Whether these disease associations are due to defects in cilia or endocytic trafficking, such as perturbed autophagy, remains to be determined, but this work demonstrates that Katnip is fundamentally important for microtubule function, and general defects in trafficking and lysosomal degradation will have wide-ranging effects on the cell. MATERIALS AND METHODS Request a protocol through Bio-protocol. Cell culture All experiments were performed using the Dictyostelium discoideum cells from the Ax2 axenic mutant background. For general culture, cells were grown in sterile HL5 media at 22°C. Starvation was performed using SIH defined medium containing or lacking Arg/Lys as previously described. Ax2 background Atg1 mutants were previously described. Cells were transformed using standard Dictyostelium electroporation methods and transformants selected 24 h after electroporation with either 10 µg/ml G418, 10 µg/ml blastidicin, or 20 µg/ml hygromycin. To observe development, 10 7 cells were washed twice before resuspension in 1 ml KK2 starvation buffer. This was then spread onto 47 mm nitrocellulose filters on top of 3 filter paper discs pre-soaked in KK2. Excess liquid was then removed by pipetting from the bottom of the filter papers and cells were left for 24 h before imaging. Viability under starvation was performed based upon. Cells were washed twice, resuspended at 5 × 10 5 /mL in SIH–Arg/Lys, and maintained in shaking flasks. At each time point, volumes equivalent to 100 starting cells were spread on lawns of Klebsiella aerogenes on duplicate SM agar plates. The number of colonies formed was then counted after 4–5 d. Plasmid constructs and transformation The KatA knockout construct was generated by amplifying and cloning a 5.5-Kb fragment of Dictyostelium KatA using the primers AGCAGAAGAAATAGCAGTAG­TGGC/TTATTTTAAATAACTAGCCATTTCTGTAT and inserting the loxP-blasticidin resistance cassette from pLPBLP as a Bam HI/ Hind III fragment into the same sites, deleting a 2.5-Kb coding sequence. The KO cassette was then excised and used to transform Ax2 cells. Correct insertion of the BSR cassette was screened by PCR, using the following primers, as indicated in Supplemental Figure 1B: P1 = GAATCAATAACCCCAAGAGAGTTG; P2 = TTCGGCAGTACATATTGAAGCG; P3 = CGC­TTCAATATGTACTGCCGAA; P4 = CAGTTGAAGCTCCTTTCATTCC. Full-length katA from Dictyostelium lacteum was amplified from genomic DNA extracted from cells using primers tgatcaATGTATGCACTTTTTAAATTATGTTTC/tctagaTTATTTTTGGAATAATATTGATTGGGAG, and adding 5′BclI and 3′XbaI restriction sites. This was subcloned into the Bgl II/ Spe I sites of D. discoideum expression vector pDM448, adding an N-terminal GFP tag. GFP-tubulin and GFP-Atg8a expression vectors were generated previously. Proteolysis assays Phagosome proteolysis was determined based on the dequenching of DQ-BSA/Alexa594 conjugated 3-μm silica beads as described by Sattler et al.. Cells were seeded at 3 × 10 5 per well of a glass-bottomed 96-well plate in Lo-Flo medium in triplicate. After 1 h, 1.5 × 10 4 reporter beads were added to each well except controls, and plates were spun at 800 × g for 10 s to synchronize bead uptake. Cells were then washed twice with Lo-Flo to remove unengulfed beads before fluorescence measurements at 480/510 nm and 560/620 nm using a plate reader every 2 min. After subtraction of background fluorescence, DQ-BSA Signal was normalized for bead uptake using the Alexa594 signal. Total proteolytic activity was performed in a similar way by adding the same reporter beads to cell lysates. Samples of 4 × 10 7 cells/mL in 150 mM potassium acetate at pH 4.0 were lysed by two freeze–thaw cycles in liquid nitrogen. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 18,000 × g for 5 min at 4°C before 1.23 × 10 5 beads were added to 100 µl of supernatant in 96-well plates and measured as above. Cathepsin D levels were measured by Western blot using the previously published antibody. Autophagy assays Time-lapse analysis of autophagosome formation was performed using cells compressed under agar, to both improve imaging and induce autophagy via mechanical stress. Cells expressing GFP–Atg8a were seeded in 35-mm glass-bottomed dishes and left for 1 h to adhere. Gels were prepared by casting 10 ml of 1% agarose in HL5 medium in a 10-cm Petri dish before a ∼1 cm 2 slice was excised, which was placed upon the cells and the medium removed. Residual medium was removed by filter paper touching the agarose square. Cells were then imaged on Perkin-Elmer Ultraview VOX spinning disk confocal microscope with ×60/1.4 NA objective, taking five optical sections at Z-spacing 1 μm every 10 s. Autophagosomes were tracked manually from maximum-intensity projections. Autophagosome closure was defined as the brightest time point for each autophagosome. Autophagic flux was measured based on the lysosomal cleavage of GFP–Atg8a as described in Cardenal-Munoz et al.. Samples of 4 × 10 6 cells expressing GFP–Atg8a were seeded in duplicate in 3 ml of HL5 in 6-well plates and placed on an orbital shaker at 180 rpm at 22°C. After 2 h, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail was added to one set of wells at 4× concentration. After a further hour a 50-µl cell suspension was transferred to a cloning ring on a 35-mm glass-bottomed dish for microscopy and imaged as above taking single z -stacks at Z-spacing 0.5 µm. The rest of the culture was pelleted and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen before analysis by Western blot. Fluorescently labeled streptavidin, which binds only 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase, the only substantially biotinylated endogenous protein, was used as a loading control. Photodamaging cells To induce photodamage, cells expressing GFP–dlKatA were imaged continuously on a Perkin–Elmer Ultraview VOX spinning disk confocal microscope with a ×100/1.4 NA oil immersion objective using 488-nm laser excitation at 50% power. Microtubule depolymerization assay Cells expressing GFP–α-tubulin were seeded in microscopy dishes and left to settle for 1 h. Medium was then removed from the dish and replaced with either 10 µM or 30 µM nocodazole in HL5. New fields of view were then imaged every 5 min for 30 min before the medium was again removed, and cells were washed twice and replaced with HL5 without nocodazole. Cells were again imaged every 5 min for a further 30 min. Full-depth Z-stacks were obtained on a spinning disk microscope before quantification from maximum intensity projections using ImageJ. The area covered by microtubules was measured manually by drawing a polygon around the ends of the array and calculated as a proportion of the whole cell area. This was calculated for all complete cells in the field of view for each time point with the mean proportion from each time point averaged across three biological repeats. Microtubule fractionation Protocol was adapted from Kimble et al.. Samples of 2 × 10 7 cells were washed once in KK2 before pelleting and resuspension in 200 µl HEMS buffer with 1% HALT protease inhibitors. After 2 min at room temperature, 30 µl of lysate was removed for the “total tubulin” fraction before the insoluble polymerized and free tubulin fractions were separated by centrifugation at 2700 × g for 1 min. Samples were then analyzed by Western blot, using antibodies against α-tubulin, GFP, or WASP. Imaging mitosis Cells were seeded in HL5 at 0.5 × 10 5 in 35 mm glass dishes and left overnight before imaging. Brightfield movies were obtained by taking images every 30 s for 2 h on a LD A-plan x20 air objective on a Zeiss Axiovert widefield microscope. Mitosis was timed from initial rounding until daughter-cell scission. To image microtubules, cells expressing GFP–tubulin were imaged under brightfield and 488 laser every 10 s for 10 to 40 min on Perkin-Elmer Spinning Disk Confocal microscope with a 60×/1.4 NA oil immersion objective. Total mitosis time of each cell was plotted for each cell line and a t test performed between cell lines. Distance between centrosomes was measured during anaphase manually using ImageJ. Immunofluorescence Dictyostelium cells seeded on nitric acid–washed coverslips at 2 × 10 5 /ml were fixed in ultracold methanol as described in Hagedorn et al.. After blocking with 3% BSA in PBS for 30 min, coverslips were incubated with primary antibody diluted in 3% BSA in PBS for 30 min and then repeated with secondary antibody. Coverslips were washed and then mounted with Prolong Gold with DAPI. Slides were left overnight to harden and imaged by either spinning disk or Zeiss Airyscan confocal microscopes using 60x objectives. Vesicle motility assays Phagosome motility was measured using the assay described by Rai et al.. Samples of 2 × 10 6 cells were seeded in HL5 medium in glass-bottomed microscopy dishes, to which 2 × 10 7 1 µm YG-labeled polystyrene beads were then added, swirled to mix, and left for 10 min to be engulfed. Cells were then overlaid with a thin sheet of 2% agarose in HL5 medium per imaging autophagosomes above. Movies were then taken using Differential Interference Contrast microscopy, capturing 200 frames at 2-s intervals. Movement of both autophagosomes and phagosomes was tracked manually using the mTrackJ plugin for ImageJ, using the time lapses described above. Only cells that did not move appreciably during the course of the movie were selected, as well as vesicles that could be clearly tracked throughout. Heatmap analysis was then performed using a custom script in R. Code is available at. Statistical analysis All data except heat maps were analyzed and plotted using Graphpad Prism 9. Each experiment consisted of at least three independent repeats. Where appropriate, biological replicates are plotted as dark symbols, with technical replicates as faded symbols behind. Statistical analysis was performed on the mean values from each day, using an unpaired Mann–Whitney t test unless otherwise specified. Throughout * = p < 0.01, ** = p < 0.005, and *** p < 0.001. Error bars indicate standard error of the mean, unless otherwise specified. Supplementary Material Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. 