 Multinucleate cells of Dictyostelium discoideum divide usually by unilateral cleavage furrows that ingress from the cell border. Along their path into the cell, they follow regions that are rich in myosin II and cortexillin and leave out the areas around the spindle poles that are populated with microtubule asters. In cells of a D. discoideum mutant that remain spread during mitosis we observed, as a rare event, cleavage by the expansion of a hole that is initiated in the middle of the cell area and has no connection with the cell’s periphery. Here we show that these ring-shaped furrows develop in two phases, the first being reversible. During the first phase, the dorsal and ventral cell cortices come in close apposition and the cell membrane detaches locally from the substrate surface. The second phase comprises formation of the hole by membrane fusion and expansion of the opening toward the border of the cell, eventually cutting the multinucleate cell into pieces. We address the three-dimensional organization of ring-shaped furrows, their interaction with lateral furrows, and their association with filamentous myosin II and cortexillin. Thus, despite their geometrical divergence, similar molecular mechanisms might link the expanding hole to the standard contractile ring. INTRODUCTION The standard model of mitotic division of an animal cell postulates a contractile ring that is constricted by the interaction of actin and myosin II to separate the daughter cells, as reviewed by Satterwhite and Pollard. Cells of Dictyostelium discoideum likewise divide by binary fission with the requirement of actin, but with a questionable contribution of myosin II. By electric pulse–induced fusion, multinucleate cells can be produced, in which nuclear division is synchronized. The multinucleate cells of Dictyostelium usually divide by unilateral furrows that are initiated as invaginations of the cell border and ingress under widening until they join another unilateral furrow. The sites of initiation and progression of unilateral furrows are not arbitrary: the path of these furrows into the cell follows regions of the cell cortex that are rich in myosin II and in the actin-bundling protein cortexillin. In the regions of microtubule asters that surround the centrosomes, these proteins are depleted; the cleavage furrows therefore do not enter these regions. In multinucleate cells of a Septase-null mutant of D. discoideum, we observed, as a rare event, central ring-shaped furrows. These furrows were found when the perimeter of a mitotic cell was occupied by microtubule asters and accordingly cortexillin became enriched in the middle of the cell. In the Septase mutant, the serin-threonin kinase SepA has been knocked out, resulting in an increase of cell-to-substrate adhesion. A substrate of SepA is Scar/Wave, an activator of the Arp2/3 complex responsible for the formation of branched actin filaments. Scar/Wave is primarily localized to polar protrusions in dividing cells, is activated during mitosis, and in particular is required for cytokinesis in the absence of myosin II. In Septase-null cells, cytokinesis is impaired, resulting in the formation of large multinucleate cells. Most relevant in our context, Septase-null cells do not round up during mitosis; they become extraordinarily flat and remain spread on the substratum. Here we study in detail the ring-shaped cleavage furrows formed in mitotic Septase-null cells. RESULTS A first, reversible step in the formation of a ring-shaped furrow Figure 1 recapitulates the ring-shaped furrow shown previously as a prototype. The figure shows bright-field and fluorescence images. Because in bright field, structures are hard to distinguish, explanatory drawings that outline the shapes and sizes of depressions and holes are added at the left of the panels. The point to make here is that the development of ring-shaped furrows can be distinguished into two phases. First, a disk-shaped expanding structure is seen, covered with a lamella formed by the two plasma membranes. We will later show that in the lamella the top and bottom cell membranes come close to each other, and therefore we call this area a depression. Second, a hole opens within this depression that by expanding replaces the depression and subsequently invades the remaining part of the cell, finally cleaving the cell into portions with irregular numbers of nuclei. FIGURE 1: Division of a multinucleate cell by an expanding ring-shaped furrow. Image series of a Septase-null cell shows in the bright-field images the two-phase formation of a central furrow. In the explanatory drawings on the left of the panels, the depression... Measurement of the membrane area and height of the cell that is attached to the upper and lower confining substrate surfaces reveals only slight changes of the area during the phase of rapid opening of the hole and almost no change in the height of the cell. These data are consistent with preservation of the cell volume during ring opening. Formation of a central depression does not always proceed to the initiation of a hole. Rather, the first step is reversible. The lamella of two fused cortices can expand and subsequently shrink up to its disappearance. This reversibility of the first step in ring-shaped furrow formation is illustrated in Figure 2A and Supplemental Video S1. The mitotic cell was labeled with FM4-64, a red fluorescent dye that is incorporated into the plasma membrane and accumulates in internalized vesicles. FIGURE 2: Central furrow that regresses after the first phase of an expanding depression. This cell expressed GFP-α-tubulin and was labeled with FM4-64. Fluorescence images are average projections of series of confocal planes. After arrangement... Download video file. Movie S1 Movie S1 Central furrow that regresses after the first phase of an expanding depression. This video shows a Septase-null cell that expressed GFP-α-tubulin and was labeled with FM4-64. Panels from left to right: Phase-contrast, merged fluorescence images, FM 4-64 dye and α-tubulin-GFP. Fluorescence images are average projections of series of confocal planes. The cell was confined by agar overlay. The video is related to Figure 2. The labeled vesicles can be used as markers for displacement of cytoplasmic space during the formation of a depression. Figure 2B shows centrifugal movement of vesicles in the expanding depression, resulting in emptying of its space from most of the vesicles. The few vesicles retained became restricted in their Brownian motion. Cortexillin and myosin II show joining of the basal and apical cell cortices Figure 3 shows the two-step formation of a central furrow in a multinucleate cell that expressed GFP-cortexillin I, known to be enriched at spaces free of microtubule asters where the formation of cleavage furrows is favored. Here the microtubules radiating out of the eight centrosomes reveal an arrangement of the mitotic complexes at a short distance from the perimeter of the cell, keeping the central area free for cortexillin to accumulate. In this central area a depression developed as the first phase of ring-shaped furrow formation. This depression expanded until a punctate hole appeared that first replaced the depressed area and then expanded further toward the perimeter of the cell. FIGURE 3: Ring-shaped furrow formed in a central cortexillin-rich area. The cell expressed GFP-cortexillin I and RFP-α-tubulin. The main images show average projections of z-scans, revealing in the first two frames the enrichment of cortexillin... To visualize cell shape and cortexillin distribution in the orthogonal direction from the glass-attached cell surface toward the agar overlay, reconstructions of z-scans are shown in Figure 3 along the dotted lines indicated in the first frame. During formation of the depression, the basal and apical cortices did join, building a common cortexillin-rich layer. In the second step, when the circular hole was formed, this thinned part of the cell was disrupted, which implies that the upper and lower plasma membranes fused. During expansion of the hole, scrambling of the surrounding cellular structures indicates that they had been under tension before. Download video file. Movie S2 Movie S2 A ring-shaped furrow formed in a central cortexillin-rich area. Panels from left to right: Phase-contrast, merged fluorescence images, GFP-cortexillin I and RFP-α-tubulin. Fluorescence images are average projections of series of confocal planes. The video is related to Figure 3. Download video file. Movie S3 Movie S3 Three-dimensional distribution of cortexillin I in the area around an expanding ring-shaped furrow. Distribution in z-direction is color-coded as displayed at the scale on the right. The cell was confined by agar overlay. This video shows the same cell as Figure 3 and Video S2. Addition of fluorescent dextran to the extracellular space revealed that at the site of depressions the cell membrane detached from the substrate surface, whereas the surrounding area remained attached. This action against the adhesive surface suggests that vertical forces pull the upper and lower cell cortices together. FIGURE 4: Central depression in a cell that expressed GFP-cortexillin I and was incubated with TRITC-dextran in the extracellular space. Orthogonal sections along the x - and y -axes indicated are displayed on the bottom and at... To answer the question of which areas in the ring-shaped cleavage patterns might be contractile, the localization and orientation of myosin II filaments are relevant. As shown in Figure 5 and Supplemental Video S4, this filament-forming motor protein is present outside as well as within the depression. To visualize orientation, the myosin II structures obtained by confocal microscopy were subjected to the superresolution radial fluctuations algorithm using the enhanced version of Laine et al.. This procedure increases resolution without a need for high-intensity illumination, so that the cells can be imaged for longer periods of time without photodamage. The increase of resolution by processing the images with enhanced SRRF indicates filaments that radially point to the border of the depression both from outside and from inside. The outer myosin II filaments may act in expanding the depression, the inner filaments in its regression. Expansion will increase tension in the depression and thus favor the opening of a hole, and also contraction of the inner filaments may contribute to opening and expansion of the hole. FIGURE 5: Filamentous myosin II outside and inside a depression. Cell that expressed RFP-α-tubulin and myosin II-heavy chain-GFP, as shown in Supplemental Video S4. Here we display only the myosin II label as average projections of series... Download video file. Movie S4 Movie S4 Filamentous myosin II outside and inside a depression. Panels from left to right: Phase-contrast, merged fluorescence images, filamentous myosin II-GFP and RFP-α-tubulin. Fluorescence images are average projections of series of confocal planes. The video is related to Figure 5A-D. Orthogonal sections through a depression labeled with myosin-II-GFP show joining of the apical and basal cell cortices, in accord with the GFP-cortexillin–labeled depression in Figure 3. Interaction of central and unilateral furrows The usual way of mitotic division in multinucleate cells is by unilateral furrows that ingress from the border into a cell, as illustrated in Figure 6 for a single unilateral furrow that subsequently expands within the cell. When a unilateral furrow similarly invades a cell that already harbors a central depression, it will open the depression from the side, converting it into a hole, to subsequently proceed by expanding the hole as shown in Figure 7A. Likewise, two lateral furrows may join in opening a depression. FIGURE 6: Unilateral furrow expanding in a multinucleate cell. The cell expressed mRFP-α-tubulin showing spindle formation in the first two frames and PLC-δ-GFP, a label for PIP 2. Side-by-side with the fluorescence images Furrow opening by lateral ingression and by a ring-shaped hole. A depression entering the multinucleate cell from its border is opened in two ways: by ingression from the border and by a circular, expanding... Download video file. Movie S5 Movie S5 Furrow opening by lateral ingression and by a ring-shaped hole. The cell expressed GFP-α-tubulin and was labeled with FM4-64. Panels from left to right: Phase-contrast, merged fluorescence images, FM 4-64 dye and α-tubulin-GFP. The phase-contrast image shows interaction of another cell with the dividing one at the region of the incipient furrow. Fluorescence images are average projections of series of confocal planes. The cell was confined by agar overlay. This video is related to Figure 8A. Download video file. Movie S6 Movie S6 Central depression opened by a lateral furrow and by a hole. Panels from left to right: Phase-contrast, merged fluorescence images, filamentous myosin II-GFP and RFP-α-tubulin. Fluorescence images are average projections of series of confocal planes. The video is related to Figure 8 B. DISCUSSION In a Septase-null mutant of D. discoideum we observed an unusual way of mitotic cell division by ring-shaped furrows that cleaved a multinucleate cell by expansion. Ring-shaped furrowing is favored when the periphery of a large mitotic cell is closely occupied by microtubule asters and the center of the cell is free of them. The formation of ring-shaped furrows could be divided into two steps, of which the first turned out to be reversible: a depression that brings the upper and basal cell membranes into close proximity. This depression could expand and then either regress or open by local fusion of the two membranes, thus initiating the second phase of an expanding hole. A hint on mechanisms is provided by radially orientated myosin II filaments apparently acting from the outside as well as the inside on the border of a depression : stronger contraction of one or the other group may decide about opening or reversal of the depression. Most often, multinucleate cells divide by unilateral furrows that ingress from the cell border. The merging of lateral furrows with a ring-shaped one indicates a relationship between unilateral furrow ingression and circular hole expansion. The ring expansion resembles the widening of a unilateral furrow, such that the difference between the two types of furrowing resides only in their initiation: as the formation of a circular hole in an area of closely apposed membranes or as an invagination from the border of a cell. This relationship is underlined by the simultaneous formation of a lateral and a ring-shaped furrow. Like normal cleavage furrows consisting of a contractile ring and unilateral furrows ingressing into multinucleate cells, the expanding ring-shaped furrows develop in areas of the cell cortex that are rich in myosin II and cortexillin and are free of microtubule asters. This localization suggests that the different types of furrows have mechanisms of their progression in common and raises the question of how ring-shaped furrows can be compared with normal furrows in mononucleate cells that constrict by a contractile ring. The hole formation in ring-shaped furrows involves membrane fusion, which in normal cytokinesis occurs at the end of constriction, when the daughter cells are separated. A specific question is whether expansion of ring-shaped furrows is based on contractile activity in the cell cortex. Indeed, our findings are in accordance with the notion that the entire planar cortex surrounding an incipient ring-shaped furrow contains myosin II filaments and is contractile, pulling in the centrifugal direction until a hole is created. This activity may be assisted by the activity of Scar/Wave in actin-rich protrusions at the perimeter of the cell and by the cell’s confinement between two planar surfaces that hinders its extension in the z -direction. Radially oriented myosin II filaments within the depression may be responsible for its regression. The formation of a depression that brings the membranes close to each other before hole initiation may also be considered as a contraction. For these reasons we suppose that myosin II–mediated contraction is a common mechanism in the expansion of a circular ring and the constriction of a normal cleavage furrow, despite the differences in their geometries. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell strains, culture conditions, and sample preparation for confocal microscopy Fluorescent proteins were expressed in a Septase-null mutant derived from the AX2-214 strain of D. discoideum. The combinations of labels and corresponding references are shown in Table 1. TABLE 1: Combinations of fluorescent labels and staining in Septase-null strains. Nutrient medium was used as described by Malchow et al. for cultivating the cells, supplemented with 10 µg/ml blasticidin S, 10 µg/ml Geneticin, and/or of 33 µg/ml hygromycin B in plastic Petri dishes at 21 ± 2°C. Two methods were used to increase the rate of mitotic stages in the multinucleate Septase-null cells and the number of ring-like structures in these cells. Cells were transferred into Loflo medium onto an HCl-cleaned cover-glass bottom dish. Because we observed by transmitted light microscopy that the cells made more ring-like structures on the bottom of a plastic Petri dish, we later used dishes with a polymer coverslip. The cells were incubated for 24 or 48 h in the Loflo medium before imaging. After rinsing the cells off a Petri dish with 17 mM K + /Na + -phosphate buffer, pH 6.0, they were transferred to an HCl-cleaned cover-glass bottom dish. After 3 h in the phosphate buffer, the cells were incubated in Loflo medium for 4–6 h. To demonstrate that the depressions lack contact with the glass surface, tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate -dextran, mol wt 65,000–85,000, diluted in Loflo to a final concentration of 2 mg/ml, was added to the cells before imaging. To label membranes, we used the lipophilic styryl dye FM4-64. At the onset of mitoses, half of the Loflo medium was removed and an equivalent volume of the double-concentrated dye dissolved in Loflo medium was added. The final concentration of the dye was 0.2 µg/ml. Where indicated, the cells were overlaid by a thin agarose sheet when mitoses commenced. For the experiments with FM4-64, the agar sheet was preincubated with FM4-64 at the final concentration. Confocal image acquisition and data processing Confocal images were acquired either on a Zeiss LSM 780 microscope equipped with a Plan-Apochromat 63×/1.46 oil immersion and a C-Apochromat 40×/1.20 water immersion or on a Zeiss LSM 980 microscope equipped with a Plan-Apochromat 63×/1.40 oil immersion. The plane-to-plane distance was 0.10–0.25 µm. The images were processed using the image-processing package Fiji developed by Schindelin et al. on the basis of ImageJ. Because the RFP label was bleached during long periods of imaging, we corrected the signal in the red channel with the Bleach Correction tool in Simple Ratio Mode. Contours of the cells, ingressions, and inner furrows were detected with the Polygon Selection tool, and areas and contour lengths were measured in Fiji. Calculations were done and charts plotted with Microsoft Excel. The plug-in Temporal-color code was used for visualizing the tracks of particles over time, and the Manual Tracking tool was used for tracking specific particles. The plug-in NanoJ-eSRRF developed by Laine et al., an extension of the SRRF method described by Gustafsson et al., was used to process the images in Figure 5, A–D. For three-dimensional reconstructions in Supplemental Video S3 and orthogonal views in Supplemental Figure S1, the images were deconvolved with Huygens software. The USCF Chimera program was used for the 3D reconstruction in Figure 5E and Supplemental Video S3. Statement for replication of experiments Ring-shaped cleavage furrows are rare events because they require a specific arrangement of centrosomes close to the border of a multinucleate cell, such that myosin II and cortexillin are enabled to accumulate in the cell’s center. We have analyzed altogether 11 formations of ring-shaped furrows, among them three examples in cells expressing myosin II and six in cells expressing cortexillin I. The preceding stage of depressions is more abundant; we found 49 cases, 16 of them regressing and 22 opened by lateral furrows. We did not exclude data but chose the most instructive cases for publication. Supplementary Material Click here for additional data file. 