 The study of free-living amoebae has proven valuable to explain the molecular mechanisms controlling phagocytosis, cell adhesion and motility. In this study, we identified a new adhesion molecule in Dictyostelium amoebae. The SibA protein is a type I transmembrane protein, and its cytosolic, transmembrane and extracellular domains contain features also found in integrin β chains. In addition, the conserved cytosolic domain of SibA interacts with talin, a well-characterized partner of mammalian integrins. Finally, genetic inactivation of SIBA affects adhesion to phagocytic particles, as well as cell adhesion and spreading on its substrate. It does not visibly alter the organization of the actin cytoskeleton, cellular migration or multicellular development. Our results indicate that the SibA protein is a Dictyostelium cell adhesion molecule presenting structural and functional similarities to metazoan integrin β chains. This study sheds light on the molecular mechanisms controlling cell adhesion and their establishment during evolution. Keywords: adhesion, Dictyostelium, integrin, motility, talin Introduction Cell–substrate adhesion is a crucial step in many biological processes such as development, wound healing, metastasis and phagocytosis. In mammalian cells, several proteins are involved in cellular adhesion, in particular cell-surface receptors, signalling molecules and components of the actin cytoskeleton. Integrin-mediated cell adhesion is one of the most widely studied adhesion mechanisms. Integrins are heterodimeric type I transmembrane proteins composed of one α-subunit and one β-subunit, which bind to the extracellular matrix by their extracellular domain and control cell spreading, migration, proliferation and survival. The amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum is a widely used model to study cellular adhesion, phagocytosis and the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton. This unicellular organism is amenable to genetic analysis, mainly owing to its fully sequenced haploid genome. Many gene products have been implicated in various aspects of the phagocytic process in Dictyostelium on the basis of the analysis of targeted knockout mutants or of mutants identified in random genetic screenings. Nevertheless, the receptors controlling the adhesion of free-living Dictyostelium cells to their substrate and to phagocytic particles have not been unambiguously identified. Here, we report the identification and characterization of a Dictyostelium adhesion molecule, named SibA, which presents several features also found in mammalian integrin β chains. These results may shed light on the origin of adhesion molecules in evolution. Results and Discussion SibA, a membrane protein involved in phagocytosis To identify new genes involved in phagocytosis, we mutagenized Dictyostelium cells by random insertion of a plasmid, and selected a mutant defective for phagocytosis of fluorescent latex beads. On the basis of its resemblance to integrins, the corresponding gene was named SIBA. In the sibA mutant, the mutagenic plasmid is inserted in the DDB0187447 gene, resulting in the absence of the corresponding transcript. The SibA protein has a putative endoplasmic reticulum insertion signal sequence at its amino terminus and a transmembrane domain towards its carboxyl terminus, suggesting that it is a type I transmembrane protein. Indeed, cell-surface biotinylation followed by immunoprecipitation confirmed that SibA is present at the cell surface. Four genes encoding homologues of SibA are present in the Dictyostelium genome, and positioned, like SIBA, on chromosome V. The first three are adjacent and arranged in tandem, and the fourth is in close proximity, suggesting a recent expansion of this gene family. Consistent with this hypothesis, the overall structure of Sib proteins is almost identical. Figure 1 Structure of Sib proteins. Organization of the SIBA gene. Exons are shown as numbered black boxes. The position of the vector insertion site in sibA mutant cells is indicated. Scale bar, 1 kb.... Figure 2 Interaction of SibA with talin. SibA is localized at the cell surface. The cell surface of wild-type and sibA cells was biotinylated. Biotinylated SibA was immunoprecipitated and then observed with avidin–horseradish peroxidase. Fusion... The extracellular domains of Sib proteins contain an immunoglobulin-like fold, a cysteine-rich domain and a von Willebrand factor type A domain. These three domains are commonly found in the extracellular domains of secreted or membrane-bound proteins and in many instances have been implicated in cell–substrate adhesion. VWA domains are ubiquitous in cytoplasmic proteins, but are also specifically deployed in several metazoan extracellular proteins, with integrin β subunits as very early evolutionary representatives. Although lacking several features characteristic of metazoan integrin β chains, the Sib VWA domains show particularly high homology to integrin β VWA domains. In addition, Sib extracellular domains contain four repeats of about 200 amino-acid residues also found in several surface or secreted bacterial proteins, in particular VCBS and RTX proteins. These bacterial proteins are involved in the interaction of bacteria with their substrate or with host cells, suggesting that these repeats could have a role in binding to certain substrates. We could not detect similar repeats in any eukaryotic protein other than Dictyostelium Sib proteins. Sib proteins thus represent hybrid structures associating bacterial-like repeats and metazoan-like features, suggesting that these bacterial repeats might have been acquired from bacterial genomes by horizontal transfer. The Sib transmembrane and cytosolic domains are particularly conserved among Sib proteins. The transmembrane domain is unusually rich in glycine residues, forming notably a GxxxG motif. A GxxxG membrane motif is important for the oligomerization of several homo- and hetero-oligomeric membrane complexes and is a key feature of integrins' structure. The cytosolic domain contains two highly conserved NPxY motifs separated by eight amino-acid residues, a motif also found in integrin β chains. The cytosolic domain of Sib proteins interacts with talin The conserved cytoplasmic domain of integrin β chains mediates interactions with several cytosolic proteins. One of these, talin, has a crucial role in integrin-mediated adhesion. However, integrin β cytosolic domains contain a tryptophan residue crucial for this interaction, which is not conserved in Sib proteins. To test the ability of the SibA cytosolic domain to interact with talin, we expressed a fusion protein of glutathione S -transferase with the cytosolic domain of SibA in bacteria, purified it and immobilized it on Sepharose beads and then incubated the beads with a Dictyostelium cellular lysate. Talin bound to GST–SibA, but not to GST alone. As expected, no signal was detected when a lysate from talin knockout cells was used. In addition, talin also bound to GST–SibB, GST–SibC, GST–SibD and GST–SibE. Mutational analysis showed that the membrane-proximal NPxY motif is essential for binding to talin, whereas the membrane-distal motif is dispensable. A similar finding was previously reported for integrin β chains. Cellular adhesion of sibA mutant cells is defective In several phagocytosis mutants characterized so far, the phagocytosis defect is caused by a defect in cellular adhesion to particles. For sibA mutant cells, phagocytosis of latex beads was altered, but macropinocytosis, which was determined by measuring the uptake of fluid phase, was unaffected. In addition, sibA mutant cells phagocytosed Klebsiella bacteria almost normally, indicating that the machinery responsible for engulfment of particles was still functional and suggesting that the primary cause of the phagocytosis defect in sibA cells might be a specific defect in cell adhesion. To confirm this hypothesis, we measured the ability of sibA cells to establish a tight contact with their substrate. Cells were incubated on a glass substrate, and their zone of contact with the glass was visualized and measured by interference reflection microscopy. The contact area was markedly smaller for sibA cells than for wild-type cells, suggesting that sibA mutant cells adhered less readily to their substrate. Figure 3 sibA mutant cells show specific adhesion defects. sibA mutant cells phagocytose latex beads poorly. Wild-type or sibA cells were incubated for 20 min in the presence of fluorescent latex beads.... We then directly measured the adhesion of mutant cells to their substrate. Cells attached to a glass substrate were subjected to a flow of medium, and the speed of the flow necessary to detach 50% of the cells was determined. The strength necessary to detach the cells can be extrapolated and represents the strength of the cellular adhesion to the substrate. The adhesion of sibA mutant cells was significantly weaker than that of wild-type cells, indicating that SibA is necessary for efficient cell–substrate adhesion. Defects in cellular adhesion can be associated with alterations of the actin cytoskeleton, resulting in a range of anomalies in cell shape and migration, or in cytokinesis. No alteration in the organization of the cytoskeleton was seen in sibA cells. Motility of sibA cells was also identical to that of wild-type cells. Finally, only a small proportion of sibA cells were multinucleate, indicating that there was no significant defect in cytokinesis. Thus, besides their defect in cellular adhesion, sibA mutant cells did not show any important alteration in the organization and function of the actin cytoskeleton. Social amoebae, such as Dictyostelium, undergo multicellular development in nutrient-free medium. Here, we observed that sibA mutant cells undergo normal development, with the formation of tight aggregates after 6 h of starvation, and of fruiting bodies after 24 h. This indicates that SibA does not have an essential role in the cell-to-cell interactions that allow multicellular development. Analysis of messenger RNA levels by real-time PCR indicated that SibA, SibB, SibC and SibE are expressed in vegetative as well as in starved cells, suggesting that for certain cellular processes SibB, SibC and SibE may compensate for the lack of SibA. Figure 4 Development of sibA mutant cells is normal. Wild-type or sibA cells were starved to induce development. Cellular aggregates were observed after 6 h and fruiting bodies after 24 h. Scale bar, 0.5 mm. Similarity between β integrins and Sib proteins In summary, several features found in Dictyostelium Sib proteins are also present in metazoan integrin β chains. First, like integrin β chains, the extracellular domains of Sib proteins contain a VWA domain. Second, the transmembrane and cytosolic domains of Sib proteins are very similar to those found in integrin β chains. In metazoan proteins, this specific configuration is present only in integrin β chains. Third, like integrin β chains, the cytosolic domain of Sib proteins binds to talin. Finally, loss of SibA causes a specific alteration in cellular adhesion. There are, however, clear differences between Sib proteins and metazoan β integrins: several domains typical of metazoan integrins are not found in Sib proteins, and we have not identified a Sib-associated subunit that would represent the equivalent of α integrins. Several features found in Sib proteins are also absent from β integrins. Thus, a phylogenetic relationship between Sib proteins and β integrins remains highly speculative. Irrespective of their putative phylogenetic relationship, our observations suggest a certain degree of functional similarity in the way in which integrin β chains and Sib proteins connect the extracellular space with the cytosolic machinery. This reinforces the notion that cellular adhesion mechanisms are similar in Dictyostelium and in mammalian cells, and that observations in the Dictyostelium model system can be extrapolated meaningfully to mammalian cells. A more detailed analysis of the structure and function of Sib proteins will be necessary to determine further the extent of the similarity between β integrins and Sib proteins. Speculation Metazoan integrin β chains and Dictyostelium Sib proteins could be the products of convergent evolution. However, in view of the similarities demonstrated in this study, we speculate that they might stem from the same ancestral integrin β-like protein. This ancestral β integrin would represent one of the first evolutionary attempts to use VWA domains in extracellular domains, as proposed previously. This hypothesis would place the appearance of β integrins long before the appearance of Metazoa, as recent analysis of the Dictyostelium genome indicated that Dictyostelium diverged from the line leading to animals after the plant–animal split, but before the divergence of fungi. The higher rate of evolutionary change along the fungal lineage may explain why, so far, no fungal integrin β-related molecules have been identified. Methods Cell culture and mutagenesis. Cells were cultured at 21°C in HL5 medium. To initiate multicellular development, cells were plated on 1% agarose Petri dishes in nutrient-free medium. The sibA mutant was isolated following a procedure described previously. The plasmid rescued from the original mutant was used to inactivate the SIBA gene by homologous recombination in a DH1-10 wild-type strain, and these sibA knockout cells were used for further characterization. Reverse transcription of RNA from wild-type cells followed by PCR amplification and sequencing showed that the 5′ coding sequence of SIBA differed from the coding sequence predicted by the genome sequencing centre, with two short exons instead of one. For northern blot analysis, a SIBA probe was obtained by PCR amplification of the genomic DNA using the primers CCAACTCCAGGTTCATCTGG and GCACCATCAGCAAAAGCTCC. The probe was radiolabelled and northern blot was carried out as described. The SIBA sequence can be found at www.dictybase.org. Analysis of protein sequences was carried out with SMART, Blast and MULTALIN programs. Cellular assays. Phagocytosis and fluid-phase uptake were measured by incubating cells for 20 min at 21°C in HL5 containing 0.5-μm-diameter Fluoresbrite YG carboxylate microspheres, fluorescently labelled Klebsiella or 10 μg/ml Alexa647-labelled dextran. The internalized fluorescence was measured in a fluorescence-activated cell sorter after two washes with HL5 containing 0.1% sodium azide. Velocity measurements and staining of nuclei and of the actin cytoskeleton were also performed as described. To examine cell–substrate adhesion, cells were incubated for 4 h in HL5 on a glass coverslip, then observed by phase-contrast microscopy and IRM, using an Axiovert 100 M microscope coupled to a Hamamatsu Photonics camera, Openlab 3.0.6 software; contact surfaces were determined using the MetaMorph Offline software. Biochemical methods. To express GST–Sib fusion proteins, the sequence coding for each Sib cytosolic domain was cloned into the bacterial expression vector pGEX-3X. The expression and purification of GST fusion proteins on glutathione–Sepharose beads was carried out as described. D. discoideum cells were lysed in 1 ml of PBS containing 1% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation, and supernatants preincubated twice with glutathione–Sepharose beads before incubation for 16 h at 4°C with GST fusion proteins immobilized on Sepharose beads. Beads were washed five times in lysis buffer and once in PBS, and bound proteins were separated by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Talin was observed as described, with monoclonal anti-talin antibodies. To immunoprecipitate surface SibA, 6 × 10 6 cells were biotinylated, lysed and immunoprecipitated with a rabbit anti-SibA polyclonal antibody raised against the cytoplasmic domain of SibA. Biotinylated SibA was shown with horseradish peroxidase-coupled avidin as described. Supplementary information is available at EMBO reports online. Supplementary Material Supplementary Information Click here to view. 