 When growth stops due to the depletion of nutrients, Dictyostelium cells rapidly turn off vegetative genes and start to express developmental genes. One of the early developmental genes, dia1, is adjacent to a vegetative gene, impA, on chromosome 4. An intergenic region of 654 bp separates the coding regions of these divergently transcribed genes. Constructs carrying the intergenic region expressed a reporter gene that replaced impA in growing cells and a reporter gene that replaced dia1 during development. Deletion of a 112-bp region proximal to the transcriptional start site of impA resulted in complete lack of expression of both reporter genes during growth or development. At the other end of the intergenic region there are two copies of a motif that is also found in the carA regulatory region. Removing one copy of this repeat reduced impA expression twofold. Removing the second copy had no further consequences. Removing the central portion of the intergenic region resulted in high levels of expression of dia1 in growing cells, indicating that this region contains a sequence involved in repression during the vegetative stage. Gel shift experiments showed that a nuclear protein present in growing cells recognizes the sequence GAAGTTCTAATTGATTGAAG found in this region. This DNA binding activity is lost within the first 4 h of development. Different nuclear proteins were found to recognize the repeated sequence proximal to dia1. One of these became prevalent after 4 h of development. Together these regulatory components at least partially account for this aspect of the growth-to-differentiation transition. Differentiation of most cells in metazoan organisms occurs after exit from the cell cycle. This growth-to-differentiation transition is controlled both spatially and temporally but is poorly understood. The social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum also displays a GDT when the food source is depleted. The cells arrest in G 2 and stop replicating nuclear DNA. Within the next few hours they express a set of early genes such that the cells become able to signal each other chemotactically by extracellular cyclic AMP and to respond by aggregating into mounds containing up to 10 5 cells. As the cell density increases in a growing population and the bacterial food source starts to be depleted, the cells respond to a signal protein, prestarvation factor, that is continuously secreted and used to predict approaching starvation. Conditioned medium containing PSF can induce expression of discoidin I and several early developmental genes. Mutants lacking either Gdt1 or Gdt2 express discoidin I precociously, indicating that these putative protein kinases regulate GDT. One of the responses to PSF is the expression of the protein kinase YakA, which inhibits the ability of the RNA binding protein PufA to modulate translation of various mRNAs, including that for the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, PKA. The resulting increase in PKA activity leads to the expression of early developmental genes. We have identified several genes that are expressed soon after the initiation of differentiation. carA encodes the major cAMP receptor. The products of dia1 and dia2 do not show significant similarity to proteins of known function. dia3 is a multicistronic mitochondrial gene cluster encoding several subunits of NAD dehydrogenase as well as two mitochondrial small ribosomal subunit proteins. Genetic studies have shown that dia1 plays an inhibitory role in early differentiation by reducing the expression of genes related to the cAMP signal relay system, and both dia2 and dia3 are required for proper expression of early genes, including those for the cAMP receptor CAR1 and the aggregation adenylyl cyclase ACA. Based on studies with populations in which cell division was synchronized following a temperature shift from 11.5°C to 22°C, it has been proposed that Dictyostelium cells must reach a point late in G 2 before embarking on development. Cells which have reached this point and recognize that the environment is depleted in nutrients repress many growth phase genes and induce developmental genes. dia1 is found on chromosome 4 adjacent to impA, which encodes a protein with sequence similarity to the FKBP class of immunophilins that participate in protein folding. A 654-bp region separates the start codons of these genes, which are transcribed in opposite directions. This divergent arrangement allowed us to determine whether the intervening region carries separate or shared cis -acting sequences regulating their transcription. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture and developmental conditions. Dictyostelium discoideum Ax-2 was grown axenically in PS medium with shaking at 22°C. Strains carrying reporter constructs were grown in PS medium containing 10 μg/ml of G418. Cells were harvested during the exponential phase of growth, washed twice in BSS, suspended at 10 7 cells/ml in BSS, and shaken at 22°C. Northern analyses. Total RNA was extracted with TRIzol reagent according to the manufacturer's instructions. Samples containing 20 μg of RNA were separated by electrophoresis under denaturing conditions and blotted onto Hybond N+ membranes. DNA probes were labeled by random priming of the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase on 200 ng probe DNA in 30 μM dTTP, dCTP, and dGTP; 30 μM 32 P-labeled dATP; 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5; 5 mM MgCl 2 ; and 7.5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 37°C. Hybridization was performed in 6× SSC, 5× Denhardt's solution, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate, and 100 mg/ml denatured salmon sperm DNA at 55°C after 1 h of prehybridization. Deletion constructs. To be able to monitor transcription in the impA direction by fluorescence, green fluorescent protein modified to have a short half-life was ligated to the impA end of portions of the 654-bp intergenic region. The intergenic region was digested with SspI, which cuts at bp 340 relative to the ATG of impA, generating the 1-to-340 construct. PCR primers were prepared such that intergenic fragments containing bp 1 to 153 and 1 to 555 were generated and could be ligated to GFP. The primer sequence for bp 1 to 555 was cut at the HindIII site to produce the portion from bp 1 to 525. The PCR primer is found at bp 107 to 133 but has an inserted C to generate an ApaI site. The product was digested with ApaI to generate the portion from bp 1 to 112, which was ligated to GFP. The construct carrying 112 bp was digested with exonuclease III to generate constructs with 59 bp and 92 bp upstream of GFP. These constructs were cloned in the low-copy extrachromosomal vector pDXA-3C from which the actin 15 promoter had been removed. These vectors were transformed together with the helper plasmid in cells of strain Ax-2, and transformants were selected and maintained in medium containing 10 μg/ml G418. Expression of GFP was measured by flow cytometry and the values confirmed by quantitation of Western blots stained with anti- Aequorea victoria antibody by using horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse immunoglobulin G as the second antibody. Another series of constructs was prepared to determine expression in the dia1 direction. The DsRed Express gene was modified to carry a His 6 tag at the N terminus and ligated at the dia1 end of the intergenic region. Digestion of this construct with SspI left the fragment from bp 440 to 654 fragment ligated to NH-Red. PCR primers were used to generate the fragments from bp 104 to 654, 527 to 654, and 553 to 654 adjacent to NH-Red. Expression of these constructs carried on the low-copy extrachromosomal vector was monitored in transformants that had developed in buffer for 8 h. Samples were collected and lysed in sample buffer, heated to 100°C for 5 min, and electrophoretically separated on 12% polyacrylamide gels before being transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. The levels of NH-Red were determined by staining Western blots with antibody to the His epitope on NH-Red. NH-Red has a half-life of >24 h.. Flow cytometry. Exponentially growing cells were harvested, washed in 20 mM sodium-potassium phosphate buffer, and resuspended in PB. An equal volume of ice-cold methanol was added to the suspension, and the cells were pelleted before being fixed for 10 min at −20°C in 100% ice-cold methanol. Fixed cells were washed in PB twice and incubated in PB containing 5% bovine serum albumin for 30 min. Anti-A.v. antibody was diluted 1:1,000 in BSA-PB and incubated with the cells for 30 min. Washed cells were incubated with fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated anti-mouse immunoglobulin G diluted 1:500 with BSA-PB. The cells were washed three times with PB before being analyzed on a FACSCalibur. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Portions of the impA / dia1 intergenic region between bp 1 and 112 as well as bp 106 to 484 were PCR amplified and labeled with dATP. The sequence TGATCAGCTCGATC, which is found in two related copies proximal to dia1, was synthesized along with its complement, to which 3 Ts were added at the 5′ end such that the double-stranded DNA could be labeled with dATP by using the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I. Nuclear extracts were prepared by the method of Gollop and Kimmel. Approximately 8 × 10 8 cells were collected and resuspended in ice-cold 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, buffer containing 6.5 mM magnesium acetate, 10% sucrose, 2% Nonidet P-40, and 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. Following lysis, the extract was centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min to remove whole cells and debris and the supernatant centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 5 min to pellet the nuclei. The nuclei were suspended in 400 μl of nuclear extraction buffer. After incubation at 4°C for 1 h, the extracts were cleared by centrifuging at 10,000 rpm for 30 min. The supernatant was dialyzed against buffer at 4°C for 2 h and the protein content determined. Ten micrograms of nuclear protein was incubated with each of the probes in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 50 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM MgCl 2, 25 mM ZnCl 2, 0.5 mM DTT, 4% glycerol, and 12.5 μg/ml poly, with or without a 50-fold excess of unlabeled probe added 10 min prior to addition of labeled probe. After 30 min at 4°C, the reaction mixture was electrophoretically separated on 5% polyacrylamide, 0.13% bisacrylamide nondenaturing gels in 0.5× TBE at 35 mA at 4°C. Gels were dried onto filter paper and exposed to film. RESULTS dia1 and impA are divergently transcribed adjacent genes. We have previously shown that dia1 mRNA is not present in exponentially growing cells but starts to accumulate within 2 h following removal of growth medium, reaching a peak at 4 h and then disappearing. Inspection of the genome sequence showed that there is a divergently transcribed gene 654 bp upstream of the ATG of dia1. This gene encodes a protein of 285 amino acids that includes a Pfam domain found in the FKBP class of immunophilins and so was named impA. The cis -acting regions that control transcription of Dictyostelium genes have all been found in the flanking 5′ sequences, and some divergently transcribed genes such as cprB and zfaA have been found to be coordinately regulated in Dictyostelium. Microarray studies with human tissues have demonstrated that 90% of bidirectional regulatory regions result in coordinate expression of the flanking genes. To determine whether impA and dia1 are coordinately regulated at the GDT, we isolated RNA from exponentially growing cells and from cells that had differentiated after being shifted to BSS. As expected, Northern blot analyses showed that dia1 mRNA was low in growing cells and accumulated within the first 2 hours of development. 1 ). On the other hand, impA mRNA was high in growing cells and decreased during the first few hours of development. 1 ). It appears that these genes are inversely expressed before and after the GDT. FIG. 1. Expression profiles of dia1 and impA during early differentiation. Exponentially growing Ax-2 cells were harvested, resuspended in BSS at 10 7 cells/ml, and incubated at 22°C in suspension. Samples were collected at the times indicated and RNA... Deletion analyses of the impA / dia1 intergenic region. To determine the cis -acting sequences essential for transcriptional regulation of impA and dia1, we prepared low-copy extrachromosomal vectors in which portions of the intervening sequence were used to drive GFP rather than impA or to drive NH-Red rather than dia1. Due to the weakness of the impA promoter, fluorescence signals were below the detection limit in the fluorescence-activated cell sorting, but GFP expression could be analyzed after staining fixed cells with anti-A.v. antibody and fluorescein isothiocyanate-coupled second antibody. 2B ). Expression levels in exponentially growing cells carrying either the full-length intergenic region or a portion from which the distal 100 bp was removed were indistinguishable. 2B ). Deletion of another 30 bp reduced the level of GFP about twofold, indicating that this distal sequence plays a role in impA transcription. Further deletion of bases up to 92 bp upstream of the gene had no further effect on GFP levels, but deletion of another 33 bp, leaving only 59 bp of the impA upstream sequence, abolished GFP expression. 2B ). The relative levels of GFP expression determined by flow cytometry were confirmed by quantitation of electrophoretically separated GFP. 2C ). The values were also confirmed by spectrophotometrically measuring the total fluorescence at 510 nm in extracts of sonicated cells after excitation at 488 nm. Expression of GFP decreases rapidly following the initiation of development in cells carrying constructs with at least 92 bp of the adjacent intervening sequence. It appears that the cis -acting sequence which is essential for control of impA transcription during growth and repression during development resides in the proximal 92-bp sequence. FIG. 2. Sequences essential for impA. A) Schematic representation of the region separating impA and dia1 and deletion constructs. The base adjacent to the start codon of impA is set at 1. B) Transformants carrying full-length region and deleted... Expression of NH-Red could not be measured by fluorescence because the levels were not significantly above the background level. Therefore, we carried out Western analyses on 8-h-developed cells by using antibodies to the His 6 epitope carried by NH-Red. While cells carrying the full-length construct accumulated the NH-Red reporter, cells carrying constructs in which the distal 107 bp, which is adjacent to impA, had been deleted failed to accumulate any measurable NH-Red during development, 3 ), nor did growing cells carrying these constructs have measurable NH-Red. It appears that the same region of the intervening sequence is essential for expression of both impA and dia1. FIG. 3. Sequences essential for dia1. A) Schematic representation of the region separating impA and dia1 coding regions and deletion constructs. Numbering is the same as in Fig. ​ Fig.2. 2. B) Transformants carrying the full-length region and... A cis element necessary for repression of dia1. While the distal 107 bp is necessary for expression of dia1 following the GDT, what accounts for the lack of expression in growing cells? To determine whether the central region of the intervening sequence plays a role in repressing dia1, we ligated the first 153 bp adjacent to impA to the region from bp 440 to the start of dia1. This construct was ligated to NH-Red and introduced into cells. Western analyses showed that exponentially growing cells carrying the full-length construct had no measurable levels of NH-Red and that NH-Red accumulated following the initiation of development. 4 ). On the other hand, exponentially growing cells carrying the construct lacking the central 287 bp had high levels of NH-Red, and the level did not change significantly following the initiation of development. 4 ). It appears that cis -acting signals in the middle region are critical to repression of dia1 before the GDT. FIG. 4. Derepression of dia1 in vegetative cells. Expression of NH-Red was determined in transformants carrying constructs with the full-length region or the full-length region from which the sequence between bp 153 and 440 was deleted. Samples... Characteristics of the impA / dia1 intergenic sequence. There appear to be at least three regions within the 654 bp separating impA and dia1 that play significant roles in their regulation. The first 100 bp of this region is essential for both impA and dia1 transcription. This region includes the basal promoter region for impA expression as well as TTCAAAAAGTTC and its related inverse, GAATTTTTTGAA. Sequences similar to these inverted repeats are found in the 5′ regions adjacent to other genes expressed immediately after the initiation of development, carA and pdsA. 5 ). In addition, the 5′ region of the GDT-related gene gdt1 has two copies of the motif, one of which is inverted. It is possible that a common trans -acting protein binds these sequences and stimulates coordinate transcription of each of these genes. The sequence in the middle of the intergenic region separating impA and dia1 is high in As and Ts, but there are two pairs of similar sequences that may be recognized by a trans -acting factor. The region proximal to dia1 which appears to stimulate expression of impA twofold contains two related sequences next to each other. 5 ). A similar sequence is present at the equivalent carA position, 5 ), suggesting that a trans -acting factor may bind there and affect transcription to the right as well as to the left. FIG. 5. Sequences in the regulatory regions of impA/dia1, carA, pdsA, and gdt1. Almost identical 7-bp direct repeats are found as a closely spaced inverted pair 500 bp upstream of dia1. Sequence related to the 7-bp repeats is found 600 bp upstream of... DNA binding factors that recognize the impA / dia1 intergenic sequence. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay were carried out with the 112-bp region proximal to impA as well as the middle region necessary for repression of dia1. The probes were labeled with 32 P, incubated with nuclear extracts from vegetative cells or 4-h-developed cells with or without excess unlabeled probe, and separated on 5% polyacrylamide gels. 6 ). Although we tested several conditions, we could not observe a gel shift of the 112-bp probe with nuclear extracts from either growing or differentiating cells. However, the middle region was retarded by nuclear extracts of vegetative cells in a manner that could be competed by unlabeled probe. 6 ). When the central portion of this region was used as a probe, the same band was seen with nuclear extracts of vegetative cells. Neither of these probes was retarded by nuclear extracts of 4-h-developed cells in a manner that could be competed with unlabeled probe. 6 ). It appears that a nuclear factor in vegetative cells recognizes the sequence from bp 290 to 311 sequence and may play a role in repression of dia1 in vegetative cells. This factor disappears when dia1 is expressed after 4 h of development. Another sequence in the middle region did not show a gel shift with nuclear extracts from either vegetative or 4-h-developed cells. FIG. 6. Gel shifts with nuclear extracts of vegetative and 4-h-developed cells. A) The central region necessary for repression of dia1 in vegetative cells was labeled with 32 P and incubated with nuclear extract from either vegetative cells... There are two copies of the sequence ACTGATCAGCTCGATC proximal to dia1 that are responsible for a twofold increase in the level of transcription in the impA direction. 2 ). We prepared a probe with the sequence from bp 533 to 546 and found that it was retarded by nuclear extracts of vegetative cells in a manner that could be competed with unlabeled probe. 6B ). There were two bands near the top of the gel and two bands lower down, suggesting that more than one nuclear protein recognizes this sequence. Omitting zinc from the gel shift buffer reduced the amount of retarded probe, suggesting that the proteins might carry zinc fingers. When this probe was incubated with nuclear extracts of cells that had differentiated for 4 h in buffer, one of the upper bands was stronger, the lower bands were not seen, and a new band that was much stronger appeared. 6C ). It appears that this sequence is recognized by several different factors which are controlled at the GDT. DISCUSSION Genome-wide microarray studies have shown that there is a significant change in the global pattern of transcription when growth ceases as the result of nutrient deprivation and cells start to differentiate. Many genes that are expressed during growth, including impA and the genes encoding ribosomal proteins, are turned off immediately after the GDT, while a set of early genes, including dia1, dia2, and dia3 as well as carA, pdsA, and gpaB, are rapidly induced. Although reversible, the GDT is one of the most significant transitions in the life cycle, since growth potential is curtailed. There are multiple preparatory steps that involve YakA, PufA, PKA, AmiB, Gdt1, Gdt2, and the DNA binding proteins CbfA and CRTF. There is also evidence that cells must progress through the cell cycle before arresting at the PS point such that the cells initiate development in late G 2. Transcriptional regulation at the GDT is likely to involve changes in the proteins that bind to cis -acting sequences upstream of the pertinent set of genes. The fortuitous arrangement of a gene that is repressed and a gene that is induced at the GDT has allowed us to dissect the intergenic region into some of its component parts. There is a pair of 7-bp direct repeats in the 92-bp region proximal to impA which is essential for expression of both impA and dia1. 3 ). Related sequences can be recognized upstream of carA, pdsA, and gdt1, genes whose expressions are regulated soon after the GDT. 5 ). Site-directed mutations in the copy that is upstream of carA have been shown to significantly reduce expression of carA and affect binding of the transcription factor CRTF. It is likely that CRTF or related proteins function in transcriptional regulation of each of these genes. Unfortunately, we could not detect protein binding to this region in electrophoretic mobility shift assays. There is a region in the middle of the impA / dia1 intergenic region that is essential for repression of dia1 expression in growing cells. 4 ). A sequence within this region is recognized by a factor present in growing cells but absent in cells which have differentiated for 4 h. The most likely reason that impA is expressed in growing cells while dia1 is not expressed is that a repressor binds in the middle of the intergenic region and blocks transcription to the right but not the left. This repressor disappears following a shift from growth medium to buffer and likely accounts for this aspect of GDT. Finally, there is a pair of nearly identical 20-bp sequences in the region proximal to dia1 that appear to stimulate expression of impA about twofold. Deletion of one member of this pair reduces the level of the GFP reporter twofold. The repeated sequence is recognized by several proteins present in growing cells, at least one of which disappears following the initiation of development. These proteins may be transcriptional factors responsible for the stimulation of impA expression in growing cells. Another protein that recognizes this sequence accumulates during early development and may play a role in expression of dia1. A highly related sequence is found just upstream of carA and may stimulate expression of this gene at the GDT. 