 Mammalian professional phagocytic cells ingest and kill invading microorganisms and prevent the development of bacterial infections. Our understanding of the sequence of events that results in bacterial killing and permeabilization in phagosomes is still largely incomplete. In this study, we used the Dictyostelium discoideum amoeba as a model phagocyte to study the fate of the bacteria Klebsiella pneumoniae inside phagosomes. Our analysis distinguishes three consecutive phases: bacteria first lose their ability to divide, then their cytosolic content is altered, and finally their DNA is degraded. Phagosomal acidification and production of free radicals are necessary for rapid killing, membrane‐permeabilizing proteins BpiC and AlyL are required for efficient permeabilization. These results illustrate how a combination of genetic and microscopical tools can be used to finely dissect the molecular events leading to bacterial killing and permeabilization in a maturing phagosome. Keywords: Bpi, Dictyostelium discoideum, intracellular killing, Klebsiella pneumoniae, lysozyme, NADPH oxidase, phagosomes, reactive oxygen species Following phagocytosis, internalized Klebsiella pneumoniae are killed within a few minutes. Phagosomal acidification and production of free radicals are necessary for rapid killing, and membrane‐permeabilizing proteins BpiC and AlyL are required for efficient permeabilization. Digestion of the bacterial content, in particular of bacterial DNA, is then initiated and extends over a period of 30 to 60 min. Abbreviations AlyL amoeba lysozyme‐like protein L A.U. arbitrary units Bac bacteria BpiC bactericidal/permeability‐increasing protein C DAPI 4′,6‐diamidino‐2‐phenylindole DNA deoxyribonucleic acid FITC fluorescein isothiocyanate GFP green fluorescent protein KO knock‐out LB lysogeny broth LPS lipopolysaccharide NADPH reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate Nox NADPH oxidase PCR polymerase chain reaction SB Sorensen's buffer WT wild‐type PAF paraformaldehyde 1. INTRODUCTION Phagocytic cells are an essential element of innate immunity in the human body. Professional phagocytic cells like macrophages and neutrophils ingest and kill invading microorganisms and prevent the development of bacterial infections. Within these cells, as the early phagosome matures into a phagolysosome, it acquires luminal and membrane constituents of lysosomes. Many potential antibacterial mechanisms have been identified in maturing phagosomes, and they generally fall into four main categories. First, reactive oxygen species and reactive nitrogen species are produced by phagosomal enzymes like the NADPH oxidase 2. Second, the phagosome ionic composition is profoundly modified by ionic pumps and transporters, such as the proton v‐ATPase which ensures acidification of the phagosome. Many ions, like protons or zinc may participate directly or indirectly in intracellular killing. Third, a variety of lysosomal enzymes degrade specific bacterial elements. Fourth, peptides and proteins delivered to the phagosome permeabilize bacterial membranes. In view of the large number of putative antibacterial mechanisms, our understanding of the sequence of events that results in bacterial destruction in phagosomes is still largely incomplete. Even our vocabulary is uncertain: in different publications, the term “bacterial killing” may refer to very diverse events, such as the permeabilization of bacterial membranes, the partial or complete destruction of various bacterial constituents, or the loss of the bacterial capacity to grow. While these diverse events are clearly linked, their precise role in the overall process and the underlying molecular mechanisms remain to be established. One of the most precise studies on that theme proposes that in alveolar macrophages, early non‐acidic phagosomes are the site where bacteria are permeabilized by a NOX‐dependent mechanism, while delivery of lysosomal enzymes and acidification initiates a second phase devoted to digestion of the bacterial membrane. The limitations in our understanding are compounded by the fact that different phagocytic cells may make use of different antibacterial mechanisms and that different species of bacteria are probably killed by largely different mechanisms. Dictyostelium discoideum is a soil amoeba which continuously ingests, kills and digests a wide variety of microorganisms to ensure its feeding. To the best of our knowledge, D. discoideum makes use of an array of antibacterial mechanisms very similar to those used by mammalian phagocytes. It is amenable to biochemical analysis, to genetic analysis and to live microscopy. In this study we analyzed bacterial killing, permeabilization and digestion in D. discoideum phagosomes and determined the role of several key gene products at various stages in this process. 2. RESULTS 2.1. In D. discoideum phagosomes, permeabilization of K. pneumoniae precedes their digestion For the sake of clarity, we adopted a strict nomenclature in this study. The choice of words is largely arbitrary, and is not meant to imply a priori anything about the underlying mechanisms. Bacteria are called alive if they can divide, dead if they cannot, and killing refers to the loss of the bacterial ability to divide. Permeabilization of GFP‐expressing bacteria is defined as the loss of their intracellular GFP fluorescence. The equivalence between loss of GFP fluorescence and bacterial permeabilization is hammered out in the Discussion section. Finally, bacterial digestion designates the loss of bacterial integrity evidenced when DAPI‐stained bacteria gradually disaggregate and lose their DAPI staining. Of these three parameters, our previous analysis focused on the loss of bacterial GFP fluorescence which was generally observed a few minutes after ingestion of non‐pathogenic K. pneumoniae bacteria into D. discoideum phagosomes. To better define the sequence of events in D. discoideum phagosomes, we first addressed the question of whether loss of bacterial GFP fluorescence was synonymous with loss of the whole bacterial structure. For this, we labeled GFP‐expressing bacteria with DAPI, a membrane‐permeable fluorescent dye that is expected to persist in killed bacteria as long as their DNA is not digested. The observed DAPI fluorescence was decreased by fluorescence energy transfer to GFP, imposing a significant level of correction for all the results shown in Figure 1. In individual ingested bacteria, DAPI staining persisted after extinction of GFP fluorescence, and was lost gradually over a much longer period of time. The levels of GFP and DAPI fluorescence were quantified in individual ingested bacteria, and two typical curves are shown. For these two bacteria, loss of GFP fluorescence occurred abruptly 4 min and 20 min after ingestion of the bacteria. On the contrary, in these two instances, DAPI fluorescence declined gradually 30 min after ingestion, and was fully lost approximately 60 min after ingestion. 150 ingested bacteria were observed and we always observed that DAPI fluorescence persisted after extinction of GFP. The average fluorescence levels were determined and plotted as a function of time after phagocytosis in WT D. discoideum, and this analysis confirmed that GFP fluorescence disappeared faster than DAPI fluorescence. To precisely determine the relationship between these two events, DAPI fluorescence was plotted as a function of time following GFP extinction for each bacterium. This analysis showed that the DAPI fluorescence did not vary significantly in the 10 min preceding extinction of GFP fluorescence. DAPI fluorescence started to decrease approximately 20 min after GFP extinction, and was completely lost approximately 60 min after GFP extinction. Overall, these observations clearly establish that permeabilization of ingested bacteria occurred with a half‐life of approximately 10 min after ingestion, and was followed by a much slower gradual digestion phase extending over a period of approximately 1 h. Together these observations indicate that in phagosomes, bacterial permeabilization always precedes their digestion. FIGURE 1 Permeabilization and digestion of Klebsiella pneumoniae in Dictyostelium discoideum phagosomes. To visualize ingestion and intracellular digestion of individual bacteria, D. discoideum cells were incubated for 2 h with GFP‐expressing... 2.2. Kil1 and Kil2 are necessary for efficient digestion We next tested whether extinction of DAPI fluorescence was slowed down in kil1 KO and kil2 KO mutants, both of which have previously been shown to destroy ingested bacteria very inefficiently. Kil1 is a Golgi sulfotransferase involved in the maturation of lysosomal enzymes. Kil2 is a phagosomal P‐type ATPase that has been proposed to transport magnesium ions from the cytosol to the phagosomal lumen. As previously reported, we observed that extinction of bacterial GFP was slower in kil1 KO cells, in kil2 KO cells and in kil1kil2 double KO cells than in WT cells. In addition, DAPI fluorescence persisted longer in kil1 KO cells, in kil2 KO cells and in kil1kil2 double KO cells than in WT cells. In these experiments, the observed DAPI fluorescence was decreased by fluorescence energy transfer to GFP, imposing a significant correction of the measured values. To avoid the need for correction and to confirm our results, bacteria that did not express GFP were used, and DAPI fluorescence did persist longer in kil1 KO, kil2 KO and double kil1kil2 KO than in WT cells. Together these experiments indicate that efficient permeabilization and digestion of ingested bacteria requires the activity of both Kil1 and Kil2. FIGURE 2 Efficient permeabilization and digestion of bacteria requires the activity of both Kil1 and Kil2. Dictyostelium discoideum cells were incubated with GFP‐expressing Klebsiella pneumoniae stained with DAPI and imaged as described in the legend to... 2.3. Killing of K. pneumoniae precedes their permeabilization in phagosomes We next attempted to define if extinction of GFP fluorescence was synonymous with loss of bacterial viability, and if not, which one of the two events occurred first. In order to assess simultaneously the disappearance of bacterial fluorescence and the loss of their ability to grow, we first visualized by light microscopy for 25 min D. discoideum cells mixed with K. pneumoniae. The medium was then abruptly changed to LB containing a small percentage of paraformaldehyde, detergent and kanamycin. The temperature was raised to 37°C and bacterial growth and division were observed for 15 h. The medium used during phase 2 killed D. discoideum cells as evidenced by the observation that they irreversibly stopped moving within seconds and rounded up. However, the cell structure was sufficiently preserved to prevent the release of ingested bacteria from dead D. discoideum cells. On the contrary, these conditions did not affect bacterial viability as evidenced by the fact that addition of paraformaldehyde and Triton X100 did not slow down growth of K. pneumoniae in LB. A vast majority of uningested bacteria grew and divided during phase 2 confirming that bacterial viability was not decreased in phase 2. We expected each ingested bacteria to fall into one of seven theoretical categories. Intraphagosomal bacteria that were still fluorescent at the end of phase 1 were classified into category A if they divided during phase 2, category B if they did not divide during phase 2 but did not lose their fluorescence, or category C if they did not divide and lost their fluorescence during phase 2. Intraphagosomal bacteria that lost GFP fluorescence during phase 1 were classified into category D if they did not divide during phase 2, category E if they did not recover GFP fluorescence but divided during phase 2, category F if they recovered their fluorescence but did not divide during phase 2, or category G if they recovered their fluorescence and divided during phase 2. We performed 58 independent experiments and visualized 3344 phagocytic events where WT D. discoideum cells ingested a K. pneumoniae bacterium. For 2240 ingested bacteria, GFP fluorescence was still detected at the end of phase 1. For 1104 ingested bacteria, GFP fluorescence went off during phase 1. Division of non‐fluorescent bacteria during phase 2 can be visualized by phase contrast microscopy, or by fluorescence microscopy if they recover GFP fluorescence. We never observed GFP‐OFF bacteria dividing, recovering fluorescence or recovering fluorescence and dividing. Accordingly, all 1104 GFP‐OFF bacteria were classified in category D. This observation indicates that all GFP‐OFF bacteria are incapable of dividing, that is, are dead. On the other hand, the 2240 GFP‐ON bacteria were seen to fall into the three proposed categories: during phase 2, 400 of them divided, 132 did not divide but remained fluorescent, and 1708 did not divide and lost their fluorescence. This result indicates that ingested bacteria that are still fluorescent can be either alive or dead. Together these observations indicate that in phagosomes, bacterial death always precedes their permeabilization. FIGURE 3 In Dictyostelium discoideum phagosomes, Klebsiella pneumoniae bacteria are first killed then permeabilized. Schematic representation of the experimental procedure: D. discoideum cells were mixed with GFP‐expressing K. pneumoniae and imaged... For each bacterium, during phase 1, the time of ingestion and the time of GFP extinction were recorded. This allowed us to establish the kinetics of GFP fluorescence extinction during phase 1. To determine the kinetics of bacterial killing, we also calculated in the same experiments the percentage of ingested bacteria that were still capable of dividing at a given time after phagocytosis. In WT D. discoideum cells, 50% of bacteria were killed 2 min after ingestion, while it took approximately 9 min for 50% of them to lose their fluorescence. These observations indicate that the killing of ingested K. pneumoniae precedes their intracellular permeabilization in D. discoideum phagosomes. Note that, while it is relatively easy to visualize bacterial permeabilization, determining the kinetics of bacterial killing requires data from a large number of independent experiments. 2.4. Kil1 and Kil2 are necessary for efficient killing We next assessed in the same manner the killing and permeabilization of K. pneumoniae in kil1 KO and kil2 KO cells. Previous experiments established that both bacterial permeabilization and bacterial killing are slower in kil1 KO and kil2 KO cells than in WT cells. When bacterial death and permeabilization were recorded simultaneously as described in Figure 3, we also observed that both killing and permeabilization were significantly delayed in kil1 KO cells and in kil2 KO cells compared to WT cells. In kil1‐kil2 double KO cells, killing of ingested bacteria was even slower than in individual kil1 and kil2 KO cells. These observations confirm that the procedure developed in this study measures accurately and simultaneously bacterial killing and bacterial permeabilization, and that Kil1 and Kil2 are both required for efficient intracellular killing and permeabilization of K. pneumoniae. FIGURE 4 Kil1 and Kil2 are necessary for efficient killing of bacteria. Bacterial killing and permeabilization in phagosomes were analyzed as described in Figure 3. Both bacterial killing and permeabilization were slower in kil1 KO cells, kil2 KO cells... 2.5. AlyL, BpiC, NoxA, and acidic pH are necessary for efficient permeabilization of K. pneumoniae in phagosomes Three effector proteins were previously shown to participate in the permeabilization of K. pneumoniae : AlyL, one of D. discoideum lysozyme, the BpiC bactericidal permeability‐increasing protein and NoxA, the main superoxide‐producing NADPH oxidase in D. discoideum. Genetic inactivation of the corresponding genes led to a slower permeabilization of K. pneumoniae bacteria, although in the original study the defect observed in noxA KO cells was not statistically significant. We observed virtually identical results in this new set of experiments: in alyL KO cells, bpiC KO cells and noxA KO cells, permeabilization of K. pneumoniae was significantly slower than in WT cells. In addition, NH 4 Cl increases the pH in acidic lysosomes and phagosomes, and as observed previously, NH 4 Cl slowed down permeabilization of K. pneumoniae. Note that NH 4 Cl only partially raises the phagosomal pH in D. discoideum endocytic compartments. While this observation indicates that the very acidic pH of phagosomes is important for efficient permeabilization of bacteria, a complete loss of phagosomal acidification would presumably have a more profound effect on bacterial permeabilization. 2.6. NoxA and acidic pH are required for efficient killing of bacteria, BpiC and AlyL are not We then analyzed the intracellular killing and permeabilization of K. pneumoniae in alyL KO cells, bpiC KO cells and noxA KO cells as well as in cells exposed to NH 4 Cl. Note that a significant variability is apparent when comparing the kinetics of killing observed in WT cells in different sets of experiments. For this reason, the killing kinetics in mutant cells were only compared with kinetics in WT cells analyzed the same day. The kinetics of intracellular killing were identical in alyL KO cells, in bpiC KO cells and in WT cells. On the contrary, bacterial permeabilization was significantly slower in alyL KO cells and bpiC KO cells than in WT cells. These results indicate that AlyL and BpiC participate in K. pneumoniae permeabilization but not in their intracellular killing in D. discoideum phagosomes. A different phenotype was observed in noxA KO cells and in cells incubated with NH 4 Cl: in these cells, both the permeabilization of K. pneumoniae and their killing were slower than in WT cells, indicating that in the minutes following phagocytosis, production of superoxide by NoxA and rapid phagosomal acidification are both necessary for efficient killing of ingested bacteria. While live bacteria persisted longer in phagosomes in these mutant cells, they were eventually all killed after 15 min in noxA KO cells and 6 min in NH 4 Cl‐treated cells, indicating that redundant killing mechanisms can ensure killing of ingested bacteria even when one effector is inactivated. FIGURE 5 AlyL, BpiC, NoxA and acidic pH are necessary for efficient permeabilization of Klebsiella pneumoniae in phagosomes but only NoxA and acidic pH are required for efficient killing. Bacterial killing and permeabilization in phagosomes were measured as described... 2.7. Phagosomal acidification precedes permeabilization of bacteria Phagosomes are rapidly acidified following ingestion of bacteria by D. discoideum cells. In order to determine when acidification of phagosomes is initiated, we used specific anti‐LPS antibodies to decorate the surface of K. pneumoniae bacteria with pH‐sensitive FITC fluorescence. Following bacterial ingestion, the FITC fluorescence decreased rapidly, indicating that phagosomes acidified within 2–3 min of their formation. Similar kinetics of acidification were seen in all the mutants analyzed in the current study with only a minor delay in kil1 KO cells and kil2 KO cells. Note that extinction of FITC fluorescence indicates with exquisite precision the initiation of phagosome acidification. It does not provide an accurate measurement of the very acidic pH reached in D. discoideum phagosomes since FITC fluorescence is almost fully quenched at pH 5. This explains why even NH 4 Cl treatment did not produce significant changes in the acidification kinetics in phagosomes : as described earlier NH 4 Cl only partially increases the pH of lysosomal compartments in D. discoideum, an effect not sufficient to prevent the quenching of FITC. Together these observations indicate that phagosome acidification is initiated a few minutes after formation of phagosomes in both WT and D. discoideum mutant cells. FIGURE 6 Rapid acidification of Klebsiella pneumoniae ‐containing phagosomes. To visualize the acidification of the phagosome lumen, we imaged Dictyostelium discoideum cells mixed with FITC labeled K. pneumoniae. Representative images showing a K. pneumoniae... In order to determine whether the initiation of phagosome acidification takes place before, after or during permeabilization of bacteria, we used K. pneumoniae bacteria expressing a red fluorescent protein mCherry, which is destroyed in phagosomes with kinetics very similar to those observed for GFP‐expressing bacteria. We then observed the ingestion of these bacteria after labeling their surface with FITC‐coupled antibodies. We observed 100 ingestion events, and in every case the disappearance of FITC fluorescence preceded the disappearance of mCherry fluorescence. These observations indicate that the acidification of D. discoideum phagosomes precedes the permeabilization of the ingested bacteria. FIGURE 7 Acidification of phagosomes precedes permeabilization of Klebsiella pneumoniae. In order to measure in the same experiment the permeabilization of K. pneumoniae and the acidification of the phagosome lumen. Together these experiments clearly indicate that acidification of phagosomes is initiated before the permeabilization of bacteria. 3. DISCUSSION As described in the Graphical 