 Spatial and temporal variations of oxygen environments affect the behaviors of various cells and are involved in physiological and pathological events. Our previous studies with Dictyostelium discoideum as a model of cell motility have demonstrated that aerotaxis toward an oxygen-rich region occurs below 2% O 2. However, while the aerotaxis of Dictyostelium seems to be an effective strategy to search for what is essential for survival, the mechanism underlying this phenomenon is still largely unclear. One hypothesis is that an oxygen concentration gradient generates a secondary oxidative stress gradient that would direct cell migration towards higher oxygen concentration. Such mechanism was inferred but not fully demonstrated to explain the aerotaxis of human tumor cells. Here, we investigated the role on aerotaxis of flavohemoglobins, proteins that can both act as potential oxygen sensors and modulators of nitric oxide and oxidative stress. The migratory behaviors of Dictyostelium cells were observed under both self-generated and imposed oxygen gradients. Furthermore, their changes by chemicals generating or preventing oxidative stress were tested. The trajectories of the cells were then analyzed through time-lapse phase-contrast microscopic images. The results indicate that both oxidative and nitrosative stresses are not involved in the aerotaxis of Dictyostelium but cause cytotoxic effects that are enhanced upon hypoxia. Keywords: Dictyostelium discoideum, aerotaxis, hypoxia, oxidative stress, nitrosative stress, mitochondria, microfluidics 1 Introduction Oxygen is vital for many living organisms. The oxygen concentration inside multicellular organisms is lower than that in the atmosphere due to oxygen consumption by cells, and changes spatially and temporally. The variations of oxygen environment affect various cell behaviors physiologically and pathologically. Aerotaxis, the motion of cells toward optimal oxygen levels, is well known in bacteria, but the characteristics and mechanisms of aerotaxis in eukaryotic cells are poorly elucidated. Although intracellular protein hypoxia-inducible factors generally express their functions by transcriptionally activating genes in the nuclei, they do not seem to induce a rapid directional motility change. Recently, an in vitro study reported a clear oxygen-directed migration of both epithelial and breast tumor cells under a self-generated hypoxic environment caused by cellular oxygen consumption in a confined environment. Such oxygen-directed migration was also observed even after the knockout of HIF in the cells, suggesting a HIF-independent aerotaxis. An oxidative gradient seems to overlap the oxygen gradient and is required to direct aerotactic motility through activation of the epithelial growth factor receptor. The cysteine 797 located near the ATP binding site of EGFR was shown to be a target of redox regulation and might be the target of the hypoxia induced oxidation that potentiate its tyrosine kinase activity. Most of the dioxygen is metabolized in mitochondria to produce ATP as part of respiration processes. Mitochondria generate a burst of oxidant molecules, both reactive oxygen species and reactive nitrogen species during hypoxia, and inactivation of mitochondrial respiration prevents aerotaxis. It was thus hypothesized that in hypoxic condition an oxygen gradient will cause cells to generate a secondary redox gradient that would modulate EGFR activity to direct cell migration toward higher oxygen concentrations. Dictyostelium discoideum vegetative amoeba also shows collective migration toward an oxygen-rich region. In a confined spot assay, Dictyostelium cells exhibited long-lasting and highly stable migration towards oxygen-rich regions guided by a self-generated oxygen gradient, forming a stable ring of cells to escape from the hypoxic region. Moreover, the aerotaxis of Dictyostelium was successfully confirmed under controlled oxygen gradient generated by microfluidic devices with gas channels for supply of gas mixture of nitrogen and oxygen. Under hypoxic conditions, below 2% O 2, which corresponds to 25 µM O 2 in the culture medium, the migration of Dictyostelium cells was enhanced, and the oxygen gradient guided the cells toward the oxygen-rich region. A catalase-deficient strain of Dictyostelium demonstrated an aerotactic ring formation quicker than the wild type, suggesting that hydrogen peroxide could play a role in the aerotaxis of Dictyostelium. How cells sense an oxygen gradient and integrate it to direct motility is not clear as this phenomenon is little studied contrary to response to hypoxia. It is possible that aerotaxis uses some of the hypoxia sensing mechanisms. In eukaryotes, oxygen is mainly used to generate energy through oxidative phosphorylation occurring in mitochondria. Hypoxia can thus be detected indirectly through the lack of energy and increase in free radicals resulting from impaired mitochondrial functions. A more direct way to detect hypoxia involves oxygen-dependent enzymes that will regulate downstream responses. The only well-documented oxygen sensing system in Dictyostelium is PhyA, a member of the oxygen-dependent prolyl-hydroxylase domain proteins also found in mammals and plants. PhyA is a prolyl hydroxylase that acts as an oxygen sensor to control the terminal phase of Dictyostelium multicellular development that results into the differentiation of spore and stalk cells. Since PhyA present a low affinity of O 2, its activity is restricted under 21% O 2. In presence of normal level of oxygen, PhyA hydroxylates a proline on Skp1, an adaptor subunit of the Skp1–Cul1–F-box class of E3 ubiquitin triggering its glycosylation. The modified Skp1 will in turn associate with its targets to trigger their polyubiquitination and degradation by the proteosome. PhyA activity is reduced under 10% O 2, resulting into the accumulation of unmodified Skp1, preventing terminal differentiation from proceeding. PhyA is expressed during Dictyostelium multicellular development and control the culmination phase, such that it happens in a place with normal oxygen level such as the soil surface rather than underground. Other candidates include flavohemoglobins, oxygen-dependent enzymes that neutralize nitric oxide, a source of RNS that also acts as a signaling molecule regulating the hypoxic response in many organisms. Flavohemoglobins are found in many bacteria, fungi and protists where it oxidizes NO into nitrate to maintain NO homeostasis. While NO is produced at low level as part of nitrogen metabolism, high level can occur during hypoxia due to dysfunction of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase but can also results from fermentation of nitrite in acidic pH or be released by plants or animals as part of antibacterial defense. The oxidation of NO by flavohemoglobin is very efficient in saturation oxygen concentration but the reaction can also occur in hypoxic condition when oxygen is in micromolar range. In anaerobic condition, flavohemoglobins appear able to detoxify NO at a slow rate through an alternate reaction. As such, flavohemoglobins were shown to protect organisms from NO toxic effects both in high and low oxygen conditions. Dictyostelium genome encodes two flavohemoglobins genes, fhbA and fhbB, that were successfully inactivated. Dictyostelium flavohemoglobin proteins share well conserved amino-acid sequences and structure with the characterized bacterial and fungal homologs shown to act as NO dioxygenases. While the enzymatic activity of FhbA and FhbB has not been tested, the double null mutant fhbA - B - displays poor viability when challenged with NO generating chemicals, consistent with their expected NO dioxygenases functions. The intracellular localization of Dictyostelium flavohemoglobins has been not investigated but in organisms that also possess two flavohemoglobin genes, such as filamentous fungi, one isomer is at least partly located in the mitochondrial matrix despite lacking a classical targeting sequence while the other isomer is mostly cytoplasmic. In yeast, the YHB1 flavohemoglobin is distributed between the cytosol and mitochondrial matrix in normoxia but relocates fully to mitochondria in anaerobic condition. Dictyostelium cells generate NO at the onset of multicellular development to regulate the initiation of cAMP pulses. This NO generation coincides with the strong downregulation of fhbA and fhbB expression observed by RNA-seq. fhbA and fhbB are re-expressed at low level when aggregates are formed. cAMP is secreted by Dictyostelium to act as a chemoattractant that directs cell motility during the aggregation phase. It is thus possible that flavohemoglobins act as oxygen sensor that would regulate NO level produced during hypoxia. NO could then act as a secondary signal to direct cellular motility upward oxygen gradients. In this context, available mutants in genes encoding for potential oxygen sensors or signaling intermediates were tested for their ability to form aerotactic rings of cells when a micro-colony was covered with a glass coverslip. Out of the mutants tested, including members of the PhyA-Skp1 pathway, only one displayed an abnormal phenotype during the spot assay. A null mutant of the flavohemoglobin gene fhbB presented a poorly defined ring that expanded at a slower rate than wild-type controls. Therefore, we investigated the role of flavohemoglobins and the effects of oxidative stress on aerotaxis. The migratory behaviors of wild type and mutant Dictyostelium cells were observed both with the spot assay and with microfluidic devices generating an oxygen gradient. Chemicals were used to inhibit mitochondria functions, source of free radical or anti-oxidant. The trajectories of the cells were then analyzed with time-lapse phase-contrast microscopic images to draw the aerokinetic and aerotactic features of Dictyostelium cells under these pharmacogenetic treatments. Thanks to complementary cell respiration and proliferation experiments, micro-colony experiments were modeled with a Go-or-Grow mean field model previously introduced in order to confirm the existence of a true aerotactic response in all analyzed experiments. This complementary experimental and theoretical approach indicates that neither flavohemoglobins nor oxidative stress are involved in the aerotaxis of Dictyostelium contrary to expectations. Instead, our data indicates that hypoxia increases the toxic effects of oxidative stress on cell motility, leading indirectly to an impaired aerotactic motility. Surprisingly, we observed that for Dictyostelium, mitochondrial respiration is dispensable both for generation of an oxygen gradient and for aerotactic response. 2 Materials and methods 2.1 Cells and strains The wild types AX2 and AX3, and the flavohemoglobin null mutants fhbA -, fhbB - and fhbA - B - strains of Dictyostelium cells were provided by the National BioResource Project and cultured axenically with HL5 medium containing 100 mM glucose and 1/1,000 penicillin-streptomycin on cell culture dishes at 22°C or under agitation. PhyA-strain is a kind gift from C. West. 2.2 Chemicals and reagents Sodium nitroprusside dihydrate, which releases NO, was added at 10–100 µM to the culture medium to investigate the effect of RNS on the aerotaxis. H 2 O 2 was added at 100–500 µM to investigate the effect of ROS on the aerotaxis. Ethidium bromide, which inhibits mitochondria DNA replication, was added to the culture medium 24 h before experiments at 30 μg/mL for pretreatment of the cells. Oligomycin was used at 10 μg/mL, and antimycin A was used at 37.5 µM. Tiron was used at 10 mM. 2.3 Microfluidic devices A double-layer microfluidic device with oxygen-controllability was used. The device was 30 × 30 mm square, and the thickness was 4 mm. Inside the device, two gas channels in a 1-mm interval were located at 0.5 mm from the bottom surface, perpendicularly crossing above three parallel media channels on the bottom. The width and height were 2 mm and 0.15 mm for all channels, respectively. The device mainly consisted of polydimethylsiloxane and contained a polycarbonate film to prevent gas infusion from the atmosphere. The x and y -axes were defined to be parallel and perpendicular to the media channels, respectively, and the z -axis was in the vertical direction. The origin was set at the center of the device. The oxygen concentration in the device was controlled by gas exchange between the channels, supplying gas mixtures at predefined oxygen concentrations to the gas channels. The oxygen concentration in the device was computed by three-dimensional numerical simulation using commercial multiphysics software and verified using an oxygen-sensing film which emitted phosphorescence quenched by oxygen. The computational and experimental results showed almost the same tendency especially for the minimum value of oxygen concentration, showing an oxygen concentration gradient from 0.4% to 21% O 2 was generated along each media channel in the x -direction when the gas mixtures containing 0% and 21% O 2 were supplied to the left and right gas channels, respectively. At the most hypoxic location at x = −1.6 mm, the slope of the oxygen concentration gradient inverted. Dictyostelium cells were harvested from the culture dishes and introduced into the media channels in the microfluidic device at 2 × 10 6 cells/mL with the HL5 culture medium. After incubation for 20 min to adhere Dictyostelium cells to the bottom surface of the media channels, the HL5 culture medium was replaced by fresh one. Here, depending on the experimental conditions, reagents were added to the HL5 culture medium. For accurate comparisons, each device was set to have channels for control condition and each of another two conditions at the same time. The device was placed in a stage incubator mounted on an inverted microscope, and controlled at 22°C. Just after gas mixtures of oxygen and nitrogen were supplied at 30 mL/min to the left and right gas channels, time-lapse imaging was started. A second type of microfluidic device, with a Y-shape channel was used to generate a chemical gradient of soluble molecules. The device was placed in the same stage incubator mounted on the microscope, and controlled at 22°C. The x and y -axes were defined to be perpendicular and parallel to the merged channel, respectively. The origin was set at the junction of the channels from the two inlets. Dictyostelium cells were first allowed to adhere on the microchannel in HL5 culture medium for 20 min. HL5 culture media without and with a pharmacological substance at a concentration C 0 were injected from the left and right inlets, respectively, at 1 mL/h, and time-lapse imaging was then started. The average velocity was U 0 = 0.37 mm/s in the merged channel inducing a wall-shear stress around 4.4 mPa low enough not to affect cell migration and adhesion on the bottom glass. The profile of chemical concentration C at a given position was calculated by the following equation: C x, y = C 0 2 1 + erf x 2 U 0 D y where D is the diffusion coefficient of the chemical substance in water. For the H 2 O 2 gradient we used D = 1.4 × 10 −3 mm 2 /s. Addition of 100 µM SNP leads to rapid increase of NO in the media to reach a prolonged plateau after 25 min. As the experimental set-up require 30 min, we expect a constant level of NO for the duration of the assay, hence for the SNP gradient experiment. We used the diffusion constant of NO, D = 2.2 × 10 −3 mm 2 /s, to compute the relative NO concentration profile. Cells were imaged and tracked between 1 h and 2 h after starting the media flow. FIGURE 3 Gradients of SNP or H 2 O 2 do not induce chemotaxis but reduce the migration speed. Schematic of the Y-shaped microchannel device. HL5 culture medium without and with SNP at 100 μM or H 2 O 2 at 500 μM were... 2.4 Imaging and analyzing cell migration in microfluidic devices Phase-contrast microscopic images of the central part of each media channel including the region of interest displayed in Supplementary Figure S1A and were taken by the microscope with a ×4 objective lens every 30 s for 2 h. The positions of Dictyostelium cells were detected at each time step by analyzing the images using ImageJ with its built-in plugin, Find Maxima. Then, the individual cells were tracked using MATLAB by minimizing the total of squared displacements with a published tracking code. All trajectory data were analyzed using in-house MATLAB programs. The migration distance in 1 min between the time steps t i and t i +1 was defined as dl i, which was decomposed into the x and y -directional displacements dl x,i and dl y,i, respectively, where the x -direction is defined as the gradient direction for both devices. The average speed v = d l i ¯ and the average x -directional velocity v x = d l x, i ¯ were averaged from all 1-min cell displacements in Δ x = 200 µm wide slabs as a function of x -position. The aerotactic index was defined as AI = d l x, i / d l i ¯ referring to a chemotactic index normally used as a metric for chemotaxis. The maximal AI max was measured in each individual experiment as the maximum value of AI on the positive side since the oxygen gradient was better controlled than on the negative side. A chemotaxis index CI = d l x, i / d l i ¯ was computed to analyze the data by experiments with the Y-shaped microfluidic devices. 2.5 Spot assay and ring speed kymographs The confined spot assay offers a quick and robust way to test whether cells can generate oxygen gradients and move aerotactically. A drop of either 2, 3 or 5 µL of a cell suspension containing 2,000, 3,000 or 5,000 cells respectively was carefully deposited on a dish. The drop was incubated for 30 min in humid atmosphere at 22°C before adding 2 mL of HL5 culture medium. An 18 mm or 22 mm diameter round glass coverslip cleaned with ethanol then thoroughly rinsed in HL5 was gently deposited on top of it. Image acquisition was performed using a lens-free imaging device or the aforementioned inverted microscope. Images were taken every 5–15 min for 24 h. The software Horus was used to process and reconstruct the Cytonote images, and a homemade ImageJ macro based on the polar transformer plug-in was used to construct kymographs from the original images by polar transformation and z -stacking of frames. The ring speed was determined by calculating the slope of the front density band associated with ring propagation on these kymographs between 16 h and 24 h. To improve signal to noise ratio in kymographs, images were filtered from their background by using the Find-Edges function of ImageJ before applying the polar transformation. 2.6 Oxygen consumption and proliferation experiments For consumption measurements of fhb null mutant and for those of the respiratory inhibitors oligomycin and antimycin A, about 10 6 total cells suspended in HL5 culture medium were placed in a respirometer to determine oxygen concentration changes over time. After the measurement of the basal respiration, oligomycin or antimycin A were added successively. Oxygen consumption were calculated using the change of oxygen level over time and normalized per cell. For consumption measurements of EtBr treated cells or in presence of SNP or H 2 O 2, a 6-mL glass vial was filled with 2 × 10 7 cells suspended in HL5, and closed it with a cap through which an optical oxygen probe was plunged. The cap was carefully sealed around the probe to avoid external oxygen entering the bottle. We measured the change of oxygen level over time with this probe coupled to its oxymeter. For proliferation experiments, cells were plated at about 10 4 cells/cm 2 in 6-well plates, and imaged and counted with the lens-free imaging device or the inverted microscope every 30 min for 24 h. 2.7 RT-qPCR Four plates containing 2.3 × 10 6 A×3 cells in 1.5 mL HL5 culture medium were prepared with either no chemicals, 100 µM SNP or 100 µM H 2 O 2. The two plates containing SNP or H 2 O 2 and a plate without chemical were placed at 22°C and 21% O 2. The last plate containing cells in HL5 culture medium was incubated at 22°C and 0.4% O 2. After 3 h, total RNA was extracted, quantified and adjusted at 1 µg to synthesise cDNA. Then a qPCR was performed using the following primers: rnlA -F, rnlA -R, cxgE -F, cxgE -R, cxgS -F, cxgS -R, fhbA -F, fhbA -R, fhbB -F, and fhbB -R. The experiments were performed in duplicate for each gene. The relative gene expression was determined using the 2 −ΔΔCt method using rnlA as a housekeeping gene. 2.8 Statistical test For each measurement type, experiments were repeated three to six times. Significant differences between three or more conditions were evaluated by one-way ANOVA or two-way ANOVA followed by a post-Tukey test for multiple comparisons. In each test, statistical significance and the tendency toward significance were inferred at * p < 0.05 and † p < 0.1, respectively. 2.9 Mean-field “Go-or-Grow” model The simulations were performed using a numerical mean-field “Go-or-Grow” model coded in the Python language, which we recently introduced to explain ring propagation in confined spot experiments. The mean field model used for the aerotactic dispersion consisted of coupled reaction-diffusion equations for both oxygen and cell concentrations respectively: ∂ C ∂ t = D O 2 Δ C − b 0 C ρ ∂ ρ ∂ t = D c e l l s Δ ρ + r o C ρ − ∇. → J → a e r o where C is the oxygen concentration, t is the time, D O 2 is the oxygen diffusion constant, b 0 is the cell oxygen consumption, ρ is the cell density, D cells is the cellular diffusion constant, r 0 is the cell proliferation rate, and J → a e r o is the advection term. From our recent observations that the aerotactic displacements are more correlated to the relative oxygen gradient ∇ → C C than to the absolute gradient ∇ → C, we propose a slight modification to the advection term in the shape of J → a e r o = ρ v → a e r o, with: v → a e r o = χ l ∇ → C C ) 1 1 + e C − C 0 s χ is a proportionality constant called aerotactic bias, l = 10 µm is the approximate cell size, and the latter two terms comprise the response function to oxygen relative gradient. We choose an initial cell distribution and a boundary condition for oxygen C = 21% O 2 mimicking the experimental situation. Mesh sizes of Δ x = 10 µm and Δ t = 0.05 min were used. To avoid negative O 2 values a threshold C 1 = 0.5% O 2 was chosen below which cells consume oxygen relative to the local ambient oxygen concentrations. We also used a proliferation threshold below which cells stop dividing C 2 = 0.2% O 2 as recently measured. This is also a slight modification to our initial Go-or-Grow model for which C 0 = C 2. The aerotactic bias, the oxygen threshold, and the steepness factor in Eq. 4 were respectively updated to χ 0 = 30 μm/min, C 0 = 0.4% O 2 and s = 0.1% O 2 upon further analysis of density accumulation of cells and maximum aerotactic displacement along the gradient perceived in the microfluidic device experiments with the AX2 in HL5 control condition. For other conditions, C 0 and s were kept constant as we never observed any shift in the range of oxygen concentrations triggering an aerotactic response, but χ was set proportional to the measured aerotactic x -directional velocity v x, as χ = χ 0 v x v x 0 where v x 0 is the aerotactic speed of the control condition reported in Figures 2E, H. The cellular diffusion constant D cells plays a minor role on the ring propagation speed or ring formation time. It was not systematically measured but we used a scaling relation motivated by former studies, D c e l l s D 0 = v v 0 where D 0 = 30 μm 2 /min and v 0 = 5 μm/min are the diffusion constant and average speed of the AX2 control condition in the ring region. All parameter values, cell oxygen consumption b 0, aerotactic x -directional velocity v x, absolute displacement speed v, cell proliferation rate r 0, were taken directly from experimental observations discussed in this article and summarized in Supplementary Table S1. Oxygen diffusion constant in HL5 medium at 22°C was taken from the one in pure water at 20°C: D O 2 = 2,000 μm 2 /s. On one hand, salt and sugar present in HL5 decrease D O 2 by about 100 μm 2 /s, but on the other hand, temperature increases D O 2 by about 50 μm 2 /s/°C. FIGURE 2 Effect of various treatments on the aerotactic response of Dictyostelium to an imposed 0.4%–21% external oxygen gradient generated by supplying pure nitrogen and air to the gas channels of a double-layer microfluidic device.... 3 Results 3.1 Abnormal motility of flavohemoglobin B null mutant upon hypoxia Micro-colonies of various strains were confined with a glass coverslip and observed by videomicroscopy. The behavior of the PhyA null mutant or of the one of the wild type AX3 cells were similar to the one previously described with AX2 cells. After less than an hour, the oxygen depletion at the center of the colony induced an increase of aerokinetic motility and the formation of an expanding ring of aerotactic cells. This resulted in a sharp density profile, the ring being two to three times of higher density than the interior of the colony. All of fhb null mutants presented a much slower and rougher ring of cells than the AX3 strain, the slowing down of the ring being especially more marked and significant for the fhbB - and fhbA - B -. Furthermore, small aggregates of cells were frequently observed inside the mutant colonies while they were very rare for the wild type. FIGURE 1 fhb KO cells migrate toward oxygen in the confined spot assay. Snapshots right after, 6 h after and 12 h after covering the colony with a glass coverslip non permeable to O 2 : cells quickly consume available... In order to test solely the aerotaxis of fhb null mutants in imposed oxygen gradients, and not the intermingled response to self-generated gradients with oxygen consumption and cell proliferation, we used a double-layer microfluidic device generating a 0.4%–21% O 2 gradient. In such a device, at the most hypoxic location where the slope of the oxygen concentration gradient was inverted, the directionality of the cell migration was changed from the - x direction for x < −1.6 mm to + x direction for x > −1.6 mm, implying migration toward higher oxygen levels. The existence of such an inversion even when the signal-to-noise in cell displacement is low is a signature of an aerotactic response. Cells migrated also in the y -direction but the average of the y -directional displacements were almost zero regardless of the position. The AX2 strain migrated faster in the hypoxic region than in the normoxic region. The parental AX3 strain presented a higher non-directional motility than the mutants in all oxygen concentrations and displayed a strong aerotactic bias when the oxygen level was under 1.5% O 2, resulting in a maximal aerotactic index AI max of 0.13. The average speed of all fhb null mutants was significantly reduced, but all exhibited an aerotactic displacement. Even if for the fhbB - and fhbA - B - strains, it was just measurable. As a result, the AI max was slightly reduced in fhbA - strain comparatively to wild type, but reduced by more than half for the fhbB - and fhbA - B - strains, indicating a strong reduction in the ability of the cells to properly sense or respond to oxygen gradients in these mutants. We performed a comparative random motility assay in plastic dishes at 21% and 0.4% O 2. The AX3 strain exhibited a higher motility in the hypoxic condition confirming the results of Figure 2A and the flavohemoglobin mutants motility was normal in normoxia but slightly reduced by hypoxia. In many organisms, flavohemoglobins expression is induced by NO, while induction upon hypoxia is uncommon. Therefore, the level of expression of fhbA and fhbB genes in wild type cells were tested by RT-qPCR in response to hypoxia and SNP, a chemical source of NO or H 2 O 2 as a generic source of ROS. Both flavohemoglobins expression were strongly induced after 3 h in 0.4% O 2. Strong induction was also observed for cxgS, an optional subunit of cytochrome c oxidase induced by hypoxia, used here as positive control. As expected, cxgE, the alternate optional subunit of cytochrome c oxidase expressed only during growth in normoxia was sharply downregulated at 0.4% O 2. On the other hand, treatment with SNP, a classical source of NO, did not induce fhbB expression and rather slightly repressed fhbA. As mitochondria also release ROS, H 2 O 2 effect was tested but did not affect the flavohemoglobins expression. Thus, low oxygen concentration appears to be key to induce the expression of flavohemoglobin genes, reinforcing the possibility that the proteins are important in this condition required for aerotaxis to appear. TABLE 1 Changes in expression level of a series of genes in response to oxidative stress or hypoxia. Wild type cells in petri dishes were incubated for 3 h with 100 µM SNP as source of NO, 100 µM H 2 O 2 or in a hypoxia chamber... 3.2 Oxidative stress does not affect aerotaxis Micro-colonies of wild type AX2 cells were confined in HL5 supplemented with either H 2 O 2 as a source of ROS or with SNP as a source of RNS by generating NO in the media. Neither product prevented the formation of the expanding ring of cells even though the ring speed was reduced with SNP or H 2 O 2. It was not possible to use much higher concentrations of these chemicals as they prevented cell adhesions or killed the cells at 1 mM. As an alternate way to change the potential effect of ROS, we used Tiron, a free radical scavenger that had previously been used to prevent oxidative stress in Dictyostelium. Addition of 10 mM Tiron to confined wild type cell had no visible effect on ring formation appearance or migration speed. To detect eventual fine effect of free radical, SNP and H 2 O 2 were applied to wild type cells placed in the microfluidic device previously described. However, lower concentration had to be used as they impair cell adhesion to the glass bottom of the device. The 100 µM H 2 O 2 did not affect migration speed or response to oxygen gradient of the cells. On the other hand, the 100 µM SNP reduced only slightly the cell speed at 21% O 2 but dramatically at 0.4% O 2. Despite this strong speed reduction, the SNP-treated cells still responded to oxygen gradients and the maximum aerotactic index remained similar to that of untreated cells. To further exclude a role of ROS and RNS in controlling aerotaxis, wild type cells were placed in a Y-shaped microfluidic device generating a chemical gradient of soluble molecules: either SNP or H 2 O 2. Higher levels of NO or of H 2 O 2 induce a lower motility of Dictyostelium cells but cells did not show specific chemotaxis towards or away from either product, up to 100 µM for SNP and 500 µM for H 2 O 2 as exemplified by the chemotactic index. These experiments unambiguously indicate that cells do not respond to direct ROS or RNS gradients. As ROS/RNS are not implicated in the observed aerotactic responses, we investigate whether mitochondria are involved in any other way. 3.3 Mitochondrial role during aerotaxis As mitochondria are major oxygen sinks and are potentially involved in direct or indirect oxygen sensing for aerotaxis, three different mitochondrial inhibitors were used on confined wild type cells. Treatment with 10 μg/mL of the mitochondria replication inhibitor EtBr for 5 days was shown to inhibit mitochondrial respiration in Dictyostelium cells by 75% and to prevent cell division. For our experiments, a pretreatment of 24 h with 30 μg/mL EtBr was used as it results into a strong reduction of cell growth. This resulted into a reduction of total respiration by 35% comparatively to their untreated control. The confined colony of EtBr-treated cells formed an expanding ring but with a decreasing migration speed with respect to the non-treated AX2 cells tested and a slight delay of ring formation time. Although it was not measured, cell growth was expected to be strongly reduced since the media contained EtBr during the confinement assays. The EtBr-treated cells were also tested for their aerotactic response in an oxygen gradient. There was no reduction of the aerotactic response and the aerotactic index was similar to untreated cells. Interestingly, on the normoxic side, the addition of EtBr markedly reduced the migration speed of the cells but with no significant reduction on the hypoxic side. FIGURE 4 AX2 cells migrate toward oxygen in the confined spot assay even when their mitochondrial activity is impaired. Snapshots right after, 6 h after and 12 h after covering the colony with a glass coverslip non-permeable... Oligomycin and antimycin are fast acting inhibitors of mitochondrial respiration that reduce considerably oxygen consumption: by nearly 60% with oligomycin, and 85% with antimycin as measured in this study. As expected, these drugs also reduce considerably cell division. Despite this strong inhibition, an expanding ring of cells was formed in the confined spot assay, but with a 5 h to 6 h delay as shown with the kymographs of Figures 4D, L, P. In addition, the ring expansion speed was slower than for the untreated AX2 cell colony especially for the antimycin treatment. In the microfluidic assay, oligomycin treated cells responded as did the EtBr-treated cells with a similar aerotactic displacement along the direction of the gradient but a slightly reduced migration speed on the normoxic side. On the other hand, both migration speed and aerotactic response were reduced by the antimycin treatment. Such general reduction of motility is not unexpected as antimycin prevents the cytochrome c oxidase to generate ATP which is required for motility. 3.4 Modeling of the ring formation and speed of expansion in the different condition tested To interpret experiments, we used the numerical mean-field version of the Go-or-Grow model. Briefly, the rapid oxygen consumption by cells in the confined area and the very selective aerotactic cell response are the two key ingredients for ring formation and propagation. Ring formation may occur even in the absence of proliferation. However, proliferation is necessary to sustain a stable long-lived ring. The ring speed depends mostly on the aerotactic speed and slightly on the proliferation rate. Here, we simulated the experiments with various O 2 diffusion constants values taken from literature and found that the changes in the ring speed between the various extreme literature values were negligible. The ring speed also did not depend on initial cell density, only the formation time depended on it: the denser, the quicker the ring formation and the more it appeared in the peripheral position of the initial spot. After adjusting the aerotactic response from microfluidic experiments, and the initial cell density profile and other parameters from experiments, the model predicted a ring formation within an hour for AX2 and AX3 cell spots in agreement with experiments. 1D ). The simulated ring propagated at constant speeds of ∼1.1 and 1.2 μm/min for AX2 and AX3, respectively. These values were in good agreement with the range of measured ring speeds, given the experimental variability. FIGURE 5 Simulated kymographs of cell density for the various experimental conditions presented in this study: AX3 control with 2,000 cells initially plated; fhbB - cell line with 2,000 initial cells; AX2 control cell line with 5,000 initial cells;... All other cell lines tested in this study presented an aerotactic response in the region of 0%–2% O 2. Simulated rings of fhbB - mutant were 50% slower and much wider than those of the parent cell line AX3 as the x -directional velocity v x was only 37% of their parent one. But, the rings appeared as quickly as their parent did as the cellular oxygen consumption or proliferation was not impaired. The rings of AX2 treated with 100 µM SNP were 21% slower than those of non-treated cell line as the x -directional velocity v x was also reduced by 21% with respect to their parent. They were also wider but not significantly delayed as the oxygen consumption of this condition was only slightly decreased with respect to the control. These findings were in very good agreement with experimental observations. Oligomycin and antimycin treatments corresponded to a very different set of parameters. The aerotactic directional migration speed v x of oligomycin-treated cells was similar to the non-treated AX2 but they did not proliferate at all. As a result, once initiated the ring expanded poorly and even stopped after a while. The ultra-low oxygen consumption of antimycin-treated cells made the ring appear at very late simulation times comparable to experimental observations. One can conclude from these simulations that. Rings formed only in presence of aerotaxis. Ring speed mostly correlated with the aerotactic strength. Ring formation time did not correlate with the aerotactic strength but with the overall oxygen consumption by the cells in the confined area. 4 Discussion Dictyostelium motility towards extracellular cAMP has been described extensively and served as a model for chemotaxis in other organisms. cAMP acts through G protein-coupled receptors to regulate actin polymerization and cell motility. Spatial gradients of cAMP between the front and the back of the cells are detected and amplified intracellularly through second messengers to direct motility. Dictyostelium uses similar signaling mechanisms to respond to a wide variety of signals such as temperature, light, electric current, and chemical substances such as folate. In all these characterized situations, cells perceive differences of the signal levels on the plasma membrane, usually using a receptor, and integrate them to become polarized and direct their motility. In the present case, the initial signal is oxygen, a molecule normally present in high amount in the environment and constantly used for basic metabolism. There is no known cell surface receptor for oxygen and its hydrophobic properties allow its free diffusion through membranes before being metabolized. Inactivation of the G-beta protein required for transducing most GPCR signal does not prevent aerotaxis. To identify the signaling mechanism, we tested mutants in gene-coding potential oxygen-sensing proteins using a confined spot assay to observe an aerotactic ring, and then further dissected this phenomenon to model and distinguish what aspect of the cell properties was affected by the mutation. The same strategy was then used when challenging cells with various chemicals. Among tested mutants, the fhbB - and fhbA - B - strains were the one presenting a somewhat altered ring formation with the micro-colony confining test. However, the fact that a ring was formed and expanded, even if irregular and at lower speed, indicates that the cells still present some aerotaxis, which was confirmed when imposing an oxygen gradient. The strong reduction but not complete abolition of the aerotactic index could indicate a direct role for flavohemoglobins in sensing oxygen gradients, but can also be an undirect effect that mask the cell aerotaxis. Our further assays with imposed oxygen or chemical gradients and simulation argue for an undirect role of flavohemoglobins and NO. Dictyostelium cells did not move towards or away from NO generated by SNP in the microfluidic RNS gradient experiment, excluding a role for NO to act as secondary gradient to orient cell motility. If NO was used as a signal to orient cell or even to fine tune aerotaxis, swamping the cells with 500 µM SNP should reduce their aerotaxis, which was not the case. Instead, SNP impairs general motility by reducing the average cell speed, this effect being more pronounced in hypoxic conditions. As SNP reduces more cell motility in hypoxic condition and flavohemoglobins expression is induced at low oxygen, it suggests that those enzymes main function is to protect cells from toxic effects of NO generated upon hypoxia. The weak aerotactic response of the fhbB - cells cannot be fully explained by the motility reduction caused by acute exposure to NO in hypoxic condition. It seems that the strains present other defects, maybe due to adaptation to chronic exposure to self-generated NO. In most microorganisms, low level NO is produced as part of nitrogen metabolism, and flavohemoglobins regulate NO homeostasis. It is thus likely that inactivation of fhbB results into elevated levels of NO even during normal growth that would cause the mutants’ phenotypes. The observation that fhbB - cells were bigger than the wild type without being polynucleated and more sensitive to toxicity when exposed to high glucose concentration suggests a broad metabolic unbalance. Differences between short-term and long-term exposure to NO have been observed when incubating Dictysotelium with SNP over prolonged period. Wild type cells’ growth is little affected during the first 20 h but protein kinase A becomes transiently activated after 12 h of SNP treatment through the yakA pathway as part of a stress response that then leads to reduced cell growth. The protein kinase, yakA, regulates cell division, actin filament polymerization, transition from growth to development and the arrest of growth in response to stresses, including exposure to NO. The fhbB - cells might thus present a low-level activation of the yakA pathway in response to a constant stress due to elevated exposure to RNS, leading to abnormal cell size and motility. Thus, the fhbB - mutant appears to be affected in aspects unrelated to the rapid adaptation to hypoxia that characterize aerotaxis. As such, the data obtained with SNP treatment appear more significant than the one with the fhbB - strain and lead to the conclusion that aerotaxis is not directly controlled by NO signaling. Based on our experimental data with various strains and conditions, we used a model allowing us to explain many outcomes of ring formation and propagation in our confined spot assay. Cells first need to generate an oxygen gradient through respiration. Changes in cell number or respiration capability will mostly affect the timing to generate a sufficiently steep gradient for cells to detect. But eventually, aerotactic motility occurs and a ring is formed as shown with the various mitochondrial inhibitors that reduced but not fully abolished oxygen consumption. Surprisingly, the inhibition of mitochondrial respiration did not block aerotactic ring formation in Dictyostelium contrary to epithelial or breast tumor cells. The inhibition of mitochondrial respiration by oligomycin or antimycin in human cell lines likely prevents the formation of the steep oxygen gradient needed to direct the outward cell motility. Like many protists, Dictyostelium possesses an alternate oxidase that consumes oxygen and is not blocked by cyanides, explaining how the cells retain a significant respiration capability even in presence of antimycin or oligomycin. With Dictyostelium, our results allow to distinguish the role of mitochondria as a sink for oxygen to generate a gradient from its putative functions as oxygen sensor. As mitochondria are not necessary for aerotaxis, it excludes their direct role as oxygen sensors for Dictyostelium. Mikaelian et al. have also shown that mitochondria are dispensable for oxygen sensing in human cancer cells by showing that cells with impaired mitochondria will follow the gradient generated by normal one. Since the main ATP biosynthesis pathway is dispensable, a control of aerotaxis through a secondary signal based on energy depletion, such as ADP/ATP ratio is also unlikely. Antimycin not only blocks ATP synthesis but also induces ROS production in Dictyostelium ’s mitochondria, yet aerotaxis remained normal. Aerotaxis was also unaffected upon treatment with H 2 O 2 or Tiron, a ROS scavenger. Taken together, these data also exclude a role for ROS as secondary signal for aerotaxis in Dictyostelium. Controversially, Biondo et al. suggested that Dictyostelium cells utilized intracellular H 2 O 2 as an activator or an enhancer of aerotactic migration, similar to mammalian cells. They performed a confined spot assay with a catalase-deficient strain and reported that its aerotactic ring formation was much quicker than the wild type. However, our experiments and modeling of aerotactic ring shows that the timing of its formation is absolutely not dependent upon the strength of aerotaxis, but is determined by the number of cells in the micro-colony and their oxygen consumption. The presented data illustrate well these concepts: the mitochondrial inhibitors that reduce oxygen consumption without influencing aerotaxis do delay the timing of the ring formation, while the fhbB - mutant with reduced aerotaxis but normal respiration form a ring at the same time than the wild type. In mammalian cells, there are clear evidence that aerotactic motility requires the modification of the receptor tyrosine kinase EGFR by oxidative stress. As the Dictyostelium genome is devoid of any receptor tyrosine kinase, it is not surprising that this specific mechanism is not conserved. As some of the strains tested in Mikaelian et al. do not express EGFR, alternate oxygen sensors might also exist in human. While the reported results did not allow to identify the molecular mechanism behind Dictyostelium aerotaxis, we were able to exclude the most expected contributors: mitochondria or secondary signals linked to ROS and RNS. 