 A new Dictyostelium discoideum cyclase gene was identified that encodes a protein with 35% similarity to mammalian soluble adenylyl cyclase. Gene disruption of sGC has no effect on adenylyl cyclase activity and results in a >10-fold reduction in guanylyl cyclase activity. The scg– null mutants show reduced chemotactic sensitivity and aggregate poorly under stringent conditions. With Mn 2+ /GTP as substrate, most of the sGC activity is soluble, but with the more physiological Mg 2+ /GTP the activity is de tected in membranes and stimulated by GTPγS. Unexpectedly, orthologues of sGC and sAC are present in bacteria and vertebrates, but absent from Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, Arabidopsis thaliana and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Keywords: cGMP/chemotaxis/ Dictyostelium /evolution/guanylyl cyclase Introduction cAMP and cGMP are important signalling molecules in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In prokaryotes, cAMP regulates gene expression. cGMP is only found in cyanobacteria in relatively high amounts, but its function as an intracellular signalling molecule is not well understood. In eukaryotes, cAMP and cGMP regulate enzyme activities, channel activities and gene expression, mainly via cAMP- and cGMP-dependent protein kinases. A large and complex family of adenylyl cyclases and guanylyl cyclases is responsible for the synthesis of cAMP and cGMP. At present, five phylogenetically separated classes have been recognized, which are the ACs in enterobacteria, the calmodulin-dependent toxin ACs, the universal group of ACs and GCs and two recently recognized genetically unrelated ACs in hyperthermophilic archeabacteria and ruminal anaerobic bacteria. All five classes of enzymes are present in bacteria, while eukaryotes seem to contain only class III enzymes, which are the subject of this study. The general topology of class III enzymes is deduced from the three-dimensional structure of mammalian AC. Two cyclase domains are associated in an antiparallel manner. This dimer can be formed by two identical cyclase domains or two different domains. In the latter case, these domains can derive from one polypeptide or from two different polypeptides. Additional domains may control the localization and regulation of the cyclases. In higher eukaryotes, four subgroups are recognized : the 12-transmembrane ACs, which are composed of two different cyclase domains and are regulated by G-proteins; the single-transmembrane GCs, which contain one cyclase domain and dimerize to form a homodimer; these enzymes are stimulated by extracellular peptides, which bind to a receptor domain; the nitric oxide-sensitive soluble GC, which is a heterodimer of two different proteins with one cyclase domain each; and the recently discovered mammalian soluble adenylyl cyclase, which harbours two cyclase domains and shares the highest degree of identity with bacterial ACs. sAC is regulated by bicarbonate and involved in sperm maturation. In the social amoeba Dictyostelium, cGMP is implicated as a second messenger for chemotaxis, while cAMP can act as both first and second messenger. As first messenger, cAMP induces chemotaxis, cAMP signal relay and gene expression. As second messenger, it controls terminal spore and stalk cell differentiation and spore germination. Three AC genes were identified in Dictyostelium. ACA is similar to mammalian 12-transmembrane ACs and controls cAMP signalling during cell aggregation. ACG has the topology of the single transmembrane cyclases, with one cyclase domain ; the enzyme produces cAMP, which regulates spore germination. A third adenylyl cyclase activity is detectable mainly in the multicellular stage. This activity is encoded by the acrA gene, which is most similar to cyanobacterial ACs and controls spore maturation. Not all known effects of cAMP can as yet be attributed to the known ACs, which may suggest the presence of a fourth AC gene. Recently, we identified a Dictyostelium GC gene, gcaA, which encodes a protein with the topology of 12-transmembrane ACs. The two catalytic domains of GCA appear to be interchanged; thus, the second cyclase domain of mammalian AC, which provides most catalytic interactions with ATP, is similar to the first domain of GCA, interacting with GTP. GC enzymes with this topology have also been found in Paramecium and Plasmodium but, unlike GCA, these proteins have a P-type ATPase at their N-terminus. Cells with an inactivated gcaA gene still possess substantial GC activity, indicating the presence of a second GC in Dictyostelium. During the last 3 years, a large portion of the Dictyostelium genome has been sequenced; presently, the probability of finding an open reading frame of 300 amino acids is ∼80–90%. Using this database, we recognized gene fragments whose deduced amino acid sequence predicts two catalytic domains and a more C-terminal sequence that are similar to mammalian sAC. The complete amino acid sequence was deduced from genomic and cDNA sequence data. We have inactivated the gene and demonstrate that it encodes a guanylyl cyclase. Interestingly, databases of several completed genomes suggest that orthologues of Dictyostelium sGC are present in bacteria and mammals, but not in Drosophila, Caenorhabditis elegans, Arabidopsis and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Results Identification of sGC To identify novel AC or GC candidates, the Dictyostelium genome and cDNA databases were screened with AC and GC consensus sequences. This revealed a novel gene that is positioned on the 18 kb contig CHR2.0.71028. As discussed below, the putative protein shares a significant degree of identity with mammalian sAC, and the Dictyostelium gene was found to encode an sGC; we therefore denote the gene as sgcA and the protein as DdsGC. The sequence of contig CHR2.0.71028 allows the unambiguous identification of the 3′ end of the sgcA gene, since a distinct ORF that encodes a PIWI transcription factor is positioned downstream of sgcA. The start of sgcA is more difficult to identify, because the deduced amino acid sequence does not reveal an obvious translational start methionine. Mammalian sAC contains a short N-terminal sequence that is followed by two cyclase domains and a long C-terminal sequence. In DdsGC, an in-frame methionine is present ∼140 amino acids before the first catalytic domain, but this methionine is preceded in-frame by 193 amino acids without other in-frame methionines. An upstream ORF contains a perfect start methionine, but potential splice sites would predict an intron of >1 kb, which is extremely long for Dictyostelium. To identify the ORF, we isolated 16 cDNAs and sequenced the three with the largest inserts. This revealed that sgcA consists of at least three introns and four exons. The first exon contains a start methionine that conforms well to the Dictyostelium Kozak sequence; the exon encodes 649 amino acids. The first intron is short and AT rich, which is common for Dictyostelium. The second exon is exceptionally short, encoding only 23 amino acids. This exon was observed in all cDNA clones that have the appropriate size; furthermore, its presence is essential as it preserves the reading frame. The second intron is very long and unusually GC rich for a Dictyostelium intron. The remaining third and fourth exon encode 373 and 1796 amino acids and are separated by a normal 166 bp intron. The total ORF is 8532 bp, and predicts a 2843 amino acid protein with a mol. wt of 315 kDa and a pI of 8.5. Fig. 1. Comparison of Dictyostelium DdsGC with related sequences. Schematic of the putative domains in DdsGC, mammalian HssAC, bacterial MlsAC and bacterial AsKin, a complex kinase from Anabaena sp. and poly ], that is found in many Dictyostelium proteins. It also contains 12 repeats of a sequence PS, without indication for a putative function. Subsequent to this N-terminal segment, DdsGC contains two cyclase domains that share the highest homology with mammalian sAC and bacterial cyclases. The cyclase domains of DdsGC are followed by a long 1433 amino acid C-terminal segment that shares a significant degree of amino acid identity with the C-terminal segment of mammalian sAC. From the many bacterial type III cyclases, two genes were identified in Mycobacterium laepra and Sinorhizobium meliloti that predict C-terminal segments that are similar to the first half of the C-terminal segment of sGC. Furthermore, the complete C-terminal segment of sGC shares significant identity with the central region of a bacterial protein that also harbours a serine/threonine kinase, a histidine kinase and a GAF domain. We denote this segment sCKH, the s oluble c yclase k inase h omology region. The only recognizable functional feature of this sCKH region is an AAA-domain with a P-loop motif that is common to many ATP- and GTP-binding proteins. The cyclase catalytic domains The crystal structure of mammalian AC suggests that AC and GC enzymes are active as a dimer with potentially two ATP- or GTP-binding pockets, α and β, at the dimer interface. Enzymes with one cyclase domain, such as the mammalian GCE or the bacterial MlsAC, form a homodimer and thus will have two identical catalytic centres. In the crystal structure of the ACV C1–ACII C2 dimer, ATP is bound in the β-site; the corresponding region of the α-site contains many mutations that would prevent high affinity binding and conversion of ATP or GTP. Although both domains contribute to the binding of the substrate in the β-site, the amino acids involved in the cyclization reaction are located in the C2 domain. Also in sGC, these amino acids are present only in the C2 domain, indicating that in sGC the substrate is also bound in the β-site. In contrast, GTP appears to be bound and hydrolysed in the α-site of the other Dictyostelium guanylyl cyclase GCA. In mammalian cyclases, the purine moiety of ATP or GTP is recognized specifically by only a few amino acids. The most pronounced amino acid in AC is a lysine from the domain that also provides the amino acids for catalysis ; in GC, this amino acid is a glutamate. In the active binding pocket of sGC, the corresponding amino acid is aspartate D1332, suggesting that DdsGC is more likely to encode a GC than an AC. Phylogeny of the catalytic domains Figure 2 presents a phylogenetic analysis of the cyclase domains of DdsGC, vertebrate sAC, bacterial sAC, mammalian classical AC and GC, and several bacterial AC sequences. The analysis includes a second human soluble adenylyl cyclase that was found in human genome databases; its amino acid sequence could only be partially deduced. [The deduced amino acid sequence of the human contigs } AL133404 and } AL031778 shows a high degree of identity with sAC, yeast. Two transcripts can be detected of ∼8.2 ± 0.5 and 10.3 ± 0.5 kb, respectively. The larger transcript is ∼3-fold less abundant than the smaller transcript, especially at later stages of development. The presence of two transcripts may indicate different transcription start sites and/or alternative splicing; the isolated cDNA clones do not provide evidence for alternative splicing in the coding region of sGC. Expression of DdsGC is relatively low during growth, increases ∼2.5-fold during aggregation and reaches a maximum at 3–6 h. Expression declines ∼3-fold during the slug stage to increase slightly during culmination. The expression of the other GC in Dictyostelium, DdGCA, shows approximately the opposite profile, with relatively high expression during growth and the multicellular stage and low expression during aggregation. Fig. 3. Developmental expression of DdsGC. Wild-type AX3 cells were allowed to develop for the indicated time periods. Total RNA was isolated, size-separated and probed with the catalytic domains of sGC. The arrows indicate the size of the two transcripts.... Inactivation of the sgcA gene The sgcA gene was inactivated by homologous recombination to establish its function. This strategy was preferred over expression of the protein due to the large size of sGC with its long and relatively unknown N- and C-terminal segments; expression of the two His-tagged cyclase domains in Dictyostelium or Escherichia coli did not result in a detectable increase of AC or GC activity in crude Dictyostelium lysates or Ni + -purified bacterial lysates. Two independent sgc– knock-out cell lines were obtained with different deletions, yielding identical results. Southern blot analysis demonstrated the disruption of the sgcA gene, resulting in the absence of both mRNA species for sGC. Fig. 4. Genetic and functional characterization of a DdsGC gene disruptant. Schematic of gene disruption. A second independent sgc– cell lines was obtained with a deletion of the first cyclase domain. Northern blot of wild-type... To establish the biochemical identity of sGC, we first tested the effects of sgcA gene disruption on two predominant AC- and GC-mediated responses in aggregating cells: cAMP relay and the cAMP-induced cGMP response. Figure 4 C shows that cAMP accumulation, which peaks at 2 min, was unaffected in sgc– cells. In contrast, cGMP accumulation, which occurs within 10 s of cAMP stimulation, was 90% reduced in the sgc– cell line. sAC, the mammalian orthologue of sGC, is activated by Mn 2+ and is present mainly in the cytosol. We measured both AC and GC activities in the soluble and particulate fractions of wild-type and sgc– cells. Figure 5 A shows that almost all Mn 2+ -dependent AC activity was present in the particulate fraction and was equally high in wild-type and sgc– cells. In contrast, Mn 2+ -dependent GC activity was present predominantly in the soluble fraction and was >95% reduced in sgc– cells. These data demonstrate that DdsGC encodes a GC, that is mainly cytosolic in the presence of Mn 2+ and has no significant AC activity. Fig. 5. Adenylyl and guanylyl cyclase activity in sgc– cells. AX2 and sgc– cells were lysed and separated into a 16 000 g particulate fraction and a 180 000 g soluble fraction... Phenotype of sgc-null cells The sgc– mutant aggregated and developed normally into fruiting bodies on standard culture plates. Under standard conditions, the cells are closely packed, and diminished chemotactic sensitivity may not affect cell agglomeration too severely. To test the cells’ ability to aggregate under more stringent conditions, we plated them at decreasing cell densities, submerged in buffer. Figure 6 A shows that wild-type cells still aggregated efficiently at 3 × 10 4 cells/cm 2, whereas sgc– cells did not aggregate at all. Aggregation of sgc– cells started at 10 6 cells/cm 2 but was delayed by several hours compared with wild-type cells. The chemotactic response of sgc- null and control cells to cAMP was measured. Wild-type cells responded to 10 –8 and 10 –7 M cAMP, which was insufficient for sgc– cells. The sgc– cells started to show a clear chemotactic response to 10 –6 M cAMP, indicating that chemotaxis in sgc– required at least 10- to 20-fold higher cAMP concentrations than in wild-type cells. Fig. 6. Phenotype of the DdsGC gene disruptant. Cell aggregation of wild-type AX2 and sgc– cells in phosphate buffer at two cell densities, 10 6 and 3 × 10 4 cells/cm 2. Chemotaxis... Guanylyl cyclase activity in sgc– cells Earlier work showed that the cGMP response requires a heterotrimeric G-protein and that GC activity in cell lysates can be activated by guanosine 5′- O -. We measured GC activity in lysates of vegetative and 7 h starved cells in the presence and absence of GTPγS. Figure 7 A shows that vegetative wild-type cells have approximately equal GC activity when measured in the presence of 2 mM Mg 2+ or Mn 2+. The Mg 2+ -dependent GC activity was stimulated 4-fold by GTPγS. In vegetative sgc– cells, the Mg 2+ /GTPγS-stimulated activity was reduced by ∼50% if compared with the activity from wild-type cells; interestingly, all Mn 2+ -dependent GC activity in the sgc– cells is virtually absent. In 7 h starved wild-type cells, GTPγS induced a 3-fold stimulation of basal Mg 2+ -dependent GC activity. Maximal GC activity was detected in the presence of Mn 2+, which was 6-fold higher than in the presence of Mg 2+. In starved sgc– cells, the GTPγS-stimulated activity is 4-fold lower than in wild-type cells, while Mn 2+ -dependent activity was absent. These data illustrate the presence of two GC species: an activity, mainly in vegetative cells, that is stimulated by GTPγS, but is not active with Mn 2+ ; and an activity in 7 h starved cells that is activated by both GTPγS and Mn 2+. Since the latter activity is lost in sgc– cells, it is most likely to be sGC. The activity in vegetative cells is most likely to be GCA, which is expressed at high levels during growth and decreases during starvation. The residual GCA expression during cell aggregation may also explain the small 10% cGMP response in sgc– cells. Fig. 7. Guanylyl cyclase in sgc– cells. Wild-type AX2 and sgc– mutant cells were starved for 0 or 7 h. Cells were lysed in the presence or absence of 30 µM GTPγS. The... Characterization of sGC activity Mammalian cells expressing sAC contain a high background of other ACs, which hinders studies on sAC regulation. Dictyostelium offers the unique possibility to investigate the biochemical properties of this class of soluble enzymes. The experiments were performed in gca– cells to ascertain that only sGC was measured. Figure 8 A reveals that sGC is more active with Mn 2+ than with Mg 2+ as divalent cation. Figure 8 B shows that the Mn 2+ -dependent GC activity could not be stimulated by GTPγS in either the soluble or particulate fraction. A small Mg 2+ -dependent activity is present in the particulate fraction, which is stimulated 5-fold by GTPγS. Fig. 8. Characterization of DdsGC enzyme activity in gca– cells. Cells were lysed in the presence of 100 µM GTPγS, and sGC activity was measured in the lysate with 0.5 mM GTP and the indicated concentrations... Submicromolar Ca 2+ concentrations inhibit Dictyo stelium GC activity, as is the case for GC in the vertebrate eye. Figure 8 C shows that 1 µM Ca 2+ has no effect on Mn 2+ -dependent sGC activity, whereas it induces >90% inhibition of Mg 2+ /GTPγS-stimulated sGC activity. Discussion The Dictyostelium genome sequencing project has provided a wealth of information on genes that potentially are involved in signal transduction. We identified the Dictyostelium homologue of mammalian sAC. Sequence alignment with both AC and GC domains and functional analysis of the Dictyostelium gene showed that it encodes a guanylyl cyclase. Similarly to mammalian sAC, sGC shows high activity in the soluble cell fraction with Mn 2+ /GTP as a substrate. Lower activity can be detected in the particulate fraction. sGC does not contain hydrophobic segments that could result in membrane localization, suggesting that it may form a complex with a membrane-bound protein. In Dictyostelium, Mn 2+ is most probably not the physiological bivalent cation of sGC, because the intracellular concentration of Mn 2+ is too low to support activity, while at the prevailing Mg 2+ concentration significant activity is observed. The same conclusion was drawn for sAC in mammalian cells. In the presence of Mg 2+, sGC activity was detected mainly in the particulate fraction. Regulation of ACs and GCs by their natural effectors such as G-proteins or Ca 2+ generally is detectable only with Mg 2+, while Mn 2+ uncovers all intrinsic activity. In agreement with this general observation, Mg 2+ -dependent sGC activity is stimulated by GTPγS and inhibited by Ca 2+ ions, whereas these regulators do not affect Mn 2+ -dependent sGC activity. The in vitro activation of membrane-associated sGC by GTPγS could represent the activation mechanism in living cells. The large pool of inactive sGC allows for two additional activation mechanisms: A G-protein-mediated signal may modify the soluble enzyme such that soluble sGC becomes Mg 2+ sensitive. Alternatively, a G-protein-mediated signal may result in the translocation of soluble sGC to the membrane, which could result in an Mg 2+ -sensitive sGC activity. Inactivation of the sgcA gene demonstrates that the cAMP-induced cGMP response is mediated predominantly by sGC. The sgc– cells show ∼20-fold reduced chemotactic sensitivity towards cAMP and a reduced capacity to aggregate under stringent conditions, which is consistent with the proposed role of cGMP during chemotaxis and cell aggregation. The small ∼10% residual cGMP response in sgc– cells to cAMP is most probably derived from GCA at the aggregation stage. Northern blot analysis reveals that the expression of the sGC gene and of the GCA gene complement each other, with high expression of GCA during growth and late development and highest expression of sGC during aggregation. These expression patterns are also reflected by the enzyme activities. sGC shows an ∼4-fold higher activity during aggregation than during growth, while GCA is 5-fold more active during growth than during aggregation. The two GCs in Dictyostelium have a very different topology suggesting different modes of regulation. GCA is a 12-transmembrane enzyme, similar to G-protein-coupled ACs, whereas sGC is homologous to bicarbonate-stimulated sAC. Nevertheless, both GCA and sGC are activated in membranes by GTPγS and inhibited by Ca 2+ ions. Detailed biochemical characterization and regulation of GCA and sGC can be performed in sgc– and gca– cells, respectively. This may also uncover the mechanism by which GCA is Mn 2+ insensitive and sGC is associated with the membrane. The identification of the two GCs in Dictyostelium, GCA and sGC, which are both homologous to ACs, uncovers unexpected evolutionary traits. From a biochemical point of view, this may not be very surprising, considering the relative ease with which an AC can be converted by site-directed mutagenesis into a GC. No close phylogenetic relationship can be found with mammalian GC, suggesting that GCA and sGC developed independently into a GC. Phylogenetic analysis of hundreds of ACs and GCs suggests that mammalian GC, GCA and sGC developed independently. This analysis also indicates that an AC to GC transition became fixed only a few times during evolution: at the formation of the vertebrate GCs; at the formation of GCA-like GCs in lower eukaryotes such as Dictyostelium, Paramecium and Plasmodium ; and at the formation of sGC in Dictyo stelium. Furthermore, it is surprising that Dictyostelium does not have a member of the metazoan GCs, suggesting that in Dictyostelium cGMP synthesis has an independent origin. This might mean that other components of the cGMP pathway, such as phosphodiesterases and cGMP targets, have unique characteristics as well, which may explain the difficulties in identifying these proteins in Dictyostelium. It is quite fascinating that orthologues of sGC can be detected in mammals and bacteria, but are absent from the completed genome sequences of the invertebrates C.elegans and Drosophila, the yeast S.cerevisiae and the flowering plant Arabidopsis. The eukaryote phylogeny strongly supports an animal/fungi supergroup, with the mycetozoa, such as Dictyostelium, as the immediate sister group. It seems unlikely that all lower animals and fungi have lost the gene, but even more unlikely that in the absence of gene loss, sGC and sAC represent two sequential cases of lateral transfer of an originally bacterial gene. It will be of great interest to trace the evolutionary roots of these enzymes when more complete genome sequences of lower unicellular eukaryotes and lower animals become available. Materials and methods Strain and culture conditions AX3, AX2, gca -null and sgc- null cells were grown in HG5 medium, which was supplemented with 10 µg/ml blasticidin S for gca– and sgc– cells. Cells were starved for up to 5 h by shaking in 10 mM phosphate buffer pH 6.5 at a density of 10 7 cells/ml. For longer starvation periods, cells were deposited on non-nutrient agar plates and incubated at 22°C. To study aggregation under submerged conditions, cells were incubated at 22°C in 4 cm Petri dishes with 1 ml of PB at densities ranging from 3 × 10 3 to 3 × 10 6 cells/cm 2 and photographed at 2 h intervals under dark field illumination. Chemotaxis toward cAMP was measured with the small population assay. Briefly, small populations were deposited on hydrophobic agar. After ∼5 h, just before aggregation started, small droplets containing different cAMP concentrations were deposited close to the amoebal populations. The distribution of cells within the small population was observed and scored positive if at least twice as many cells were pressed against the edge of the droplet close to the cAMP concentration if compared with the opposite edge. Bioinformatics The Dictyostelium cDNA and genomic databases were screened for putative ACs and GCs with the catalytic domains of bacterial and eukaryotic cyclases. During the early phase of the sequencing project, three putative cyclase domains were recognized. Later, it appeared that one gene with a single cyclase domain encoded the adenylyl cyclase ACB. The other two cyclase domains were present in one large contig, the complete ORF of sGC was obtained; this sequence is deposited in DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank. BLAST, SMART and Pfam programs were used to analyse the domain structure of sGC and its sequence similarity to other proteins. A screen of the Dictyostelium database on May 30, 2001 with sequences from all five classes of cyclases did not reveal additional candidate genes for ACs or GCs. cDNA screens A 1434 bp DNA fragment encoding part of the catalytic domains of sGC was isolated by RT–PCR and subcloned, yielding pGeasycsCyc. A cDNA library, kindly provided by Dr R.Gomer, was screened with a 571 bp fragment. After rescuing 16 λZAP clones as plasmids, three clones with the largest inserts were sequenced. Two clones were long enough to identify all four exons and three introns. In Dictyostelium, exons are large, and introns, when present, are small, with an average size of 100–200 bp. One exon of sGC is unusually small while one intron is exceptionally large and contains many potential splice sites, which prevented gene finder programs from constructing the ORF. Gene inactivation Two independent s gc knock-out cell lines were obtained. For construct 1, the bsr selection cassette from pUCBsrΔ Bam HI was cloned into the Bgl II– Cla I sites of pGeasycsCyc. A linear fragment with the bsr cassette and sGC flanking sequence was obtained by two rounds of PCR. After homologous recombination, this lead to a disruption of the first cyclase domain between amino acids 1192 and 1224. For construct 2, two DNA fragments of sGC comprising amino acids 705–1044 and 1421–1686 were amplified by PCR using oligonucleotides that yielded a 5′ Bgl I site and a 3′ Bam HI site on the first fragment and 5′ Bam HI and 3′ Eco RI site on the second fragment. These fragments were cloned in tandem into the Bam HI and Bam HI– Eco RI sites of pUCBsrΔ Bam HI. The construct was linearized with Bam HI, yielding the plasmid flanked by 5′ and 3′ sGC fragments. Homologous recombination with this construct leads to deletion of amino acids 1045–1421, which comprises both catalytic domains. Dictyostelium AX3 and AX2 were transformed by electroporation with 5 µg of DNA constructs 1 and 2, respectively. Blasticidin-resistant clones were screened for homologous recombination by PCR and Southern blot analysis; 80% of the AX3 clones carried a gene disruption and 90% of the AX2 clones carried sgc 2 –. Guanylyl and adenylyl cyclase assays AX3, AX2, gca- null and sgc- null cells were harvested and starved for 7 h in PB. To measure AC and GC activity, cells were washed and resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer and lysed through nucleopore filters in the absence or presence of 100 µM guanosine 5′- O -. For separation into soluble and particulate fractions, 0.5 ml aliquots of filter lysates were centrifuged for 5 min at 16 000 g and the pellets was resuspended in 0.5 ml of lysis buffer. In some experiments, the supernatant was cleared further by centrifugation for 5 min at 180 000 g. Lysates and fractions were incubated at 22°C with 0.5 mM ATP or GTP for AC and GC activity, respectively, in the presence of 10 mM dithiothreitol, 0.2 mM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine and 2 mM Mn 2+ or Mg 2+ in lysis buffer. Reactions were terminated by the addition of an equal volume of 3.5% perchloric acid, and cAMP or cGMP levels were measured by isotope dilution assays. For measuring cGMP responses to cAMP, cells were starved for 5 h, washed and resuspended in PB at 10 8 cells/ml. Cells were stimulated with 0.1 µM cAMP, reactions were terminated with perchloric acid, and cGMP levels were measured. For measuring the cAMP response, cells were stimulated with 10 µM 2′-deoxy-cAMP and 5 mM DTT, reactions were terminated with perchloric acid, and cAMP levels were measured. Supplementary data Supplementary data for this paper are available at The EMBO Journal Online. Acknowledgements We thank Marten Postma for assistance with the figures, and Helena Snippe for isolation of cDNA clones that allowed the assignment of the ORF. This research was supported by the Netherlands Organization of Scientific Research, and by Wellcome Trust University Award Grant 057137. Article information EMBO J. 2001 Aug 15; 20: 4341–4348. doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.16.4341 PMCID: PMC125260 PMID: 11500361 Jeroen Roelofs, Marcel Meima, 1 Pauline Schaap, 1, 2 and Peter J.M. Van Haastert 2 Marcel Meima GBB, Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands and 1 Department of Biochemistry, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK 2 Corresponding authors e-mail P.J.M.van.Haastert@chem.rug.nl or p.schaap@dundee.ac.uk J.Roelofs and M.Meima contributed equally to this work Find articles by Marcel Meima Pauline Schaap GBB, Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands and 1 Department of Biochemistry, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK 2 Corresponding authors e-mail P.J.M.van.Haastert@chem.rug.nl or p.schaap@dundee.ac.uk J.Roelofs and M.Meima contributed equally to this work Find articles by Pauline Schaap Peter J.M. Van Haastert GBB, Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands and 1 Department of Biochemistry, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK 2 Corresponding authors e-mail P.J.M.van.Haastert@chem.rug.nl or p.schaap@dundee.ac.uk J.Roelofs and M.Meima contributed equally to this work Find articles by Peter J.M. Van Haastert GBB, Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands and 1 Department of Biochemistry, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK 2 Corresponding authors e-mail P.J.M.van.Haastert@chem.rug.nl or p.schaap@dundee.ac.uk J.Roelofs and M.Meima contributed equally to this work Received 2001 Apr 19; Revised 2001 Jun 8; Accepted 2001 Jun 20. Copyright © 2001 European Molecular Biology Organization Articles from The EMBO Journal are provided here courtesy of The European Molecular Biology Organization 