 Rho GDP-dissociation inhibitors modulate the cycling of Rho GTPases between active GTP-bound and inactive GDP-bound states. We identified two RhoGDI homologues in Dictyostelium. GDI1 shares 51–58% similarity to RhoGDIs from diverse species. GDI2 is more divergent and lacks the N-terminal regulatory arm characteristic for RhoGDI proteins. Both are cytosolic proteins and do not relocalize upon reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. Using a two-hybrid approach, we identified Rac1a/1b/1c, RacB, RacC and RacE as interacting partners for GDI1. Cells lacking GDI1 are multinucleate, grow slowly and display a moderate pinocytosis defect, but rates of phagocytosis are unaffected. Mutant cells present prominent actin-rich protrusions, and large vacuoles that are continuous with the contractile vacuole system. The actin polymerization response upon stimulation with cAMP was reduced, but the motile behavior toward the chemoattractant was unaffected. Our results indicate that GDI1 plays a central role in the regulation of signal transduction cascades mediated by Rho GTPases. Keywords: actin/contractile vacuole /Dictyostelium /Rac/RhoGDI Introduction Small GTPases of the Rho family of Ras-related proteins are involved in the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in a variety of organisms, thus playing a central role in the regulation of a broad diversity of cellular processes. Small GTPases act as molecular switches, cycling between an active GTP-bound state and an inactive GDP-bound state. Activation enables Rho GTPases to interact with a multitude of effectors that relay upstream signals to cytoskeletal components, eliciting rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton. The GTP-binding/GTPase cycle is in turn modulated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors and GTPase activating proteins. GEFs catalyze the conversion to the GTP-bound state, and GAPs accelerate the intrinsic rate of hydrolysis of bound GTP to GDP. GDP-dissociation inhibitors constitute an additional regulatory element. Rho-specific GDIs apparently display three distinct biochemical activities. First, they are able to block the dissociation of GDP from the Rho GTPase, locking the protein in its inactive GDP-bound state and inhibiting activation by GEFs. Secondly, GDIs are capable of binding to the activated, GTP-bound state of Rho proteins, inhibiting their GTPase activity and preventing interaction with their effectors. Finally, GDIs stimulate the release of Rho GTPases from cellular membranes, significantly contributing to the subcellular localization of particular Rho GTPases. For this activity, the Rho GTPase needs to be post-translationally modified by the incorporation of an isoprenyl moiety at its C-terminus. Furthermore, GDIs participate in a number of interactions resulting in the formation of multiprotein complexes. Among the proteins that have been reported to interact with GDIs are a lipid kinase complex, members of the ezrin/radixin/moesin family, components of the NADPH oxidase complex and the multidomain protein Vav. RhoGDIs have been described in a variety of organisms, including Caenorhabditis elegans, yeast and plants. In mammals, three isoforms have been characterized, each displaying a specific pattern of tissue distribution and activity toward Rho proteins. RhoGDIα is ubiquitously expressed, whereas RhoGDIβ is present in hematopoietic cells. A third isoform, RhoGDIγ, is expressed predominantly in brain, lung, pancreas, intestine and testis, and, contrary to the cytosolic RhoGDIα and β, is associated with the cytoskeleton and membrane compartments. Mice deficient in LyGDI display only subtle alterations of the immunological functions, probably due to compensation by RhoGDI. Deficiency of RhoGDI in mice leads to renal failure and impaired fertility. However, the effects of RhoGDI deficiency, in particular on cytoskeleton-dependent processes, have not been investigated at the cellular level. Dictyostelium discoideum is a well-established model organism to investigate the components of the actin cytoskeleton and the elements involved in their complex regulatory pathways. Up to 15 genes coding for Rho-related proteins have been identified in this organism, but most of them are largely uncharacterized. Rac1a/1b/1c, RacF1/F2 and to a lesser extent RacB and the GTPase domain of RacA can be grouped in the Rac subfamily. None of the additional Dictyostelium Rho-related proteins belong to any of the well-defined subfamilies, like Rac, Cdc42 or Rho. To better understand the role of signal transduction cascades involving Rho GTPases in cytoskeleton-dependent processes, we have undertaken the functional characterization of a Dictyostelium Rho-GTPase dissociation inhibitor, GDI1. Additionally, we found a second RhoGDI homologue, GDI2, in the Dictyostelium genome, which is more divergent and lacks the N-terminal regulatory arm characteristic for GDI proteins. We have studied extensively the impact of the disruption of GDI1 on processes regulated by cytoskeleton rearrangements. Our results indicate that GDI1 plays a critical role in the regulation of signal transduction cascades mediated by a subset of Rho GTPases. Results Cloning and sequence analysis of Dictyostelium RhoGDI proteins We identified two genes encoding RhoGDI proteins in Dictyostelium. The rdiA gene encodes RhoGDI1, a protein of 197 amino acids. The rdiB gene encodes RhoGDI2, a protein of 152 amino acids. Southern blot analyses performed under high and low stringency conditions and extensive analysis of the Dictyostelium genomic sequence databases indicated that each gene is present as a single locus. Similarity of GDI1 to diverse RhoGDIs ranged between 51% and 58% and was evenly distributed along the entire peptide sequence. GDI2 aligned to the β-strand-rich C-terminal domain of RhoGDIs, with which it showed only 40–45% similarity. This domain has an immunoglobulin-like fold that contains a hydrophobic pocket for insertion of the isoprenyl moiety of the Rho GTPase. The non-polar residues that form this pocket are conserved both in GDI1 and GDI2, particularly the ‘hydrophobic triad’ constituted by L77, F102 and W194 of bovine RhoGDI. The pattern of expression of the rdiA and rdiB genes during development and the dynamics of subcellular distribution of both GDIs fused to green fluorescent protein are shown in Supplementary figures 1 and ​ and2 2. Fig. 1. Multiple alignment of Dictyostelium and representative RhoGDI proteins. Sequences were aligned with ClustalX and default parameters, and the output file was subsequently edited manually as described previously. Dashes indicate... Fig. 2. Interaction of RhoGDI proteins with Rho GTPases. Translocation of human Rho GTPases by Dictyostelium GDI1. Membrane fractions of insect cells infected with baculovirus encoding human Cdc42, Rac1 or RhoA were incubated with 40 µM... Interaction of GDI1 and GDI2 with Rho GTPases To identify potential binding partners for GDI1 and GDI2, we performed a two-hybrid analysis, using diverse GTPases as bait and GDIs as prey. All constructs we attempted for RacH displayed autoactivation of the β-galactosidase activity used as a reporter. RacH was therefore excluded from the analysis. GDI1 interacted with Rac1a/1b/1c, RacB, RacC and RacE, as well as with three human Rho GTPases, Rac1, Cdc42 and RhoA. There was no interaction with RasG, which has a prenylation motif, indicating that GDI1 specifically binds to GTPases of the Rho family. Positive interactions in the two-hybrid analysis were confirmed in translocation experiments. We analyzed solubilization of recombinant isoprenylated Rho GTPases from membranes of baculovirus-infected insect cells by bacterially expressed, purified GDI1. Glutathione S -transferase –GDI1 was capable of extracting human Cdc42, Rac1 and RhoA to an extent similar to or slightly lower than bovine GST–RhoGDI. His-tagged GDI1 was capable of extracting GST-tagged Dictyostelium Rac1a, RacB, RacC and RacE. Interaction with RacE was comparatively weak. It was surprising that no interaction with RacF1 and RacF2 was detected in the two-hybrid analysis, in spite of the fact that both are more closely related to Rac1a/1b/1c than RacB, RacC or RacE. However, the translocation experiment confirmed this result. In two-hybrid experiments, GDI2 did not interact with any of the Dictyostelium or human Rho GTPases assayed. This result was verified in translocation experiments with His-tagged GDI2. This could be explained by the absence of an N-terminal regulatory domain that harbors most of the residues involved in the interaction with the Rho GTPase. To further test the ability of GDI2 to interact with Rho proteins, we made a chimeric construct consisting of the N-terminal domain of GDI1 fused to GDI2. However, this construct failed to display interaction with any of the Rho GTPases tested in the two-hybrid assay or in translocation experiments, pointing at the core domain of GDI2 as responsible for lack of interaction. Generation and characterization of a GDI1 – mutant To gain insight into the function of GDI1 in vivo, we have generated a knockout cell line by homologous recombination. During micro scopic inspection of mutant cells growing on a substrate, we observed very large cells scattered all over the culture dishes. These cells were massively multi-nucleated, as revealed by staining with the nuclear marker 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, with as many as 40 nuclei in some cases. Approximately 10% of the mutant cells had four or more nuclei, com pared with 0.6% in AX2. The same extent of multi-nuclearity was also observed in cells growing in suspension. On average, GDI1 – cells were moderately, but significantly, larger than AX2 cells. The cytokinesis defect could account for this alteration of the cell size. Fig. 3. GDI1 – cells display cytokinesis and growth defects. DAPI staining and corresponding phase contrast images of wild-type and mutant cells grown on glass coverslips. Scale bar, 50 µm.... Under standard laboratory conditions, mutant cells grew with a slightly prolonged doubling time during log phase when compared with AX2, and reached saturation at a lower cell density than the wild-type strain. An impaired growth rate was expected due to the cytokinesis defect described above. To investigate the possible additional contribution of an alteration of the rate of pinocytosis, we quantitated this process and found that the rate of internalization of the fluid phase marker FITC-dextran by GDI1 – cells was 74% of that of AX2 cells. However, GDI1 – cells were able to release the fluid phase marker at a rate not significantly different from that of AX2 cells. Finally, phagocytosis of TRITC-labeled yeast cells occurred at the same rate in AX2 and GDI1 – cells. Growth rates on nutrient agar plates with bacteria as a food source were also similar for both strains, indicating further that phagocytosis is not significantly impaired in the GDI1 – cells. Fig. 4. Endocytosis of wild-type and GDI1 – cells. Pinocytosis of FITC-dextran. Cells were resuspended in fresh axenic medium at 5 × 10 6 cells/ml in the presence of 2 mg/ml FITC-dextran. Fluorescence... Changes in actin distribution in GDI1 – cells Microscopic inspection of cells growing in axenic medium in Petri dishes revealed the presence of conspicuous crown-like structures on the dorsal and lateral surfaces of GDI1 – cells. To correlate this observation with changes in the actin distribution, we generated maximum projection images from confocal sections through fixed cells stained with TRITC-phalloidin, a procedure that renders images with a pseudo-three dimensional appearance. AX2 cells display a smooth cortical actin staining, with enrichment at filopods and membrane protrusions. Besides this smooth cortical staining, intensely labeled structures were apparent in GDI1 – cells. They had most frequently a flower-like appearance, sometimes a knob-like shape. These protrusions could be observed throughout the whole cell population, and in many cases, they covered the dorsal and lateral surfaces of the cell. Giant GDI1 – cells displayed a wide range of patterns of actin distribution. In many cases, they were rich in prominent lamellar actin-rich structures and were frequently accompanied by the accumulation of microspikes at one end of the cell. They also displayed very intensely stained rims and dots at regions where the cell contacts the substrate. Fig. 5. Morphology and F-actin distribution in GDI1 – cells. AX2 and GDI1 – vegetative cells growing on petri dishes in axenic medium. Phase–contrast images. GDI1 – cells are larger and present very... Treatment of GDI1 – cells with the actin-depolymerizing agent cytochalasin A resulted in cell rounding and accumulation of actin at the cell periphery, indicating that the protrusions characteristic of these cells are actin driven. Actin polymerization and chemotaxis of GDI1 – cells Aggregation competent cells move actively toward a cAMP gradient. Upon cAMP stimulation, fast and highly transient changes in the F-actin content take place that correlate with changes in cell behavior. Five seconds after stimulation of AX2 cells with cAMP, a 1.6-fold increase in the amount of F-actin was observed that decreased rapidly to basal levels after 20 s. A second, much lower peak followed immediately and lasted until ∼50 s. GDI1 – cells showed a lower increase in the first F-actin peak, whereas the second peak was not altered. Basal F-actin levels were found to be already decreased in the GDI – mutant relative to AX2, both in vegetative and in aggregation competent cells. Fig. 6. Actin polymerization and chemotactic response upon cAMP stimulation of aggregation competent cells. F-actin polymerization responses of GDI1 – and complementation mutants. The relative F-actin content was determined by TRITC-phalloidin... In a micropipette-based assay, AX2 and GDI – cells behaved similarly upon stimulation with 0.1 mM cAMP; cells became polarized, accumulated actin at the leading front, formed streams and migrated toward the tip of the micropipette. GDI – cells did not differ significantly from the wild type in motility parameters like speed, persistence and directionality. Therefore, the impairment in actin polymerization of GDI1 – cells in response to cAMP is not of such an extent as to preclude an apparently normal chemotactic response. In fact, under all conditions studied, the timing and morphology of the developmental process appeared essentially unaltered in the mutant strain. Table I. Analysis of cell motility of GDI1 – mutant GDI1 – cells have a defect in the contractile vacuole system Microscopic inspection of mutant cells growing on a substrate brought to our attention the presence of abundant vacuoles of large size in giant GDI1 – cells that conferred them a foamy appearance. Immuno fluorescence studies revealed no staining of this membrane compartment either for protein disulfide isomerase, an endoplasmic reticulum protein, or for vacuolin, a marker for vacuoles of a post-lysosomal compartment. Immuno staining for the A subunit of the V/H + -ATPase, a protein present on membranes of the contractile vacuole and the endo/lysosomal system of Dictyostelium, clearly demonstrated that large vacuoles are continuous with the contractile vacuole system, a tubular– vesicular network found preferentially in the cell periphery that is involved in osmoregulation and calcium homeostasis. Normal-sized mutant cells also displayed larger vacuoles as compared with the wild-type strain. To analyze the functional integrity of the contractile vacuole system, we examined the osmo-sensitivity of GDI1 – cells. Viability and behavior of the contractile vacuole system were unaltered in GDI1 – cells both under hypo-osmotic and hyper-osmotic conditions. Fig. 7. GDI1 is involved in the regulation of the contractile vacuole. Confocal immunofluorescence images of cells grown overnight on coverslips in axenic medium, fixed with picric acid/paraformaldehyde and immunostained with mAb 221-35-2, but not of GDI2, a protein presumed to be present only at late stages of development, reverted the cytokinesis, growth and actin polymerization defects, confirming that the phenotype observed in GDI1 – cells specifically arises from the absence of GDI1. RhoGDIs can be thought of as negative regulators of some Rho GTPases by maintaining them as inactive cytosolic forms that are unable to interact with their regulators and downstream effectors. To test this hypothesis and to investigate whether a particular phenotype of GDI1 – cells can be linked to a particular GDI1-interacting Rho GTPase, we expressed constitutively active forms of GFP-tagged RacC and RacE in Dictyostelium cells. Mutants expressing constitutively active Rac1 isoforms have been extensively studied and mutants expressing constitutively active RacB are being investigated elsewhere. Both RacC-L64 and RacE-V20 mutants behaved similarly. Suspension cultures reached saturation at low cell densities. This growth defect can be explained, at least in part, by a cytokinesis defect; there was a marked decrease in the proportion of mono-nucleated cells in favor of multi-nucleated cells. This defect became less apparent when cells were allowed to grow overnight on a substrate prior to fixation. Very large cells and unusual actin-rich structures were not apparent in any of the strains, but both mutants displayed a reduced F-actin polymerization response to cAMP with a lower increase in the first F-actin peak and the absence of the second peak. Our results with RacE-V20 mutant contrast with a previous report by Larochelle et al., who described normal growth and cytokinesis in cells overexpressing the same mutated form of RacE. We attribute these differences to the genetic background of the strains used or to different overexpression levels. Fig. 8. Expression of constitutively active Rho GTPases RacC-L64 and RacE-V20 fused to GFP partially phenocopy the defects of GDI – cells. Growth in shaking suspension. Curves are representative of two independent determinations, each... Discussion We have identified two RhoGDI proteins in Dictyostelium, GDI1 and GDI2, and have determined the repertoire of Rho proteins capable of interacting with GDI1: Rac1a/b/c, RacB, RacC and RacE. Absence of interaction with RacA and RacD can be easily attributed to the lack of an isoprenyl moiety. It is well established that this modification is required for the GTPase to interact with the GDI. Structural studies have allowed the determining of which residues of the Rho GTPase are involved in interactions with the GDI. These are Thr35, Tyr64, Arg66 and His103. Thr35 is involved in the coordination of the Mg 2+ ion, and is conserved in all GTPases. Whereas all three other residues are present in Rac1a/b/c, RacB, RacC and RacE, substitutions in one or more of these residues might explain lack of interaction of GDI1 with RacG, RacI and RacL, and suggest that RacH, which could not be tested in the two-hybrid analysis, presumably will also not interact. Lack of interaction with RacJ is easy to explain in view of the extensive divergence of the switch regions of this GTPase. More difficult to explain is why no interaction was observed with RacF1/F2, where the residues involved in interaction with GDI are perfectly conserved. It appears that a subtle substitution or post-translational modification elsewhere is responsible for the behavior of RacF1/F2. C-terminal palmitoylation, for example, is in part responsible for the lack of interaction of RhoB and TC10 with RhoGDI. However, in RacF1/F2, the most C-terminal cysteine residue, other than the prenylation signal, is part of the A5 helix and is probably not suitable for lipid modification. The only two Rac proteins of Dictyostelium that could be palmitoylated at their C-terminus are RacG and RacI, but in these cases, additional amino acid substitutions, as already mentioned, account for the lack of interaction with GDI1. The presence of a GDI-related protein in Dictyostelium, GDI2, is puzzling. Interestingly, ICAP-1, initially described as a protein interacting with the cytoplasmic domain of integrin, binds Rac1 and Cdc42 and displays GDI activity on Cdc42 at least, in spite of a lower degree of similarity than GDI2 with the C-terminal region of RhoGDI. Although sequence analysis indicates that GDI2 could adopt a structure capable of harboring an isoprenyl modification, we could not detect interaction of GDI2 with any of the Rho GTPases tested. This cannot be attributed solely to lack of an N-terminal regulatory arm, as demonstrated in experiments with a chimeric protein of GDI2 and the N-terminus of GDI1. A single amino acid change from Ile177 in human RhoGDI to an Asn residue at the corresponding position in LyGDI has been reported to account for the 20-fold lower affinity observed for the binding of Cdc42 to LyGDI. An analogous situation can be invoked to explain the behavior of GDI2. It cannot be excluded that isoprenylated GTPases other than Rho proteins, or even isoprenylated proteins not related to GTPases, could interact with GDI2. In support of this, it has been described that RhoGDI is capable of binding to isolated isoprenyl units, although with lower affinity than to the isoprenylated Rho GTPase. Rac-dependent signaling pathways regulated by GDI1 The changes in the morphology and the pattern of actin distribution of GDI1 – cells are in accordance with the pivotal role of Rho GTPases in the regulation of different components of the cytoskeleton. The lamellar structures and microspikes apparent on giant GDI1 – cells are similar to those observed in mammalian cells microinjected with dominant active Rac1 and Cdc42, respectively, and more importantly, these changes were reduced by microinjection of RhoGDI. Remarkably, in a HeLa-derived human cell line induction of the expression of Cdc42-V12 led to the formation of giant multi-nucleated cells and the accumulation of actin in cortical microspikes and in dot-like structures located at the ventral face of the cell. This is consistent with the current view of RhoGDI as a negative regulator of Rho-controlled signaling pathways. However, the prominent actin-rich structures characteristic of GDI1 – cells cannot be observed in Dictyostelium cells overexpressing constitutively active forms of any of the Rho GTPases able to interact with GDI1; cells overexpressing activated Rac1 isoforms display actin-enriched crown-shaped extensions, although not so prominent as in the GDI1 – mutants. Cells overexpressing RacB-V12 form actin-driven spherical protrusions, whereas no noticeable alterations were seen in cells overexpressing RacE-V20 or RacC-L64. Similarly, the cytokinesis defects elicited by overexpression of the same constitutively active GTPases differ from the defect observed in GDI1 – cells; overexpressing mutants do not become massively multi-nucleated and, at least for Rac1, RacC and RacE, the defect is apparent only when cells grow in suspension. Rho GTPases also participate in the regulation of endocytic traffic. Activated Rho and Rac stimulate pinocytosis in Xenopus oocytes and mammalian cells, respectively, and recruitment of activated Rac1 to the plasma membrane induces uptake of latex particles by a mammalian cell line. By contrast, the same activated GTPases inhibit receptor-mediated endocytosis and, more important, inclusion of RhoGDI prevents this inhibitory effect. In Dictyostelium, overexpression of constitutively active Rac1 isoforms results in reduced pinocytosis and phagocytosis rates, whereas overexpression of both constitutively active or dominant-negative RacB is accompanied by reduction of both processes, and RacC stimulates phagocytosis, but reduces pinocytosis. Although GDI interacts strongly with Rac1, RacB and RacC, phagocytosis is unaffected and pinocytosis is only moderately reduced in GDI1 – cells, indicating that GDI-regulated cycling of the Rho GTPase between cytosol and the plasma membrane is dispensable for a proper functioning of these processes. In addition, signaling pathways controlled by other Rho proteins not regulated by GDI1, like RacG, as well as other GTPases, like Ras and Ras-related proteins, may be sufficient to ensure functioning of endocytosis. GDI1 – cells showed low F-actin levels and a lower increase in F-actin polymerization, but a normal chemotactic response to cAMP. By contrast, overexpression of activated Rac1 or RacB resulted in an increased amount of F-actin and, in the case of Rac1, in impaired chemotactic response. Thus, GDI1 seems to act as a global regulator of the actin polymerization process through interaction with Rho GTPases, but is not required for the spatial or temporal regulation of the chemotactic response. Again, activation of Rho proteins not regulated by GDI1, like RacG, might warrant the establishment of cell polarity in response to the chemoattractant in the absence of GDI1. Rac signaling and the contractile vacuole function It is noteworthy that mice lacking RhoGDI present intense vacuolization in the basal side of epithelial cells of the proximal renal tubules and in the seminiferous epithelium, resulting in vacuolar degeneration of these epithelia. This suggests that RhoGDI might be regulating a compartment functionally equivalent to the contractile vacuole of protists. In support of this, a Dictyostelium protein involved in discharge of the contractile vacuole, drainin, is also present in C.elegans and humans. The contractile vacuole system is primarily regulated by small GTPases of the Rab family. Expression of dominant-negative forms of RabD or Rab11 results in morphological and functional alterations of the contractile vacuole system. Similar to what has been described in yeast, where both Rho and Rab GTPases are required for vacuole fusion, in Dictyostelium, both signaling pathways may also be interconnected. The GAP domain of DRG, which acts on Rac and Rab pathways, appears to be important for the regulation of the contractile vacuole system. It is conceivable that the absence of GDI1 could disturb the equilibrium between the Rac- and Rab-dependent pathways. The signaling pathways that converge in controlling actin assembly and disassembly and have an impact in diverse cellular processes are intricate and very poorly understood. The fact that the phenotypic alterations displayed by GDI1 – cells can be reproduced only partially by overexpression of the activated form of a particular GDI1-interacting Rho protein is consistent with a role of GDI1 as a global regulator of Rho-dependent signaling pathways by maintaining the equilibrium between GDI-regulated and non-GDI-regulated signaling pathways. Materials and methods Sequence analysis The amino acid sequence of human GDI1 was used as query for TBLASTN searches of the Dictyostelium EST database and JC2d59b01 were retrieved from the Dictyostelium genome sequencing project and fully sequenced. Sequence analysis was performed with the Wisconsin Package Version 9.0 of the Genetics Computer Group. Dictyostelium GDIs have received following DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank accession Nos: RhoGDI1, } AY044085 ; RhoGDI2, } AY044086. Protein expression and generation of monoclonal antibodies For expression of recombinant proteins pGEX-2T and pQE30 vectors were used. Recombinant GST-fusion and His-tagged proteins were purified from the soluble fraction of bacterial extracts on glutathione–agarose and Ni 2+ -NTA agarose, respectively. For mAb production, BALB/c mice were immunized with recombinant GDI1 as described. Spleen cells were fused with PAIB3AG8I myeloma cells 2 days after the last boost. Hybridomas were screened for their ability to recognize the antigen on ELISA plates and western blots. MAb K8-322–2 recognized GDI1. Strains, growth conditions and development of D.discoideum Wild-type strain AX2–214, a derivative of NC-4, is the parent strain of all mutants used in this study. To express GFP fusions of Dictyostelium GDIs or Rho GTPases, cDNA fragments were cloned in a frame at its 5′end to the coding region of the red shifted S65T mutant of Aequoria victoria GFP in the transformation vector pDEX-GFP. RacC-Q64L was a kind gift from Dr Menno Knetsch. RacE–G20V was generated from the wild-type cDNA by a PCR-based site directed mutagenesis procedure. Vectors were introduced into AX2 or GDI1 – cells by electroporation. After selection for growth in the presence of G418, GFP-expressing transformants were confirmed by visual inspection under a fluorescence microscope. Disruption of the rdiA gene is described in Supplementary figure 3. All strains were grown either in liquid nutrient medium at 21°C with shaking at 160 r.p.m. or on nutrient agar plates with Klebsiella aerogenes. For development, cells were grown to a density of 2–3 × 10 6 cells/ml, washed in 17 mM Soerensen phosphate buffer pH 6.0, and 0.5 × 10 8 cells were deposited on nitrocellulose filters and allowed to develop at 21°C as described previously. Morphology was also studied by allowing 0.5 × 10 8 cells to develop on 1.2% water agar or phosphate-buffered agar plates at 21°C. Western, Southern and northern blotting SDS–PAGE and western blotting were performed as described previously using an enhanced chemiluminescence detection system. GST was detected with a polyclonal antibody from Amersham-Pharmacia. Mammalian Rho proteins were detected using polyclonal antibodies sc-179, sc-87 and sc-217 from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. DNA and RNA isolation, transfer onto nylon membranes and hybridization with 32 P-labeled probes were performed as described previously. Conventional and fluorescence microscopy Cells were fixed either in cold methanol or at room temperature with picric acid/paraformaldehyde followed by 70% ethanol. GDI1 was detected using mAb K8-322-2, protein disulfide isomerase using mAb 221-135-1, vacuolin using mAb 221-1-1 and the A subunit of the V/H + -ATPase using mAb 221-35-2, followed by incubation with Cy3-labeled anti-mouse IgG. Actin was detected using either TRITC-labeled phalloidin or mAb Act-1, followed by incubation with Cy3-labeled anti-mouse IgG. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. For conventional transmission and fluorescence microscopy, an Olympus IX70 inverse microscope equipped with a 40× LCPlanFl 0.6 and a 10× UplanFl 0.3 objective was used. Images were captured either with a JAI CV-M10 CCD video camera or a SensiCam cooled CCD video camera. For the chemotaxis assay, cells starved for 6–8 h were transferred onto a glass coverslip with a plastic ring and were stimulated with a glass capillary micropipette filled with 0.1 M cAMP. Time-lapse image series were captured and stored on a computer hard drive at 30 s intervals. The DIAS software was used to trace individual cells along image series and to calculate cell motility parameters. Confocal images were taken with an inverted Leica TCS-SP laser-scanning microscope with a 63× PL Fluotar 1.32 oil immersion objective. For excitation, the 488 nm argon-ion laser line and the 568 nm krypton-ion laser line were used. Images were processed using the accompanying software. Two-hybrid assays DNA fragments encoding Dictyostelium GDI1, GDI2, Rho GTPases and RasG, and human Rho GTPases were cloned into the pACT2 or the pAS2-1 vector. For construction of a chimera composed of the N-terminal domain of GDI1 fused to GDI2, the N-terminal domain of GDI1 was amplified by PCR. Subsequently, both fragments were joined by conventional cloning methods in pBluescript and the chimeric DNA fragment was excised and cloned into the pACT vector. Two-hybrid assays were performed following the protocols of the Matchmaker two-hybrid system from Clontech. Solubilization of membrane-bound recombinant Rho GTPases with soluble GDI For the production of Dictyostelium GST-tagged Rho GTPases in insect cells, cDNAs were cloned into baculovirus transfer vectors pAcG2T or pAcG3X. Preparation of membranes containing recombinant GTPases from baculovirus-infected insect cells and purification of GST and GST–RhoGDI from Escherichia coli have been described previously. Membranes of insect cells expressing Rho GTPases were incubated with 40 µM GST, GST–RhoGDI, GST–GDI1, His-tagged GDI1, His-tagged GDI2 or the His-tagged chimeric protein composed of the N-terminus of GDI1 fused to GDI2, as described previously. Cell biology methods To investigate changes in the distribution of the V/H + -ATPase under osmotic stress conditions, coverslips with cells were incubated for 1 h either in distilled water or in Sörensen phosphate buffer with 0.4 M sorbitol. To investigate the effects of cytochalasin on actin distribution, coverslips with cells were incubated for 1 h in the presence of 20 µM cytochalasin A. Cells were then fixed and stained for actin or the vacuolar ATPase. Cell size, resistance against osmotic shock, phagocytosis, and fluid-phase endo and exocytosis were measured as described previously. Chemoattractant-induced F-actin formation in aggregation competent cells was quantitated as described previously. Identical procedure was used to determine the F-actin content in unstimulated cells, with the difference that fluorescence values were normalized to the protein content of the sample. Miscellaneous methods Standard molecular biology methods were as described by Sambrook and Russell. All PCR products were verified by sequencing, performed at the service laboratory of the Center for Molecular Medicine, Cologne, using an automated sequencer. Supplementary data Supplementary data are available at The EMBO Journal Online. Acknowledgements We are grateful to the Dictyostelium cDNA and genome sequencing projects for allowing access to DNA sequence information and to the Genome Sequencing Centre at Jena for providing genomic clones. We thank Markus Maniak for providing antibodies against VatA, PDI and vacuolin, Menno Knetsch for providing RacC-Q64L cDNA, David Knecht for kindly allowing access to unpublished results, Angelika A.Noegel for critical reading of the manuscript and Peter Gierschik for support and encouragement. This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and by the Köln Fortune program. Article information EMBO J. 2002 Sep 2; 21: 4539–4549. doi: 10.1093/emboj/cdf449 PMCID: PMC126189 PMID: 12198156 Francisco Rivero, 1 Daria Illenberger, 2 Baggavalli P. Somesh, Heidrun Dislich, Nicola Adam, 2 and Ann-Kathrin Meyer Francisco Rivero Institut für Biochemie I, Medizinische Fakultät, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 52, D-50931 Köln and 2 Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, D-89081 Ulm, Germany 1 Corresponding author e-mail: francisco.rivero@uni-koeln.de Find articles by Francisco Rivero Daria Illenberger Institut für Biochemie I, Medizinische Fakultät, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 52, D-50931 Köln and 2 Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, D-89081 Ulm, Germany 1 Corresponding author e-mail: francisco.rivero@uni-koeln.de Find articles by Daria Illenberger Nicola Adam Institut für Biochemie I, Medizinische Fakultät, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 52, D-50931 Köln and 2 Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, D-89081 Ulm, Germany 1 Corresponding author e-mail: francisco.rivero@uni-koeln.de Find articles by Nicola Adam Institut für Biochemie I, Medizinische Fakultät, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 52, D-50931 Köln and 2 Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, D-89081 Ulm, Germany 1 Corresponding author e-mail: francisco.rivero@uni-koeln.de Received 2001 Dec 3; Revised 2002 May 28; Accepted 2002 Jul 9. Copyright © 2002 European Molecular Biology Organization Articles from The EMBO Journal are provided here courtesy of The European Molecular Biology Organization 