 The complex cytopathology of mitochondrial diseases is usually attributed to insufficient ATP. AMP-activated protein kinase is a highly sensitive cellular energy sensor that is stimulated by ATP-depleting stresses. By antisense-inhibiting chaperonin 60 expression, we produced mitochondrially diseased strains with gene dose-dependent defects in phototaxis, growth, and multicellular morphogenesis. Mitochondrial disease was phenocopied in a gene dose-dependent manner by overexpressing a constitutively active AMPK α subunit. The aberrant phenotypes in mitochondrially diseased strains were suppressed completely by antisense-inhibiting AMPKα expression. Phagocytosis and macropinocytosis, although energy consuming, were unaffected by mitochondrial disease and AMPKα expression levels. Consistent with the role of AMPK in energy homeostasis, mitochondrial “mass” and ATP levels were reduced by AMPKα antisense inhibition and increased by AMPKαT overexpression, but they were near normal in mitochondrially diseased cells. We also found that 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-β- d -ribofuranoside, a pharmacological AMPK activator in mammalian cells, mimics mitochondrial disease in impairing Dictyostelium phototaxis and that AMPKα antisense-inhibited cells were resistant to this effect. The results show that diverse cytopathologies in Dictyostelium mitochondrial disease are caused by chronic AMPK signaling not by insufficient ATP. INTRODUCTION Mitochondrial diseases are a diverse group of degenerative disorders caused by mutations in either mitochondrial genes or nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins. Affecting one in ∼4000 people, they vary in severity, age of onset, and the symptoms they cause, but they present mostly as forms of various neuromuscular disorders, heart disease, or diabetes. Although the precise nature of many of the disease-causing mutations is known, the relationship between genotype and phenotype in mitochondrial disease is complex and poorly understood. Individuals with the same genotype can exhibit very different symptoms, whereas different mutations can produce very similar clinical outcomes in different patients. This has been attributed to differences in the severity of the underlying genetic defect between individuals and to tissue-specific differences in the proportion of defective mitochondria, ATP demands, age-related accumulation of mitochondrial mutations, and the expression and function of specific isoforms of mitochondrial proteins. Despite these complexities it is accepted that mitochondrial disease pathology results primarily from a reduced capacity of the mitochondria to produce energy in the form of ATP. It has therefore been assumed that the associated cytopathology is caused by ATP supplies being insufficient to support the affected cellular activities. By using the Dictyostelium model for mitochondrial disease, we have been able to study the underlying mechanisms of mitochondrial disease cytopathology without the superimposed complexities of metazoan developmental biology. This has revealed that diverse mitochondrial disease phenotypes arise, not because of insufficient ATP, but because of chronic activation of an energy-sensing alarm system that shuts down or interferes with some, but not all, cellular functions. That cellular alarm is AMP-activated protein kinase. AMPK is a ubiquitous, highly conserved protein kinase that maintains cellular energy homeostasis in healthy cells and in a variety of pathological situations, most notably diabetes, ischemic reperfusion injury, and cancer. AMPK functions in vivo as a heterotrimer with a catalytic α and a regulatory γ subunit that are assembled into the holoenzyme on a scaffold provided by the β subunit. It is activated very sensitively by a reduction in ATP and concomitant increase in AMP levels resulting from stresses such as strenuous exercise, ischemia or glucose deprivation. The activated kinase phosphorylates target proteins and initiates downstream signaling pathways that shift metabolism from anabolic to catabolic pathways, stimulating glucose uptake and fatty acid oxidation, enhancing the energy-producing capacity of the cell through mitochondrial proliferation and inhibiting energy-consuming processes such as cell cycle progression and growth. These effects are mediated both acutely by changes in protein activities or subcellular localization and by longer-term changes in gene expression. The overall effect is to restore cellular ATP/AMP ratios to normal. In mitochondrial disease, cellular ATP generating capacity is chronically compromised so that AMPK is expected to be chronically activated. Whereas AMPK activation serves a beneficial, homeostatic role in otherwise healthy cells, we show here that AMPK is itself responsible for the diverse cytopathologies associated with mitochondrial disease in Dictyostelium —impaired signal transduction for phototaxis and thermotaxis, slow growth, and deranged multicellular morphogenesis. Thus, overexpressing the catalytic domain phenocopies mitochondrial disease in a dose-dependent manner, whereas antisense inhibition of AMPK expression in mitochondrially diseased cells suppresses all of the disease phenotypes. Major energy-consuming cellular activities such as phagocytosis and pinocytosis that are unaffected in mitochondrial disease are also impervious to AMPK signaling. MATERIALS AND METHODS Plasmid Constructs Chaperonin 60 antisense and sense control constructs were described previously. The AMPKα sense and antisense constructs express a 1173-base pair AMPKα sense or antisense RNA corresponding to base pairs 364-1536 in the snfA sequence in DictyBase. The construct for overexpression of a constitutively active, truncated AMPKα was created by subcloning the corresponding cDNA in the sense orientation into pA15GFP. Figure 1. Genetic manipulation of levels of expression of the catalytic α subunit of AMPK and its truncated form AMPKαT. Map of the Dictyostelium AMPKα polypeptide showing positions of the main functional features. Numbers indicate amino... Strains and Culture Conditions As described previously, all experiments were conducted with D. discoideum parental strain AX2 and transformants derived from it. Each transformant strain carried multiple copies of the following constructs: 1) the chaperonin 60 antisense inhibition construct HPF405-416 and HPF601-612, or its corresponding sense RNA control construct HPF417-418 ; 2) the AMPKα antisense inhibition construct HPF455-465 or its corresponding sense RNA control construct HPF466-468; 3) the AMPKαT overexpression construct HPF432-445; and 4) the hspA and snfA antisense and sense constructs in one of the four possible combinations: HPF501-512, hspA/snfA double antisense; HPF551-553, hspA / snfA double sense; HPF581-586, hspA antisense/ snfA sense; and HPF576-580, hspA sense/ snfA antisense. In no case did the presence of either the snfA sense construct or the hspA sense construct have any effect on any of the phenotypes investigated. Double transformants were isolated by cotransformation with both required plasmids as described previously. All transformants were isolated using the Ca 2 /DNA coprecipitation method and selected as isolated, independent colonies growing on Micrococcus luteus lawns on standard medium agar supplemented with 15 or 20 μg/ml Geneticin. Cells were cultured in axenic medium supplemented with 100 μg/ml ampicillin and 20 μg/ml streptomycin or on bacterial lawns on SM agar. The selective agent G-418 at 20 μg/ml was added to HL-5 medium for all transformants during routine subculture, but it was removed for phenotypic studies to exclude possible effects of the antibiotic itself. DNA and RNA Techniques Gene Cloning and Sequence Analysis. General cloning strategies and vectors were as described previously. Fragments to be cloned were amplified using gene-specific primers containing added restriction sites at the 5′ end for cloning purposes. Clones were verified by restriction digestion and by sequencing at the Australian Genome Research Facility, Brisbane, Australia. The 2.6-kb gene snfA encoding the AMPKα subunit was amplified and cloned in pZErO-2 from AX2 genomic DNA with primers PAMKF1 and PAMKR1. Plasmid constructs for expression of AMPKα antisense RNA and the corresponding sense RNA control were created from the full-length genomic clone by amplifying a fragment with primers PAMPKF10 and PAMPKR10, cloning the polymerase chain reaction product into pZErO-2 and subcloning it into the Dictyostelium expression vector pDNeo2. A truncated cDNA encoding the catalytic domain was amplified with primers PACDNAF1 and PACDNAR1A primers by reverse transcription -PCR by using RNA extracted from vegetative AX2 cells with TRIzol. The resulting PCR product was cloned into pZErO-2 and subcloned for expression into the vector pA15GFP with replacement of the resident green fluorescent protein gene. Sequence analyses, alignments, and database searches were conducted using Web-based software through DictyBase, ExPASy, and the Australian Genome Research Facility. Southern and Northern Blotting. Qualitative Southern and Northern blotting experiments were conducted using 32 P- or digoxigenin-labeled DNA probes in combination with the nitro blue tetrazolium/5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate color substrate for detection. For quantitative blots, fluorescein-labeled DNA probes were used in combination with anti-fluorescein alkaline peroxidase-conjugated antibody and the enhanced chemifluorescence substrate. Quantitative results were obtained using the fluorescence mode of a Storm 860 FluoroImager. Copy numbers were assayed by quantitative Southern blotting and confirmed independently by our previously published Escherichia coli electroporation method. Quantitative PCR. Expression of AMPKα mRNA was quantitated by real-time RT-PCR by using the iQ5 real-time PCR detection system and the iScript one-step RT-PCR Supermix with SYBR Green I for amplicon detection. The 215-base pair target amplicon, shown in Figure 1 d, was not present in the antisense RNA expression constructs or their corresponding sense RNA controls, so that the assay specifically measured the levels of the endogenous AMPKα mRNA. The 50-μl reaction mixture contained 1× iScript one-step RT-PCR Supermix with SYBR Green I, iScript Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase, gene-specific primers, and purified total RNA template. cDNA synthesis was performed at 42°C for 30 min. The experimental plate well factor was collected at 95°C for 90 s, and the PCR cycling and detection used 45 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 1 min, annealing and extension at 55°C for 1 min. Expression levels for antisense RNA-expressing strains were measured relative to those of AX2 control cells. Protein Techniques Generation of Antipeptide Antibody. Antipeptide antibodies were raised against a mixture of two AMPKα peptide sequences: KILNRTKIKNLKMDEKIRR in the catalytic domain and GSYDDEVYSPNLVSPITTPIMS in the autoinhibitory region of the D. discoideum AMPK α subunit. Peptide synthesis and coupling was carried out by Mimotopes, and antibodies were raised in a rabbit by the Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science. Sample Preparation. The AMPKαT overexpression transformants were grown to a density of 2–3 × 10 6 cells ml −1, harvested, washed, and resuspended in lysis buffer containing 50 mM NaCl, 120 mM Tris-Cl, 1% NP-40, and protease inhibitors. The protein concentration was estimated using the Bradford method in the form of the Bio-Rad protein assay. Western Blotting. Each track of 10% polyacrylamide gels was loaded with 10 μg of protein for SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis by using the Mini PROTEAN II apparatus. The proteins were electroblotted onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes by using the Mini Trans-Blot electrophoretic transfer cell. The AMPKα primary antibody and anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G horseradish peroxidase conjugate as secondary antibody were used and the AMPKα subunit protein was detected using the 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole staining kit. ATP Assays ATP assays were conducted using the luciferase-based ATP determination kit by using cells grown axenically in HL-5 medium. Background luminescences measured before the assay were subtracted, and ATP concentrations were determined from a standard curve constructed using 10-fold serial dilutions of the ATP standard in assay buffer. Phenotypic Assays Phototaxis and Thermotaxis. Semiquantitative phototaxis and thermotaxis assays were conducted as described previously by using a small quantity of amoebae scraped from the edges of Dictyostelium colonies on K. aerogenes lawns. After incubation, slugs and slime trails were transferred to clear polyvinyl chloride discs. The discs were stained for 5 min with Coomassie blue, and then they were rinsed gently in running water. Start and end points of the stained trails were digitized, stored as a series of x, y coordinates by using a Summagraphics 120 digitizing tablet connected to a SUN workstation, and analyzed using directional statistics based on the von Mises or circular normal distribution. Growth on Bacterial Lawns. Two hundred and fifty microliters of E. coli B2 cells from an overnight Luria Broth culture were harvested, resuspended in sterile saline, spread uniformly onto each normal agar, 1.1 g/l anhydrous glucose, 1.9972 g/l KH 2 PO 4, and 0.356 g/l Na 2 HPO 4 ·2H 2 O, pH 6.0) plate and allowed to dry. A 10-μl droplet of a suspension containing 1 × 10 6 Dictyostelium amoebae/ml was applied onto the center of the NA plate, allowed to dry in a laminar flow hood, and incubated at 21°C. The rate of expansion of the resulting D. discoideum plaque was measured at intervals of 8 or 12 h over a period of 5–7 d. The recorded values were analyzed by linear regression by using the “R” environment for statistical computing and graphics to determine the growth rate from the growth curve. The 95% confidence intervals for the time taken for the plaque to expand 5 mm were determined from confidence intervals for the slope of the growth curve. Growth in Axenic Medium. Cells from an exponentially growing Dictyostelium culture in HL-5 medium were inoculated into fresh HL-5 medium at an initial density of ∼1 × 10 4 cells/ml and incubated at 21°C with shaking at 150 rpm on an orbital shaker. The cell densities were determined using a hemocytometer at 8- or 12-h intervals over a period of 5–7 d and recorded. The cell densities were then analyzed by log-linear regression using the R programming environment computer software to determine the generation time from the exponential growth curve. The 95% confidence intervals for the generation time were calculated from confidence intervals for the slope of the log-linear portion of the growth curve. Phagocytosis Bacterial uptake by Dictyostelium strains was determined using as prey an E. coli strain expressing a fluorescent protein termed DsRed. DsRed-expressing E. coli cells were prepared at a density of 2–4 × 10 10 bacteria/ml in 20 mM Sorenson's buffer. The fluorescence signal per million bacteria was determined from the density and fluorescence of the bacterial culture used in a given experiment. The relationship between OD 600 and the density of the bacterial suspension was determined in a separate calibration curve. Dictyostelium amoebae were harvested, washed, resuspended at 1.3–23 × 10 6 cells/ml and starved in Sorenson's buffer at 21°C for 30 min with shaking at 150 rpm. For the assay, 1 ml of the DsRed-Ec suspension added to 1 ml of starving Dictyostelium cells. At each time point in the assay, 0.5 ml of amoebae were washed free of uningested bacteria by differential centrifugation in the presence of 5 mM sodium azide, and their fluorescence was measured in a Modulus fluorometer by using a specially constructed module designed for DsRed. Measurements were performed in duplicate at each time point. The hourly rate of consumption of bacteria by a single amoeba was calculated from the increase in fluorescence over 30 min, the fluorescence signal per million bacteria and the amoebal density. Pinocytosis Pinocytosis assays were performed with fluorescein isothiocyanate -dextran. Axenically growing Dictyostelium cells were harvested, resuspended in HL-5 at 2.5–25 × 10 6 cells/ml, and shaken at 150 rpm for 20 min at 21°C. FITC-dextran was added to the cells, and at each time point 200-μl aliquots were transferred to 3 ml of ice-cold phosphate buffer. The cells were harvested, washed twice with ice-cold phosphate buffer, and lysed by addition of 2 ml of 0.25% Triton X-100 in 100 mM Na 2 HPO 4, pH 9.2. The fluorescence of the lysate was measured in duplicate at each time point in a Modulus fluorometer using the Green Module. The hourly rate of uptake of medium was calculated from the cell density, the increase in fluorescence over 60 or 70 min, and a separate calibration curve relating the fluorescence signal to the volume of fluorescent medium. Mitochondrial “Mass” MitoTracker Green fluorescence was used to estimate mitochondrial mass. Axenically growing vegetative amoebae were harvested, washed once in Lo-Flo HL-5, incubated in Lo-Flo medium for 2 h, and then divided into two aliquots. One aliquot was resuspended in Lo-Flo HL-5 containing 200 nM MitoTracker Green FM, whereas the other aliquot was resuspended in only Lo-Flo HL-5 as an unstained control. Both aliquots were incubated for an hour in the dark and then unbound MitoTracker Green was removed by washing the cells three times in Lo-Flo HL-5, with 10-min shaking on an orbital shaker between washes. Finally, the cells were resuspended in Lo-Flo HL-5, and fluorescence was measured in duplicate in a Modulus fluorometer using the Blue Module. The MitoTracker Green fluorescence per million cells was calculated after subtraction of the background fluorescence in the unstained cells. Fluorescence Microscopy. Fluorescence microscopy was based on our previously reported methods. Vegetative amoebae were grown to log phase in HL-5 medium on sterile coverslips in six-well plates, washed gently in Lo-Flo HL-5, and stained with 200 nM MitoTracker Red CMX-Ros in LoFlo HL-5 for 1 h in the dark. Unbound MitoTracker Red was removed by washing the cells three to four times in LoFlo HL-5 over 2 h. After two washes in phosphate buffer, the cells were fixed and flattened at the same time by placing the coverslips upside down on a layer of 1% agarose in phosphate buffer containing 3.7% paraformaldehyde for 30 min. The fixed cells on the coverslips were washed four times in phosphate-buffered saline and mounted for microscopy. Morphology Fruiting body morphology after multicellular development was scored as described previously after culturing transformants on K. aerogenes lawns on SM agar plates with or without 0.5% activated charcoal. The SM agar plates were prepared by spreading 0.1 ml of a dense K. aerogenes suspension in sterile saline onto the surface of the plates and allowing the inoculum to dry in the laminar flow hood before streak inoculating amoebae of the transformants onto the lawns. The plates were incubated at 21°C for 4–6 d to allow growth and multicellular development. Statistical Techniques Analysis of Directional Data. The directions of travel of individual slugs were analyzed using directional statistics based on the circular normal distribution as described previously. The accuracy of phototaxis is the concentration parameter of the circular normal distribution, which measures how concentrated individual directions are around the mean direction μ. The κ values range from 0 for no preferred direction of migration to ∞ for perfect orientation. Regression and Correlation Analysis. Regression analysis was performed, and the coefficient of variation was calculated using standard linear regression models. R 2 equals the square of the Pearson product-moment r, which was used where appropriate to determine the significance probability for some correlations − the probability of the observed results occurring under the null hypothesis that there is no correlation. The significance of all correlations was also tested by calculating the nonparametric Kendall rank r and in all cases the outcomes were the same as those yielded by the Pearson coefficient. In some cases, Kolmogorov–Smirnov, Kruskal–Wallace, and Student's t two-sample tests were also performed. Three-Dimensional Surface Regression Plots. Three-dimensional scatter plots and surface regressions were created using a local adaptation of the “scatter3d” function in the R environment for statistical computing and graphics. Quadratic or planar surfaces of best fit were plotted for quantitative phenotypic data relating the phenotypes to both the chaperonin 60 and AMPKα expression indices. The results are presented as rotating animations in Supplemental Material. RESULTS We previously reported that mitochondrial disease can be created and studied in Dictyostelium in two ways: targeted disruption of mitochondrial genes, or antisense inhibition of nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins essential for mitochondrial respiratory functions. Regardless of which strategy was used, the phenotypic consequences of mitochondrial dysfunction in Dictyostelium were defects in phototaxis, thermotaxis, growth, and multicellular development. In view of the diverse regulatory roles played by AMPK in response to ATP-depleting stressors, we decided to test whether AMPK activation and signaling were responsible for these diverse phenotypic outcomes of mitochondrial disease. If this were so, then increasing cellular AMPK activities should cause the same defects as mitochondrial dysfunction, whereas depressing AMPK levels in mitochondrially diseased cells should ameliorate these defects. Dictyostelium AMPKα Is Similar to the α Subunits of AMPK in Other Eukaryotes and Is Expressed throughout Development Searches of the predicted Dictyostelium proteome revealed a single isoform of each of the α, β, and γ subunits of the AMPK heterotrimer. The α subunit gene, named snfA after the Saccharomyces cerevisiae orthologue, contains four introns and encodes a polypeptide of 727 amino acids. The predicted protein sequence was confirmed by sequencing full-length cDNAs. The cDNA encodes a protein that is highly similar to AMPK α subunits from other eukaryotes except for a short N-terminal stretch of 27 amino acids and a 241-residue asparagine-rich domain located 98 residues upstream of the C terminus, both of which are not conserved in other organisms. Aside from this asparagine-rich domain, all of the features of AMPK α subunits in other organisms were found to be present in the Dictyostelium protein in the expected location. These include a kinase domain near the N terminus, a phosphorylatable threonine corresponding to the regulatory T 172 of the human AMPKα2 isoform, ATP-binding and kinase catalytic site signatures, and a C-terminal region with recognizable, albeit lower similarity to the autoinhibitory and β subunit-binding domain of other α subunits. In the active form of the AMPK heterotrimer, there is one molecule of AMP bound to each of two Bateman domains in the γ subunit and the regulatory threonine on the α subunit is phosphorylated. Although the major upstream activating kinase in mammalian cells, LKB1, is constitutively active, phosphorylation of T 172 is normally autoinhibited in the heterotrimer, and this inhibition must be relieved by AMP binding to the γ subunit. ATP acts as a competitive inhibitor of AMPK at the AMP-binding sites on the γ subunit. Dictyostelium also possesses an LKB1 homologue. For AMPK to be responsible for the deranged phenotypes associated with mitochondrial dysfunction in Dictyostelium, it must be present in wild-type cells at all stages of the life cycle. A Northern blot confirmed that the α subunit mRNA is present throughout development and suggested that the levels may increase during the first 5 h of starvation-induced differentiation. Generation of Clones with Increased or Decreased Levels of AMPKα To study the role of AMPK in mitochondrial disease in vivo in Dictyostelium, we chose a molecular genetic approach. To facilitate this, we amplified and cloned a cDNA encoding a truncated form of the Dictyostelium AMPK α subunit. The encoded protein contains single amino acid changes at positions 3 and 374 through 379 at which point the polypeptide terminates prematurely. Although the S 3 P substitution near the N terminus is not expected to affect the function of the protein, the six C-terminal substitutions and truncation of the protein mean that AMPKαT will not bind to the β subunit and will not be subject to the normal autoinhibitory mode of regulation of this enzyme. Truncating the human AMPK α isoform 1 in this region has been shown to have both of these effects and to thereby produce an active kinase that is phosphorylated constitutively by upstream kinases. Ectopic overexpression of AMPKαT will therefore increase the total AMPK activity in the cell. The AMPKαT cDNA was subcloned into the Dictyostelium expression vector pA15GFP to create an overexpression construct. We also created antisense inhibition constructs by using a portion of the AMPKα gene. Multiple, independent, stable transformants of the wild-type Dictyostelium strain AX2 were isolated and retained in each case. To relate the phenotypes of these transformants to their genotypes, it was necessary to verify that the level of expression of AMPKα or AMPKαT was correlated in the expected manner with the number of copies of the plasmids with which they had been stably transformed. Quantitative RT-PCR of the amplicon in Figure 1 d showed that the reduction of the native AMPKα mRNA level was correlated with the copy number of the antisense RNA-expression construct. Conversely, in quantitative Northern blots the steady-state level of AMPKαT mRNA was tightly correlated with the copy number of the AMPKαT expression construct. Western blots using an antibody directed against two specific AMPKα peptides confirmed that these cells overexpressed, a novel 42-kDa protein not present in wild-type cells. Both constructs clearly affect expression in the expected copy number-dependent manner. Accordingly in further studies, we used the copy number of the corresponding constructs as an AMPKα expression index. To simplify analysis and presentation of the data, we assigned negative values to the copy numbers for antisense constructs and positive values to the copy numbers for overexpression constructs. Overexpression of the AMPKα Catalytic Domain Phenocopies Mitochondrial Disease, whereas AMPKα Antisense Inhibition Suppresses Mitochondrial Disease Phenotypes Because mitochondrially diseased strains of Dictyostelium exhibit impaired phototactic orientation, slow growth in liquid medium and defective multicellular morphogenesis, we investigated whether AMPKαT overexpression caused similar defects and whether AMPKα antisense inhibition suppressed those defects. We also investigated whether the impaired growth was due to slower uptake of food by phagocytosis or macropinocytosis. Phototaxis In the multicellular migratory phase of its life cycle, the so-called slug, Dictyostelium exhibits extraordinarily sensitive and accurate orientation responses to light and temperature gradients. Although they are not well understood, the photo- and thermosensory transduction pathways in Dictyostelium are known to involve a variety of typically eukaryotic signaling molecules. If any of them were downstream targets of AMPK signaling, then AMPK activation would cross-talk and interfere with phototaxis and thermotaxis. Chronic AMPK activation would then account for the impaired phototaxis and thermotaxis observed in mitochondrial disease. Figure 2 shows that slugs became increasingly disoriented in phototaxis as the copy number of either a chaperonin 60 antisense construct or an AMPKαT expression construct increased. AMPKαT overexpression thus phenocopies in a dose-dependent manner the phototaxis defect caused by mitochondrial dysfunction. AMPKα antisense inhibition in an otherwise wild-type genetic background had little effect on slug phototaxis causing, if anything, a slight improvement in orientation. However mitochondrially diseased strains that would otherwise exhibit impaired phototaxis, behaved normally if AMPKα expression was also inhibited in the same cells. Figure 2. Effect of chaperonin 60 and AMPKα expression levels on Dictyostelium slug phototaxis. Each circle represents a different clonal cell line carrying the indicated number of copies of either the chaperonin 60 antisense construct, the AMPKα... Phototaxis and thermotaxis share the same downstream signaling pathways, and mitochondrial disease impairs both. In other experiments we also found that AMPKαT overexpression impairs thermotaxis and that AMPKα antisense inhibition rescues the thermotaxis defect caused by chaperonin 60 inhibition. We conclude that in mitochondrial disease in Dictyostelium the defects in photosensory and thermosensory signal transduction are a result of AMPKα signaling. This pathway is likely to be conserved in higher eukaryotes, because AMPK was reported recently to inhibit motility and chemotactic signal transduction in mammalian monocytes. In Dictyostelium phototaxis, the downstream target proteins could include RasD and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2, which were recently reported to be part of a photosensory signaling complex. In mammalian cell lines, AMPK has been reported to inhibit upstream elements of the ERK1/2 signaling pathways. Growth Rates Although AMPK signaling was responsible for defective phototaxis and thermotaxis in Dictyostelium mitochondrial disease, the other phenotypes could have been caused by a different mechanism. For example, the dramatically reduced cell growth and division rates reported previously in Dictyostelium mitochondrial disease could have been caused by limitations in the energy available for growth. If this were the case, AMPKαT overexpression would not phenocopy and AMPKα antisense inhibition would not rescue the growth defects caused by mitochondrial dysfunction. Instead, the homeostatic function of AMPK in restoring the cellular energy status to normal would, if anything, produce the reverse outcomes. Figure 3 shows that overexpression of the catalytic domain of AMPK and mitochondrial disease dramatically impaired Dictyostelium growth both on plates on a bacterial food source and in shaken culture in a nutrient broth. In otherwise healthy cells, AMPKα antisense inhibition actually enhanced growth slightly; the generation times in liquid decreased from ∼9 to ∼7 h, whereas growth on plates also accelerated. Most remarkably, the impaired growth of mitochondrially diseased cells was completely restored to normal by AMPKα antisense inhibition. This dramatic suppression of the mitochondrial disease phenotype occurred both for growth on plates and in liquid medium. It shows that the cause of the impaired growth in Dictyostelium mitochondrial disease is chronic AMPK activation not insufficient energy. Figure 3. Effect of chaperonin 60 and AMPKα expression levels on Dictyostelium growth. Symbols used are as in Figure 2. Vertical bars are 95% confidence intervals. Negative values indicate the copy numbers of antisense inhibition constructs, whereas positive... Phagocytosis and Macropinocytosis Rates Growth and division of cells rely on their continued ability to take up nutrients and in Dictyostelium, this is achieved by phagocytosis during growth on bacterial lawns and by macropinocytosis during growth in liquid medium. The two types of endocytosis depend upon signaling pathways containing both shared and distinct elements that could be downstream targets of AMPK signaling. It was thus possible that the impaired growth of mitochondrially diseased cells was due to impaired signal transduction for phagocytosis, macropinocytosis, or both. We therefore assayed in our strains the rate of bacterial uptake in phagocytosis and the rate of fluid uptake in macropinocytosis. Figure 4 shows that neither phagocytosis nor macropinocytosis were significantly affected by the levels of expression of either chaperonin 60 or AMPKα during 30- or 60-min assays, respectively. Thus, the dramatically slower growth that AMPK activity elicits in mitochondrial disease does not result from impaired ingestion of extracellular nutrient sources but from effects on the pathways that control cell growth and proliferation. Figure 4. Effect of chaperonin 60 and AMPKα expression levels on Dictyostelium phagocytosis and pinocytosis rates. Symbols are as in Figure 2. Negative values indicate the copy numbers of antisense inhibition constructs, whereas positive values indicate... In other organisms, activated AMPK also inhibits cell growth and proliferation, and, in coupled p53-dependent pathways, additionally induces apoptosis in a variety of mammalian cell types. Although Dictyostelium lacks both caspase-mediated apoptosis and p53, it does possess components of the target of rapamycin pathway, a central integrator of signals regulating cell growth and a major means by which AMPK inhibits cell growth in metazoa. This conserved signaling pathway therefore provides a possible general mechanism for AMPK-mediated inhibition of cell proliferation in mitochondrial disease. Multicellular Development Development in Dictyostelium is initiated by starvation-induced differentiation followed by chemotactic aggregation, further differentiation into multiple cell types, and complex morphogenetic movements to form a fruiting body—a droplet of spores atop a stalk and basal disk. Multicellularity evolved independently in the amoebozoa and metazoa, so that some of the associated intracellular signaling molecules are different, whereas others have been conserved and recruited for use in regulation of cell type choice and differentiation in both lineages. The developmental signaling pathways thus provide a mixture of potential downstream targets of AMPK signaling in mitochondrially compromised Dictyostelium cells, some unique and others conserved. Mitochondrial disease in Dictyostelium has been shown to result in dysmorphogenesis so that as the disease becomes more severe, fewer fruiting bodies form, and those that do are morphologically aberrant with short thick stalks resulting from misregulation of cell type choice in favor of the stalk differentiation pathway. We found that a similar phenotype results from overexpression of AMPKαT in an otherwise wild-type background. Conversely, antisense inhibition of AMPKα expression restored normal development in mitochondrially diseased cells in which chaperonin 60 expression was inhibited. Consistent with this data, prestalk gene expression is enhanced in Dictyostelium cells that accumulate AMP because of inactivation of the AMP deaminase. Thus, the abnormal multicellular development associated with mitochondrial disease in Dictyostelium is also mediated by AMPK signaling. Figure 5. Effect of chaperonin 60 and AMPKα expression levels on multicellular morphogenesis in Dictyostelium. Photographs were taken from above or from the side of fruiting bodies formed during growth at 21°C on a bacterial... In the wild-type genetic background, antisense inhibition of AMPKα expression also caused a developmental abnormality in that cells growing on bacterial lawns failed to initiate development in areas where the bacteria had been consumed. This result shows that in otherwise healthy cells, AMPK signaling is required for the initiation of development by starvation. The simplest explanation is that during normal development, starvation results in temporary ATP depletion and AMPK activation, which signals a halt to cell proliferation and entry into the pathways for early differentiation. The aggregation defect caused by AMPKα antisense inhibition was not observed in the mitochondrially diseased background of cells in which chaperonin 60 expression was also antisense inhibited. This makes sense if, in these cells, the mitochondrial dysfunction were to cause more severe ATP depletion than usual at the onset of development. The lower levels of AMPK expression in these cells would then be offset by more complete activation of the AMPK that is present so that development is normal. AMPK Stimulates Mitochondrial Biogenesis and ATP Production In mammalian cells, particularly in muscle tissues, AMPK activity leads to mitochondrial proliferation. This is part of the response to strenuous physical training in athletes and is a component of roles of AMPK in energy homeostasis in healthy cells. However, mitochondrial proliferation is sometimes also a feature of mitochondrial diseases. We therefore examined whether mitochondrial dysfunction and AMPK activation might cause this same cytopathology in Dictyostelium. Figure 6 b shows that overexpression of the AMPKα catalytic domain resulted in a stronger MitoTracker Green fluorescence signal per cell, whereas AMPKα antisense inhibition reduced the fluorescence signal. However, the fluorescence signal was unaltered in the mitochondrially diseased cells whether or not AMPKα expression was also antisense inhibited. Fluorescence microscopy of cells stained with MitoTracker Red confirmed that mitochondrial biogenesis in Dictyostelium is stimulated by AMPK as in mammalian cells. We found no evidence for the proliferation of mitochondria in mitochondrially diseased Dictyostelium cells, presumably because in these cells any reduction in mitochondrial biogenesis caused by chaperonin 60 undersupply is counterbalanced by the effects of enhanced AMPK activity. Because mitochondrial biogenesis was stimulated in AMPKαT-overexpressing cells and reduced in AMPK antisense-inhibited cells, we expected that ATP levels would be altered in a similar manner. Figure 6, c and d, shows that this is so. ATP levels were greater in AMPKαT-overexpressing cells, were reduced in AMPKα antisense-inhibited cells, and were not significantly altered in mitochondrially diseased cells. Figure 6. Effect of chaperonin 60 and AMPKα expression levels on mitochondrial mass and ATP levels in Dictyostelium. Symbols are as in Figure 2. Negative values indicate the copy numbers of antisense inhibition constructs, whereas positive values indicate... AICAR, a Pharmacological Activator of AMPK in Mammalian Cells, Impairs Phototaxis in the Wild-Type but Not in AMPKα Antisense-inhibited Cells Treatment with 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-β- d - ribofuranoside is commonly used to activate AMPK in vitro and in vivo. AICAR is taken up by cells by an adenosine transporter and converted intracellularly by adenosine kinase to AICA-ribotide, an analogue of AMP that activates AMPK. The Dictyostelium genome encodes homologues of these proteins as well as the AMPK kinase LKB1 that is the primary mediator of AICAR activation. The presence of these genetic components makes it feasible, but does not prove, that AICAR treatment activates AMPK in Dictyostelium as it does in mammalian cells. As a further test of whether AMPK activation could cause the defects seen in mitochondrial diseases, we examined the effect of AICAR on Dictyostelium slug phototaxis. Wild-type Dictyostelium cells were allowed to develop to the slug stage in the presence of AICAR and then to migrate in the presence of the drug. These slugs became increasingly disoriented as the AICAR concentrations increased. These effects of long-term AICAR exposure could have been mediated directly or indirectly by some other adenosine- or AMP-binding protein. We therefore tested whether AICAR would still impair phototaxis in a strain in which the expression of the α subunit of AMPK had been antisense inhibited. Figure 7 b shows that the antisense-inhibited strain was resistant to the effects of AICAR on phototaxis. Although this result does not prove that AICAR impairs phototaxis by activating AMPK, it does indicate that AMPK is required for the AICAR effects and is consistent with a role for AMPK in mitochondrial disease. Figure 7. Impairment of phototaxis by the pharmacological AMPK activator AICAR. Dictyostelium slugs of the parental strain or an AMPKα antisense-inhibited transformant were allowed to form and migrate... DISCUSSION The complex pathology of mitochondrial diseases is usually assumed to result from ATP depletion to levels that are insufficient to support normal cellular activities. Our results show that diverse cytopathologies in the Dictyostelium mitochondrial disease model are due not to insufficiency of the ATP supply but to chronic activation of the cellular energy sensor AMPK. Overexpression of the catalytic domain of AMPK phenocopies mitochondrial disease, whereas antisense inhibition of expression of the AMPK α subunit suppresses all of the aberrant disease-associated phenotypes. Mitochondrial disease emerges thus as an AMPK-mediated signaling disorder rather than an energy insufficiency per se. There is every indication that this novel insight into the nature of mitochondrial disease will be generally applicable. During preparation of this article, it was reported that cell cycle progression in the developing Drosophila eye is halted specifically by AMPK signaling in response to the ATP-depleting effects of a mitochondrial mutation. Mitochondrial electron transport uncouplers such as dinitrophenol have been shown, like other cellular stressors, to activate AMPK. Much of the cytopathology of mitochondrial disorders in humans —mitochondrial proliferation and ragged red muscle fibers, cellular hypertrophy, and induction of apoptosis—is known also to occur in response to AMPK activation. Finally, symptoms that are strongly reminiscent of mitochondrial disease are seen in a rare human genetic disorder, AICA-ribosiduria, in which an inactive AICAR transformylase causes the AMPK activator ZMP to accumulate in cells. In addition to dysmorphic features, the affected patient, a female infant, suffered from severe neurological dysfunction, epilepsy, and congenital blindness. Figure 8 shows an explanatory model for the interactions between mitochondrial function, AMPK, and the various energy-consuming cellular activities investigated in this work. Mitochondrial dysfunction was created by antisense inhibition of chaperonin 60 expression as described previously. The model suggests that this results in a reduction in mitochondrial biogenesis and ATP-generating capacity. Rossignol et al. discussed multiple layers of biochemical “thresholds” that determine the degree to which ATP-generating capacity is actually compromised as a result of genetic defects affecting the mitochondria. When these thresholds are exceeded AMPK would become chronically activated in a homeostatic response that returns mitochondrial mass and ATP levels to near normal but chronically inhibits some of the major energy-consuming activities of the cell. These major symptoms of mitochondrial disease in Dictyostelium were both phenocopied by overexpression of AMPKαT in otherwise healthy cells, and they were relieved by antisense inhibition of AMPKα expression in mitochondrially diseased cells. Figure 8. Model for the role of AMPK signaling in mitochondrial disease. Cpn60 is chaperonin 60 whose undersupply in antisense-inhibited cells causes mitochondrial dysfunction. Arrowheads indicate stimulation, and barred ends indicate inhibition. AMP, ADP, and... Mitochondrial proliferation and significantly reduced ATP levels are not always evident in mitochondrially diseased cells, and they were not observed in the Dictyostelium case in this work. The model in Figure 8 suggests that ATP levels would fall significantly and runaway mitochondrial proliferation would occur in mitochondrially diseased cells only when the AMPK-mediated homeostatic response is overwhelmed by the severity of the underlying mitochondrial disorder. The ragged red fibers in muscle biopsies of myoclonic epilepsy and ragged red fibers patients derive their appearance from massive mitochondrial proliferation and would be an example of such cells. Tarnopolsky and Parise reported that in a group of patients with diagnosed mitochondrial cytopathies, muscle ATP levels were significantly reduced only in those with ragged red fibers. A feature of human mitochondrial disease that has been difficult to explain is the so-called threshold effect: as the underlying genetic cause becomes more severe, some cellular activities are affected before others. This is true of Dictyostelium as well. In this work, we found no significant changes to phagocytosis and pinocytosis rates in mitochondrially diseased cells. Both of these phenotypes were also unaffected by AMPKαT overexpression and AMPKα antisense inhibition, suggesting that they remain unaltered in the mitochondrially diseased state because they are impervious to AMPK signaling. It is highly likely that a similar situation pertains in mitochondrially diseased mammalian cells, given the striking parallels between the downstream effects of AMPK signaling and the cytopathologies associated with human mitochondrial disease. The extent of AMPK activation and the responsiveness of downstream regulatory pathways to AMPK signaling may explain much of the complexity of human mitochondrial disease phenotypes. Knowing that AMPK activity is responsible for diverse cytopathologies in mitochondrial disease should open new possibilities for successful treatment of the symptoms with pharmacological inhibitors of AMPK and other elements of the downstream signaling pathways. Naturally, such treatments would not cure the disease nor would they ameliorate symptoms once ATP supplies really did become insufficient to support normal cellular activities. However, in the Dictyostelium model at least, that point seems not to be reached—AMPKα antisense inhibition in mitochondrially diseased cells always restored the wild-type phenotypes completely. It seems likely that in mitochondrially diseased mammalian cells as well, diverse cellular functions would be impaired and apoptosis induced by AMPK before ATP supplies actually become insufficient. There is one symptom of mitochondrial disease in humans that seems unlikely to be caused by AMPK activation: exercise intolerance. This may be directly due to an acute insufficiency of ATP in muscle cells and as such would not be ameliorated by chronic AMPK inhibition. Furthermore, it seems possible to us that pharmacological inhibition of AMPK could be tumorigenic in otherwise healthy cells. Mutations in the gene encoding LKB1, the major upstream kinase activating AMPK, cause Peutz–Jeghers syndrome, which is characterized by benign gastrointestinal tumors and an increased risk of malignant tumors. AMPKα antisense inhibition in otherwise healthy Dictyostelium cells promoted cell proliferation and inhibited the normal transition from cell growth to differentiation. Yet, these effects were suppressed in mitochondrially diseased cells, suggesting that phenotypic normality can be attained by balancing the reduced levels of AMPK with its more complete activation. We would thus anticipate that in humans, too, it would be important for treatment regimens to achieve the correct levels of AMPK activity in cells. Supplementary Material Click here to view. 