 EB1 proteins are ubiquitous microtubule-associated proteins involved in microtubule search and capture, regulation of microtubule dynamics, cell polarity, and chromosome stability. We have cloned a complete cDNA of Dictyostelium EB1, the largest known EB1 homolog. Immunofluorescence analysis and expression of a green fluorescent protein-DdEB1 fusion protein revealed that DdEB1 localizes along microtubules, at microtubule tips, centrosomes, and protruding pseudopods. During mitosis, it was found at the spindle, spindle poles, and kinetochores. DdEB1 is the first EB1-homolog that is also a genuine centrosomal component, because it was localized at isolated centrosomes that are free of microtubules. Furthermore, centrosomal DdEB1 distribution was unaffected by nocodazole treatment. DdEB1 colocalized with DdCP224, the XMAP215 homolog, at microtubule tips, the centrosome, and kinetochores. Furthermore, both proteins were part of the same cytosolic protein complex, suggesting that they may act together in their functions. DdEB1 deletion mutants expressed as green fluorescent protein or maltose-binding fusion proteins indicated that microtubule binding requires homo-oligomerization, which is mediated by a coiled-coil domain. A DdEB1 null mutant was viable but retarded in prometaphase progression due to a defect in spindle formation. Because spindle elongation was normal, DdEB1 seems to be required for the initiation of the outgrowth of spindle microtubules. INTRODUCTION In living cells, organization and dynamics of the microtubule cytoskeleton are highly regulated by proteins binding directly or indirectly to microtubules, in particular to their plus and minus ends. The minus ends are bound to the centrosome, the largest known protein complex in the cell, which regulates microtubule nucleation. The microtubule plus ends are the main sites for growth and shrinkage and involved in tethering of microtubules to cortical sites and kinetochores. Recent work has shown that plus ends are also associated with a protein complex, including CLIP170, dynein, dynactin, LIS-1, the adenomatous polyposis coli protein, and EB1. Among these, EB1 proteins are of special interest because they were found at the tips of growing astral microtubules as well as at centrosomes and kinetochores. Homologs of human EB1 have been found and characterized in organisms as diverse as budding yeast, fission yeast, and Drosophila. Originally, EB1 was identified as a binding partner of the tumor suppressor protein APC. The EB1–APC interaction is disturbed in the majority of human colorectal tumors. Recent work suggests that the EB1–APC interaction may provide the physical link between growing microtubules and kinetochores. Loss of the APC–EB1 interaction could therefore cause chromosomal instability, which is usually observed in colorectal cancers. APC and EB1 seem to have a comparable function at cortical microtubule-capture sites where both proteins are essential for the interaction of microtubule ends with adherens junctions. Cortical anchorage, in turn, is required for spindle orientation and symmetrical division of epithelial cells. This function is also reflected by budding yeast BIM1 and fission yeast mal3 deletion mutants that are viable but display spindle and nuclear positioning defects. Furthermore, Bim1p also affects microtubule dynamics. It increases the microtubule depolymerization rate but promotes net polymerization by increasing both the time spent growing and the rescue frequency, resulting in longer, more dynamic microtubules. Thus, Bim1p is mainly a protein that promotes dynamic instability, similar to Xenopus XMAP215. XMAP215 homologs have been studied in organisms as different as humans, Drosophila, Arabidopsis, yeast, and Dictyostelium. The effect of Bim1p and XMAP215 on microtubule dynamics suggests that members of these two protein families act together in this function. Herein, we characterize DdEB1, a novel member of the EB1 protein family from Dictyostelium amoebae. Dictyostelium is a valuable model organism for the study of chemotaxis, signal transduction, development, cytoskeletal dynamics, and the centrosome. The Dictyostelium centrosome contains no centrioles but consists of a three-layered core structure that is surrounded by a matrix, called corona, which contains the microtubule nucleation sites. Unlike mammalian cells or budding yeast, centrosome duplication is not synchronized with the entry into S phase but is initiated in prophase and separation of the two centrosomal entities starts in prometaphase. One of the well-investigated centrosomal components in Dictyostelium is the XMAP215 homolog DdCP224, a permanent centrosomal resident that is also localized at kinetochores and plays a role in centrosome duplication. In this work we show for the first time that EB1 and XMAP215 homologs colocalize at peripheral microtubule tips and interact in cytosolic complexes that can be coimmunoprecipitated. Furthermore, we provide strong evidence that the association of DdEB1 with microtubules requires homo-oligomerization and that DdEB1 is a genuine centrosomal component required for the formation of the mitotic spindle. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cloning of Complete DdEB1 cDNA A size-fractionated Dictyostelium cDNA library containing cDNAs from 1–2 kb was screened with a labeled DNA probe corresponding to the sequence from base position 641-1121 of the complete cDNA clone. The hybridization probe was generated and labeled with digoxigenin by polymerase chain reaction by using clone JAX4a75d11 as a template. Seven clones contained the complete EB1 coding sequence. Vector Construction, Protein Expression, and Antibodies All green fluorescent protein - and maltose-binding protein -fusion vectors were generated by PCR with linker primers with restriction enzyme recognition sequences. The pMALc2 constructs for expression in Escherichia coli were MBP-DdEB1, MBP-DdEB1Δ129N, and MBP-DdEB1Δ281C. All fragments were cloned using Bam HI/ Hin dIII sites. For MBP-DdEB1 expression in Dictyostelium, the complete MBP-DdEB1 sequence amplified by PCR with Kpn I/NsiI linker primers and the respective E. coli expression vector as a template was cloned into p1ABsr8. MBP-fusion proteins were purified by amylose chromatography with E. coli or Dictyostelium extracts. Cell lysis and column washing were performed in lysis buffer containing 150 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl 2, and 50 mM HEPES/K, pH 7.4. The buffer was supplemented with 10 mM maltose for elution. Polyclonal antibodies were raised against highly purified, bacterially expressed MBP-DdEB1. The pA6PsgGFPXN constructs for expression of GFP fusion proteins in Dictyostelium were GFP-DdEB1, GFP-DdEB1Δ129N, GFP-DdEB1Δ328C, and GFP-DdEB1Δ281C. All fragments were cloned using Sal I/NsiI sites. The N-terminal GFP fusion vector pA6PsgGFPXN was constructed by replacement of the actin15 promoter/polylinker/GFP cassette of the C-terminal GFP fusion vector p1ABsr8 by an actin6 promoter/GFP/polylinker cassette. For expression of the GFP-α-tubulin in Dictyostelium, the complete coding sequence of Dictyostelium -α-tubulin was amplified by reverse transcription-PCR with Sal I/ Bam HI-linker primers and Dictyostelium mRNA as a template. The fragment was cloned into pDiscGFPSSEB2. Size Determination of Native MBP-DdEB1 Fusion Proteins Purified bacterially expressed MBP-DdEB1 and its truncation mutants were analyzed by native gradient gel electrophoresis with 4–20% acrylamide precast gradient gels. Size exclusion chromatography by using a Superdex 200HR10/30 column was performed in lysis buffer containing 1 mM maltose at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min. The sample volume was 0.2 ml and the fraction volume was 0.75 ml each. DdEB1/DdCP224 Coprecipitation Assays Dictyostelium cytosolic extracts were prepared from MBP-DdEB1 or AX2 cells in lysis buffer containing 10% sucrose as described recently. For coprecipitation of DdCP224, MBP-DdEB1–containing extracts were incubated for 20 min with 1/10 volume of amylose beads on a rotator. After washing with 10 volumes of lysis buffer the bound protein was eluted with 0.5× urea sample buffer. Cell extracts from AX2 cells were used as negative control. Coprecipitation of DdEB1 was performed accordingly, but using extracts from wild-type cells and N -hydroxyl-succinimido–activated Sepharose 4B beads covalently coupled to the anti-DdCP224 antibody 4/148. In this case anti-γ-tubulin–Sepharose beads coupled to rabbit antibodies with no affinity to DdCP224 or DdEB1 were used as a control for unspecific binding. Construction of DdEB1Δ Mutants The DdEB1 sequence from base position 85–1537 was amplified by PCR with Kpn I/ Bam HI linker-primers and cloned into pSPORT1. After the Hin dIII site of pSPORT1 had been destroyed, the entire pSPORT1 sequence and the N- and C-terminal parts of DdEB1 were amplified by inverted PCR with Xba I/ Hin dIII-linker primers, so that the sequence from base position 767–835 was deleted. The resulting PCR product was ligated with the Blasticidin resistance cassette obtained after Xba I/ Hin dIII digestion of pUCBsrΔBam. Before transformation, the DdEB1 knockout plasmid was cut with Xba I and Hin dIII, which increased homologous recombination efficiency. After transformation into Dictyostelium cells the desired null mutants were screened for the absence of DdEB1 staining by immunofluorescence microscopy with the anti-EB1 antibody. Light Microscopy Indirect immunofluorescence microscopy and confocal light microscopy were performed as described previously using secondary anti-rabbit, anti-rat, and anti-mouse antibodies coupled to Alexa 488, Alexa 568 or Cy3 dyes. DNA was stained either with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole or TOPRO3. Confocal microscopic image stacks were processed with the Huygens 2.2 deconvolution software by using a computed theoretical point spread function and the Maximum Likelihood Estimation algorithm. Z-projections of image stacks were made with the ImageJ program. Live cell imaging was performed under agar overlay at the PerkinElmer Ultraview real-time confocal system equipped with a 12-bit charge-coupled device camera, piezo stepper, and a 100×/1.3 lens. Other Methods Cultivation of Dictyostelium cells, transformation of Dictyostelium, and selection of clones was performed as described previously. Centrosome isolation, SDS gel electrophoresis, and Western blotting were carried out according to Gräf et al.. RESULTS DdEB1 Is the Largest Member of the EB1 Family A partial DNA sequence of a putative Dictyostelium homolog of human EB1 was identified in the Dictyostelium genome project. This sequence was used as a probe for the isolation of a cDNA containing the complete coding sequence for DdEB1. EB1 proteins usually have a size of 35–38 kDa. With a calculated molecular mass of 57 kDa and a length of 506 amino acids, DdEB1 is the largest known member of the EB1 family. Among all family members it is most closely related to human and mouse EB1. Its remarkable size is due to several sequence insertions and a C-terminal extension. 1 ). Figure 1 Alignment of the DdEB1 and human EB1 amino acid sequences. Top trace, DdEB1; bottom trace, human EB1. Identical amino acids are shaded in black, similar ones in gray. The coiled-coil domain predicted with the Coilscan program, and used for subcellular localization of DdEB1 by immunofluorescence microscopy. 7 A). DdEB1 was most prominent at microtubule tips and the centrosome, but it was also present along astral microtubules and weakly at the edges of protruding pseudopods where it colocalized with actin. During mitosis, it was found at the spindle, spindle poles, and in the kinetochore region. 2 D). These localizations were confirmed in mutants expressing DdEB1 fused to the GFP. 4 A). Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy revealed a ring-like appearance of the centrosome when wild-type cells were stained with anti-DdEB1 and anti-DdCP224 antibodies, respectively. 2 B). The Dictyostelium centrosome does not contain centrioles but consists of a three-layered core structure surrounded by a matrix called corona, which contains the microtubule nucleation sites. When stained with corona-specific antibodies, the corona appears as a ring in confocal sections. Colocalization of DdEB1 with DdCP224, a permanent centrosomal resident and known component of the corona, suggested that DdEB1 could be an integral centrosomal component and part of the corona as well. Indeed, centrosomal localization of DdEB1 did not require an intact microtubule network because centrosomal DdEB1 localization was unaffected by treating the cells with 30 μM nocodazole for 2 h. 3 A). Furthermore, DdEB1 was present at isolated centrosomes, which are devoid of microtubules. 3 B). Figure 2 Cell cycle-dependent localization of DdEB1. DdEB1 colocalizes with actin labeled with anti- Dictyostelium actin at protruding pseudopods. The merged image is displayed in A". The cell cycle stages shown are interphase... Figure 3 Centrosomal localization of DdEB1 does not require microtubules. Treatment of wild-type cells with 30 μM nocodazole for 2 h did not reduce centrosomal labeling with DdEB1 antibodies. DdEB1 is also present at isolated centrosomes. The centrosomes... Figure 4 Microtubule binding of DdEB1 requires the presence of the coiled-coil domain. DdEB1 and its deletion mutants were expressed as GFP-fusion proteins. GFP fluorescence; a scheme of the respective mutant is shown at the top of each panel.... Figure 7 and Movie 2. Aberrant mitotic figures in DdEB1Δ mutants. The absence of DdEB1 in the knockout mutants is shown in the Western blot, where cytosolic extracts of wild-type and DdEB1Δ mutants were probed with the anti-DdEB1... Microtubule Binding Requires the Coiled-Coil Domain The structural determinants for microtubule binding of DdEB1 were analyzed with GFP-tagged deletion mutants expressed in Dictyostelium. Recently, Juwana et al. suggested a microtubule-binding domain residing within the highly conserved N-terminal half of human EB1, which was narrowed down to amino acids 79–134 by sequence comparison between several EB1 homologs. This microtubule-binding domain was confirmed in Dictyostelium because the N-terminal DdEB1 deletion mutant, where the first 128 amino acids were missing, did not localize to microtubules or microtubule tips anymore, whereas it was still present at the centrosome. 4 B). In contrast, C-terminal deletions downstream from the coiled-coil domain predicted for all known EB1 family members had no effect on any of the DdEB1 localizations. 4 C). However, when the coiled-coil region was deleted as well the GFP fusion was neither present along microtubules nor at their tips, whereas it was still present at the centrosome and at the cell edges. 4 D). This suggested that the coiled-coil domain also contributes to the association of DdEB1 with microtubules. Because coiled-coil domains mediate intermolecular interactions, our findings indicate that microtubule binding requires the association of DdEB1 with a second DdEB1 molecule or a different binding partner. The latter possibility is rather unlikely, because EB1 proteins are known to bind directly to microtubules. Thus, the requirement of the coiled-coil domain for homo-oligomerization was tested with DdEB1 deletion mutants that were expressed as MBP fusion proteins in E. coli and corresponded to the GFP mutants described above. Native gradient gel electrophoresis revealed that highly purified full-length MBP-DdEB1 and the N-terminally truncated MBP-DdEB1Δ129N mutant behaved like homotetramers on these gels, with apparent molecular masses of ∼400 and ∼340 kDa, respectively. 5 A). In contrast, the C-terminally truncated MBP-DdEB1Δ281C mutant, where the C-terminal domain including the coiled-coil was deleted, exhibited the electrophoretic mobility of a monomer. 5 A). These results were confirmed by size exclusion chromatography where MBP-DdEB1 fractionated with a molecular mass of ∼500 kDa. 5 B). As a control for the native state of the bacterially expressed proteins, DdEB1 was expressed as an MBP fusion protein in Dictyostelium. The fusion protein had the same localization pattern as endogenous DdEB1 and the same elution behavior in size exclusion chromatography as the bacterially expressed protein. Figure 5 Coiled-coil domain is required for homo-oligomerization. Sizing of MBP-DdEB1 and its deletion mutants by native polyacrylamide gradient gel electrophoresis. Sizing of MBP-DdEB1 by size exclusion chromatography. Numbers refer to the molecular masses... DdEB1 Interacts with DdCP224 So far, EB1 and XMAP215 homologs were not colocalized at microtubule tips, although both proteins are believed to regulate microtubule dynamics at the microtubule plus ends. Herein, we show that DdCP224 and DdEB1 clearly colocalized at the microtubule tips in immunofluorescence preparations of Dictyostelium cells stained with anti-DdEB1 antibodies and a monoclonal anti-DdCP224 antibody. Moreover, using cytosolic extracts from the Dictyostelium mutant expressing MBP-DdEB1, we could specifically coprecipitate DdCP224 with MBP-DdEB1 bound to amylose beads. Vice versa, using wild-type cell cytosolic extracts, DdEB1 was coprecipitated with DdCP224 that was immobilized on beads coated with the anti-DdCP224 monoclonal antibody. 6 B). Because we have already shown that most of the cytosolic DdCP224 behaves as a monomer in density gradient centrifugation experiments, only a small fraction of DdCP224 and DdEB1 was expected to be part of the same cytosolic protein complex. Consequently, we could coprecipitate only small amounts of DdCP224 with DdEB1 and vice versa. However, the mock precipitations with control beads proved that the direct or indirect interaction of the cytosolic forms of DdCP224 and DdEB1 was specific. Figure 6 and Movie 1. DdEB1 interacts and colocalizes with DdCP224. Colocalization of DdEB1 and DdCP224 at microtubule tips. Wild-type Dictyostelium cells were stained with anti-DdEB1 antibodies and the monoclonal anti-DdCP224 antibody... Prometaphase Progression Is Retarded in DdEB1Δ Mutants To investigate the cellular functions of DdEB1, we have created a DdEB1 null mutant by homologous recombination. The DdEB1 gene disruption was very efficient because the homologous integration occurred in >80% of all transformants. DdEB1Δ mutants were easily recognized by the lack of DdEB1 staining in immunofluorescence microscopy and immunoblots of cytosolic extracts. 7 A). DdEB1Δ mutants were viable and showed normal development of fruiting bodies, but frequently displayed disordered mitotic figures. Many mitotic cells were in a prophase- or prometaphase-like stage characterized by condensed but unsegregated chromosomes. 7 ). Usually, mitotic spindles were deformed 7 B) or lacking. Often nuclei were associated with more than one duplicated centrosome, and the mutants showed signs of aneuploidy such as additional, small cytosolic DNA masses. With continuous cultivation, the proportion of cells with unusual mitotic figures decreased and there were more and more cells significantly retarded in prometaphase progression. This was observed in three independent transformations. After approximately 2 mo the DdEB1Δ phenotype was stable, and there was still no DdEB1 detectable in these cells. 7 A). The percentage of prometaphase cells among all mitotic DdEB1Δ cells was increased by a factor of three compared with untransformed cells. 1 ). As expected, the generation time of DdEB1Δ mutants was increased from ∼8 to ∼12 h. These results were confirmed by live cell analysis of DdEB1Δ cells expressing GFP-α-tubulin. The expression of GFP-α-tubulin in wild-type cells does not affect mitotic progression. However, in GFP-α-tubulin/ DdEB1Δ mutants, prometaphase often lasted longer than 8 min compared with the usual ∼2 min, before the spindle poles started to separate and a spindle was formed. However, spindle elongation was unaffected in DdEB1Δ mutants, because once a spindle was formed, its elongation proceeded at normal speed. Table 1 Percentage of prometaphase cells is increased in DdEB1Δ mutants Figure 8 and Movie 3. DdEB1Δ mutants are retarded in prometaphase progression. Live cell observation of a dinucleated DdEB1Δ /GFP-α-tubulin cell by four-dimensional confocal microscopy. The time is indicated in seconds. Prometaphase lasts... DISCUSSION Similarly to the other members of the EB1 protein family, DdEB1 is a microtubule-associated protein concentrated at the microtubule tips. However, DdEB1 is exceptional because it is almost twice as long as all other EB1 homologs and also a genuine centrosomal component. The amino acid sequence alignment with human EB1 reveals that the first 122 amino acids, including the putative microtubule-binding domain, are highly conserved. The remaining DdEB1 sequence is less conserved but contains a coiled-coil domain, which was predicted for all EB1 proteins. The sequence insertions of DdEB1 could be important for the striking microtubule-independent centrosomal association of DdEB1, which was not observed in case of the smaller human EB1 protein. Although deletion of the N-terminal microtubule-binding domain as well as truncation of the C-terminal domain, including the coiled-coil, diminished microtubule binding of DdEB1, the mutant proteins still localized to the centrosome. Thus, centrosomal binding of DdEB1 seems to be independent of homo-oligomerization and the centrosomal targeting domain is likely to reside within the sequence shared by the N- and C-terminal deletion mutants. Our DdEB1 deletion mutants demonstrated that the N-terminal microtubule-binding domain is not the only determinant for the association of DdEB1 with microtubules. The two green fluorescent deletion mutants GFP-DdEB1Δ328C and GFP-DdEB1Δ281C, which differ only in the presence of the predicted coiled-coil domain, revealed that the C-terminal part downstream from the coiled-coil domain is not required for any of the DdEB1 localizations, whereas the coiled-coil domain is essential for microtubule binding. Our studies with recombinant MBP-DdEB1 suggested that the coiled-coil domain promotes formation of a DdEB1 homo-oligomer. This oligomerization seems to be a prerequisite for microtubule binding in vivo. The intermolecular interaction between the single DdEB1 chains may be similar to other homotetrameric coiled-coil proteins such as the bcr protein, the cartilage matrix protein, or the viral NSP4 protein. The presence of the coiled-coil domain in all EB1 proteins indicates that homo-oligomerization may generally be required for binding of EB1 to microtubules. Despite its capacity to bind directly to microtubules, it is possible that other binding partners such as XMAP215 family members mediate the presence of EB1 at microtubule tips, kinetochores, and the centrosome. The XMAP215 homolog in Dictyostelium, DdCP224, was originally identified as a centrosomal component. Herein, we could show for the first time colocalization of members of the XMAP215 and EB1 families of microtubule-associated proteins at microtubule tips, the centrosome, and the kinetochore region. This may indicate that both proteins act together within the same protein complex. Indeed, yeast EB1 was found as an interactor of Stu2p, in a two-hybrid screen, but so far this interaction could not be verified by biochemical means and it cannot be excluded that it is indirect. Although most of the cytosolic fraction of DdCP224 seems to be monomeric, we could show coprecipitation of a fraction of cytosolic DdCP224 with DdEB1. The absence of a prevailing cytosolic DdEB1/DdCP224 complex does not rule out a direct interaction of both proteins at microtubule tips or at the centrosome because both proteins could assemble to these localizations subsequently. We also cannot exclude the involvement of further binding partners in an indirect DdEB1–DdCP224 interaction. So far, both proteins failed to interact in a yeast two-hybrid assay. Moreover, confocal microscopy images revealed that the localizations of the two proteins do not overlap exactly. DdCP224 is localized a bit farther distal from DdEB1 at both ends of microtubules, i.e., closer to the cell cortex at the microtubule tips and closer to the centrosomal core at the centrosome. These data suggest that DdCP224 and DdEB1 are linked together by at least one additional binding partner. Potential candidates are the dynein and dynactin subunits, which coimmunoprecipitated with EB1. These interactions were confirmed in yeast, where mutations in BIM1 were synthetically lethal with deletions in certain dynein and dynactin genes, and in Dictyostelium, where the dynein IC also coprecipitated with MBP-DdEB1. DdEB1 interactions with dynein/dynactin could also explain its colocalization with actin at protruding pseudopods because dynactin subunits have been shown to interact with the cortical actin cytoskeleton. The phenotype of DdEB1Δ mutants indicated that DdEB1 fulfills its main function in mitosis because the lack of DdEB1 caused a significant retardation of prometaphase progression. In Dictyostelium, prometaphase is characterized by the formation of the mitotic spindle whose elongation separates the two spindle poles. The defect in prometaphase progression of DdEB1Δ mutants strongly reminded of Dictyostelium cells incubated with microtubule-depolymerizing drugs. This treatment causes a block of spindle formation and prometaphase progression, whereas centrosome duplication, which takes place in prophase, is unaffected. Due to the lack of a spindle checkpoint in Dictyostelium, the cells proceed to the next cell cycle, and thus giant cells with multiple nuclei or huge, aberrantly shaped nuclei are produced. Because centrosome duplication is independent of microtubules, the nuclei in such cells are often associated with more than one duplicated, but unseparated centrosome as in DdEB1Δ mutants. The DdEB1Δ phenotype was most severe in cells viewed as early as possible after transformation and selection for transformants. In a considerable fraction of these cells, spindle formation seemed to be blocked completely. It is likely that a strong selective pressure against these severe aberrations caused a partial compensation of these defects upon prolonged cultivation of these mutants, presumably by up- or down-regulation of other proteins that are involved in the same pathway. After 2 mo the DdEB1Δ phenotype was stable. Aberrant mitotic figures were only rarely encountered, and spindle formation was not blocked anymore but still significantly retarded. However, once spindle elongation has started, the kinetics of elongation was normal in these cells. Taken together, DdEB1 assists in formation but not elongation of the mitotic spindle. Thus, DdEB1Δ mutants were similar to yeast bim1Δ mutants where formation of the preanaphase bipolar spindle was delayed, whereas spindle elongation was unaffected. bim1Δ mutants were also characterized by shorter, less dynamic microtubules. In contrast, the interphase microtubule cytoskeleton seemed normal in DdEB1Δ /GFP-α-tubulin mutants. Compared with GFP-α-tubulin cells, there were no obvious differences in length, distribution, and dynamics of astral microtubules in interphase. In Dictyostelium, the astral microtubules have a relatively constant length and show only little plus end dynamics. They are lost in prophase and most, if not all interphase microtubules of the later daughter cells start to grow out in metaphase, i.e., after the prometaphase block in microtubule outgrowth of DdEB1Δ mutants has been overcome. Consequently, obvious defects of the interphase microtubule cytoskeleton of DdEB1Δ mutants were not expected, because DdEB1 does not seem to play a major role in microtubule elongation. Although DdEB1 was localized to microtubule tips, the formation of a normal astral microtubule network in DdEB1Δ mutants argues against an essential role of DdEB1 in capturing of microtubule plus ends at cortical sites. This is supported by the observation that DdEB1Δ mutants undergo normal development of fruiting bodies, indicating that the absence of DdEB1 does not affect amoeboid cell motility and chemotaxis. Both processes are thought to require an intact microtubule cytoskeleton where most of the microtubule tips are tethered to the cell cortex. The strong centrosomal presence of DdEB1 could reflect an additional centrosomal function that remains to be identified. However, DdEB1Δ mutants exhibited no centrosomal defects that cannot be explained by the defect in spindle formation alone. Thus, the centrosome could simply serve as a source of DdEB1 for its distribution to the outgrowing plus ends. Because GFP-α-tubulin was always present at prometaphase spindle poles, DdEB1 acts downstream from the recruitment of the first α/β-tubulin dimers to the nascent spindle poles, which are thought to be initiated by γ-tubulin complexes. Taken together, our data suggest that the main function of DdEB1 is the initiation of microtubule growth and not microtubule elongation. Supplementary Material View video Click here to view. View video Click here to view. View video Click here to view. 