 On starvation, the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum initiates a program of development leading to formation of multicellular structures. The initial cell aggregation requires chemotaxis to cyclic AMP and relay of the cAMP signal by the activation of adenylyl cyclase, and it has been shown previously that the Ras protein RasC is involved in both processes. Insertional inactivation of the rasG gene resulted in delayed aggregation and a partial inhibition of early gene expression, suggesting that RasG also has a role in early development. Both chemotaxis and ACA activation were reduced in the rasG − cells, but the effect on chemotaxis was more pronounced. When the responses of rasG − cells to cAMP were compared with the responses of rasC − and rasC − rasG − strains, generated in otherwise isogenic backgrounds, these studies revealed that signal transduction through RasG is more important in chemotaxis and early gene expression, but that signal transduction through RasC is more important in ACA activation. Because the loss of either of the two Ras proteins alone did not result in a total loss of signal output down either of the branches of the cAMP signal-response pathway, there appears to be some overlap of function. INTRODUCTION In the presence of nutrients, the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum grows as free living single-celled amoebae, but upon starvation these amoebae aggregate into a multicellular organism that progresses through a motile slug stage to form a spore mass or sorus supported by a stalk. Aggregation occurs in response to cyclic AMP, which is synthesized and secreted soon after the onset of starvation. cAMP binds to cell surface cAMP receptors, resulting in the dissociation and activation of a heterotrimeric G protein, and this in turn leads to signaling through various downstream effectors that mediate chemotaxis to cAMP and the cAMP relay, the process by which the signal is passed throughout the cell population. The chemotactic response involves the activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and protein kinase B, whereas the cAMP relay involves the activation of adenylyl cyclase. Ras proteins are monomeric, small GTPases that function as molecular switches, cycling between active GTP-bound and inactive GDP-bound states. Activation is regulated by guanine-nucleotide-exchange factors, and inactivation is regulated by GTPase-activating proteins that stimulate the hydrolysis of the bound GTP to GDP. The Ras superfamily can be divided, on the basis of sequence comparisons, into several distinct subfamilies, one of which is the Ras subfamily. The human Ras subfamily consists of 36 distinct gene products that can be divided into several groups. The search for downstream effectors has revealed some specificity but also an enormous complexity of overlapping functions, even between members of the different groups within the subfamily. Despite a relatively small genome, Dictyostelium possesses a large number of Ras subfamily GTPases, and there is evidence that each protein performs a distinct function. Dictyostelium therefore provides a useful experimental model for the study of Ras function. The initial evidence for a role of Ras signaling pathways in regulating the Dictyostelium aggregation process was the disruption of a gene encoding a RasGEF, RasGEFA, which prevented aggregation. Direct evidence for a role for Ras came with the disruption of the rasC gene, which produced cells that failed to aggregate. rasC null cells exhibited reduced activation of ACA and reduced phosphorylation of PKB in response to cAMP, suggesting a role for RasC in the signal transduction pathways that regulate both the cAMP relay and chemotaxis. We recently found that both RasC and RasG were activated in response to cAMP, suggesting a possible role for RasG in the aggregation process. However, the properties of the two previously isolated rasG null strains, IR15 and IR17, had suggested that the major role for RasG was in Dictyostelium growth and other vegetative cell functions, and the only defect observed in development was a slight but inconsistent delay in the onset of aggregation. In view of the variable defects in development and the relative instability of the previously described rasG null strains, new rasG null strains were generated, to study more definitively the possible role of RasG in early development. For comparison, we also generated a rasC rasG double null and rasC null strains in an isogenic background. Studies of these strains have revealed that the branches of the bipartite cAMP signal-transduction pathway depend primarily on either RasG or RasC, although there is also some overlap of Ras protein function. MATERIALS AND METHODS Generation of Null Mutant Strains The AX2/ rasG − strains were generated as described previously. Screening of 270 blasticidin S-resistant transformants by PCR yielded three AX2/ rasG − mutants. To generate rasG − mutants in the JH10 strain background, a rasG-thy1 disruption vector was constructed by inserting the BamHI fragment of plasmid pJH60, containing the thy1 gene, into the single BglII site in the rasG promoter in plasmid pRHI125, which contains only the promoter and exon II of rasG. Transformants were selected in the absence of thymidine and screened by PCR. From 280 clones, three JH10/ rasG − cell lines were isolated. Southern blot analysis confirmed each of the presumptive gene disruptions and indicated that each was the result of a single insertion into the genome. Construction of the AX2/ rasC − and JH10/ rasC − strains has been described previously. To make a rasC − rasG − double-disruption strain, the rasC disruption vector pJLW26, carrying the blasticidin-resistance selectable marker, was transformed into JH10/ rasG − cells, and the blasticidin-resistant clones were screened by PCR. From 700 clones, two rasC − rasG − cell lines were isolated. rasG − / rasG rescued strains were generated as previously described. rasC − rasG − / rasC rasG rescued strains were created by cotransforming the previously described rasG -containing and rasC -containing plasmids into the double-disruption strain. For all transformations, 20 μg of the appropriate vector were cleaved with restriction enzymes and electroporated into Dictyostelium cells as previously described. Clones containing the selectable marker were isolated 7–15 d after the application of the selection conditions. These clonal isolates were plaque purified on a bacterial lawn. Isolated clones were screened for single or double gene disruptions by PCR using rasG or rasC specific primers. To prepare templates for PCR amplification, cells were lysed in 10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 0.3% Tween-20, 60 μg/ml proteinase K, and the lysates were incubated for 1 h at 56°C. The lysates were then boiled for 10 min, and 1 μl of the crude cell lysate was used as template in a 10-μl PCR reaction in glass capillary tubes with reactions conducted in a Idaho RapidCycler. PCR amplification was conducted with the following cycling parameters: 2 cycles of 92°C for 90 s, 50°C for 10 s, 72°C for 120 s; followed by 35 cycles of 91°C for 7 s, 50°C for 7 s, 72°C for 60 s; followed by holding at 72°C for 180 s. Cell Culture and Development Strain AX2 and its derivatives were grown at 22°C in HL5 medium containing 50 μg/ml streptomycin sulfate. The JH10/ rasG − cells were grown in the same medium, and strain JH10 was grown in the same medium supplemented with 100 μg/ml thymidine. The JH10/ rasC − rasG − and JH10/ rasG − / rasG rescue cells were grown in the same medium but without thymidine and containing 10 μg/ml blasticidin S or 10 μg/ml G418, respectively. Because the JH10/ rasG − and JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells grow poorly in shaken suspension, all strains were grown in Nunc tissue-culture plates. To obtain cAMP-pulsed cells, vegetative cells were harvested, washed twice in KK2, and resuspended in KK2 to a final density of 5 × 10 6 cells/ml. Thirty milliliters of this cell suspension was shaken at 150 rpm for 1 h and then pulsed with 50 nM cAMP every 6 min for 5 h. For some experiments, cells were pulsed with cAMP for 8 h. To observe multicellular development, axenically grown or cAMP-pulsed cells were washed twice in Bonner's salts and plated on nitrocellulose filters supported by KK2- saturated pads. To observe aggregation streaming, vegetative or 5-h cAMP-pulsed cells were washed twice in Bonner's salts, seeded at ∼4 × 10 5 cells/cm 2 in Nunc tissue-culture dishes submerged under Bonner's salts, and incubated at 22°C. For plaque purification, Dictyostelium cells were diluted and plated in association with Klebsiella oxytoca on SM agar plates. Chemotaxis Assays For cAMP micropipette assays, cells were pulsed with cAMP as described above, washed twice with Bonner's salts, and then seeded in Nunc tissue-culture dishes at a cell density of ∼5 × 10 5 cell/cm 2 in Bonner's salts. At t = 0, a micropipette filled with 100 μM cAMP was placed in the field of view, and cell movements toward the micropipette tip were monitored by time-lapse videomicroscopy using an Olympus IX-70 inverted microscope, a DAGE-MTI CCD-100 camera, and Scion Image 4.0 software. Instantaneous velocities and chemotaxis indices were determined as described previously. Western-Blot Analyses and PKB Phosphorylation Assays Cells were pelleted by centrifugation and lysed in 1× Laemmli SDS-PAGE loading buffer by boiling for 5 min. Protein, 10 μg, was then fractionated by SDS-PAGE. After electrophoresis, the proteins were transferred electrophoretically onto nitrocellulose membranes, which were then blocked with nonfat milk and probed with the appropriate antibody, which was then detected by enhanced chemiluminescence. The RasG antibody and the RasC antibody have been described previously. PKB phosphorylation was determined as described previously. Briefly, cAMP-pulsed cells were washed twice in KK2, resuspended to 5 × 10 7 cells/ml in KK2 and then stimulated with cAMP at a final concentration of 100 nM. Aliquots of 100 μl were removed at intervals, before and after stimulation, and mixed with 20 μl of 6× SDS-PAGE loading buffer. Protein,10 μg, was fractionated by SDS-PAGE and then subjected to Western blot analysis using a phosphothreonine-specific antibody. Equal sample loading was verified by staining a duplicate gel with Coomassie Blue. To assess equal PKB expression levels in all strains, Western blots were also analyzed using a PKB-specific antibody. Northern Blot Analyses For Northern blot analyses, cells were pulsed with cAMP as described above, and total RNA was extracted at intervals using guanidinium isocyanate. Aliquots, 15-μg, were size-fractionated on 1.25% agarose-formaldehyde gels, blotted onto Hybond-N+ membrane, and probed with DNA fragments from plasmids carrying the specific genes of interest, as previously described. cAMP Accumulation and Adenylyl Cyclase Assay cAMP production was measured by a previously described method. Briefly, cells were pulsed with cAMP as described above, washed twice, and resuspended in KK2 at a density of 6.25 × 10 7 cells/ml. The cells were stimulated with 10 μM 2′-deoxy cAMP, and 100-μl samples were lysed at intervals by addition of 100 μl of 3.5% perchloric acid, followed by the addition of 50 μl of 50% saturated KHCO 3. cAMP levels were then measured using a cAMP-binding protein assay kit. In vitro adenylyl cyclase activity was determined as described previously, except that cell suspensions were lysed by freezing on dry ice and thawing, followed by vortexing in the presence of glass beads. cAMP was recovered by sequential chromatography through Dowex and Alumina columns, and the eluted 32 P-cAMP was measured using a Beckman LS6000IC scintillation counter. cGMP Assay To measure cGMP production, cells were pulsed with cAMP as described above, washed twice with KK2, and resuspended to a density of 1 × 10 8 cells/ml in KK2 containing 2 mM caffeine. The cells were stimulated with 100 nM cAMP, and 100-μl samples were lysed at intervals with 100 μl of 3.5% perchloric acid followed by addition of 50 μl of 50% saturated KHCO 3. cGMP levels were then measured using a cGMP- 3 H assay kit. RESULTS Generation of rasG and rasC rasG Null Strains In view of the instability and variability of the originally isolated rasG null strains, we generated new rasG null strains in order to study the role of RasG during early development. To control for possible strain-background differences, the mutants were generated in two different backgrounds: one in AX2 and one in JH10, a thymidine-requiring derivative of AX3. All the AX2/ rasG − and JH10/ rasG − clones exhibited identical properties, so detailed studies were conducted on a representative isolate of each. Western blots revealed no RasG protein in either AX2/ rasG − or JH10/ rasG − isolates, and both new mutants showed the same growth defects as the original IR15 and IR17 rasG null strains. However, unlike the original strains, both new rasG null strains had stable phenotypes during prolonged growth. Ectopic expression of RasG protein from the rasG promoter rescued all the phenotypic defects of the rasG − mutants, including the developmental defects described below. Figure 1. Western blot analysis of Ras protein levels. Cell lysates from JH10, JH10/ rasC −, JH10/ rasG −, JH10/ rasC − rasG −, AX2, AX2/ rasC −, and AX2/ rasG − were probed with RasG- and RasC-specific antibodies, as indicated.... To investigate possible overlap of function between RasC and RasG, rasC − rasG − double-mutant strains were generated by disrupting rasC in the JH10/ rasG − background. Both independently isolated rasC − rasG − double-mutant clones lacked the RasC and RasG proteins and had identical properties. A Western blot analysis of one of the strains is shown in Figure 1. The rasC − rasG − strains exhibited vegetative growth defects that were similar to those of the rasG null strains. Ectopic expression of both RasC and RasG restored a wild-type phenotype to the doubly disrupted rasC − rasG − strain. Developmental Phenotype of the Null Strains When grown in association with bacteria, plaques of the JH10/ rasG − and AX2/ rasG − strains showed large clearing zones before differentiation commenced, as observed previously for the original rasG − strains. Like JH10/ rasC − cells, the JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells did not form aggregates on bacterial lawns. Aggregation of parental and mutant strains was observed in more detail by plating cells in plastic dishes under nonnutrient buffer. Aggregation streams of JH10 cells were observed 8 h after plating, and typical tight aggregates formed by 12 h. JH10/ rasG − and AX2/ rasG − cells formed aggregation streams with a delay of ∼4 h relative to wild type, and the final aggregates were smaller. The JH10/ rasC − cells formed very small clumps, similar to those observed previously for AX2/ rasC −. The JH10/ rasC − rasG − strains showed no sign of aggregation or clumping, even after prolonged incubation. When pulsed with cAMP for 5 h before plating in plastic dishes, JH10 cells rapidly formed aggregation streams, whereas JH10/ rasG − cells were somewhat delayed in aggregate-stream formation. Under these conditions JH10/ rasC − cells formed large clumps without detectable aggregate-stream formation, whereas JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells exhibited no detectable cell–cell association. Figure 2. Aggregation on a plastic surface of cells submerged in Bonner's salts solution, without or with 5 h of prior pulsing with cAMP. Strains JH10, JH10/ rasG −, JH10/ rasC −... Developmental phenotypes were also observed after plating on nitrocellulose filters under starvation conditions. Both the JH10/ rasG − and AX2/ rasG − strains formed small fruiting bodies, but culmination was not observed until ∼30 h, compared with 24 h for JH10 and AX2 cells. Although the JH10/ rasC − cells did not routinely undergo development under these conditions, some filters occasionally contained small fruiting bodies, but the JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells did not aggregate or form any developmental structures. It was shown previously that AX2/ rasC − cells formed multicellular clumps after the administration of cAMP pulses, and these clumps went on to form fruiting bodies when plated on nitrocellulose filters. Although JH10/ rasC − cells also formed fruiting bodies under these conditions, the JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells failed to form any developmental structures. The finding that the developmental defect in the JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells was far more pronounced than that of JH10/ rasC − cells provided additional evidence for an involvement of RasG in early development. Early Developmental Gene Expression The pronounced defect in aggregation of the JH10/ rasC − rasG − strains might be due to a defect in early gene expression, as observed for some other mutants. To test this possibility, cells were washed and pulsed with cAMP; the levels of expression of three representative genes were then determined by Northern blot analysis. In the control JH10 cells, the expression of all three genes increased markedly over the first 8 h. The expression of two genes was not appreciably reduced in JH10/ rasC − cells, but expression was significantly reduced and delayed in JH10/ rasG − cells, and similar results were obtained for the AX2/ rasG − cells. These results indicated an involvement of a RasG-dependent signal-transduction pathway for the optimum expression of these genes. In the JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells, the expression of carA and gpaB was further reduced. This low level of expression could partially explain the total absence of aggregation in the JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells. These data also suggested that a small but significant level of signal transduction through a RasC-dependent pathway also contributes to the expression of these early developmental genes in rasG − cells. For the third gene, the aggregation-specific csaA expression was only slightly lower in JH10/ rasC − and JH10/ rasG − cells than in JH10 cells, but was appreciably lower in the JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells, suggesting that signaling through either RasC or RasG was sufficient for csaA expression. Figure 3. Northern blot analysis of early developmental gene expression. Cells of strains JH10, JH10/ rasG −, JH10/ rasC −, and JH10/ rasC − rasG − were pulsed with cAMP as described in Materials and Methods, and RNA was... Starved rasG − Cells Exhibit Reduced Chemotaxis Diffusion of cAMP from the tip of a micropipette establishes a spatial cAMP gradient, and chemotaxis-competent cells respond by migrating toward the tip. Chemotaxis assays were performed with cells that had been pulsed with cAMP for 5 h before the assay. Under these conditions, JH10 and JH10/ rasC − cells were highly polarized and migrated rapidly toward the cAMP source. In contrast, chemotaxis by pulsed JH10/ rasG − cells and AX2/ rasG − cells was slower, and the cells were less polarized than JH10 cells even upon reaching the pipette tip. The pulsed JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells exhibited no net migration to the pipette tip. A few cells did show slight movement toward the tip but then dispersed. Calculation of the rates of cell motility revealed no significant difference between the JH10 and JH10/ rasC − cells, but average instantaneous velocities of the JH10/ rasG − cells and JH10/ rasG − rasC − were lower than those for the wild type. The instantaneous velocity values obtained for the JH10 and JH10/ rasC − cells were not significantly different from the values published previously for AX2 and AX2/ rasC − strains. A calculation of chemotactic index revealed no reduction relative to JH10 for the JH10/ rasC − cells, but the index was lower for the JH10/ rasG − cells and very low for the JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells, reflecting the virtual absence of chemotaxis for the latter strain, as seen in Figure 4 D. These results indicate that the defect in chemotaxis for the double-null cells is far greater than the defect in motility. Figure 4. Chemotaxis toward a source of cAMP of cells that had been pulsed with cAMP for 5 h or 8 h. Cells of strains JH10, JH10/ rasG −, JH10/ rasC −, and JH10/ rasC − rasG − could possibly explain the delay in aggregation and reduced chemotaxis, the experiments were repeated with cells that had been pulsed with cAMP for 8 h to ensure maximum expression of carA. However, the results were not detectably different from those for 5 h cAMP-pulsed cells. The chemotaxis defects exhibited by the JH10/ rasG − cells suggest an important role for RasG in the signaling pathway responsible for cAMP chemotaxis. However, the finding that rasG − cells are still capable of some chemotaxis suggests that RasC is capable of contributing to this pathway, at least in the absence of RasG. cGMP Production in Response to cAMP In Dictyostelium, cGMP production has been shown to be associated with the chemotactic response. We therefore examined cGMP production in response to cAMP in the ras mutant strains. As previously reported for wild-type cells, there was a burst of cGMP production in JH10 cells 10 s after the application of cAMP, and basal levels were recovered after ∼30 s. This response was reduced in JH10/ rasC − cells but reduced to an even greater extent in JH10/ rasG − cells and in AX2/ rasG − cells. There was a barely detectable response in JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells. These results mirror the results obtained in the chemotaxis assays and further substantiate the importance of RasG for chemotaxis signaling. Figure 5. cGMP production in response to cAMP. JH10, JH10/ rasG −, JH10/ rasC −, and JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells were pulsed for 5 h with cAMP, washed, and then stimulated with 100 nM cAMP. Samples... RasG Is More Important than RasC for PKB Phosphorylation The Dictyostelium chemotactic response to cAMP involves a PI3K-mediated signaling pathway that leads to the transient phosphorylation of PKB. To test the possible involvement of RasG in the PI3K-PKB pathway, lysates of cAMP-stimulated cells were analyzed by Western blotting using a phosphothreonine-specific antibody that is capable of unambiguously detecting the phosphorylation of PKB. In JH10 cells, PKB was transiently phosphorylated after 10 s in response to cAMP. The phosphorylation level then decreased, and there was a second, smaller increase after 120 s. This response was reduced in JH10/ rasC − cells and more severely reduced in JH10/ rasG − cells and in AX2/ rasG − cells. The response was totally eliminated in the JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells. The total amounts of PKB protein, as detected using a specific PKB antibody, were identical in all four strains. These results indicate that the cAMP-stimulated phosphorylation of PKB depends more on the RasG signaling pathway than on the RasC pathway. When cells were pulsed for 8 h rather than for 5 h with cAMP, identical results were obtained, indicating that the reduction in PKB phosphorylation in the JH10/ rasG − cells was not due to the delayed expression of carA. Figure 6. PKB phosphorylation in response to cAMP. Cells were pulsed with cAMP for 5 h or 8 h and then treated with 100 nM cAMP. Cell extracts from JH10, JH10/ rasG −, JH10/ rasC −, and JH10/ rasC − rasG − were prepared at the indicated... RasC Is More Important than RasG for Adenylyl Cyclase Activation To test for a role of RasG in the cAMP-stimulated activation of adenylyl cyclase, cells that had been pulsed with cAMP for either 5 or 8 h were washed, stimulated with 2′-deoxy-cAMP, and assayed for cAMP accumulation at various times after stimulation. JH10/ rasG − cells produced lower levels of cAMP upon stimulation than the JH10 wild-type cells, but the reduction was far less pronounced than that observed for JH10/ rasC − cells. AX2/ rasG − cells were similar to JH10/ rasG − cells. These results suggest that RasC is more important for the activation of ACA but that RasG can also make a contribution. JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells produced negligible levels of cAMP. Although cAMP production increases in some strains as cells progress through aggregation, our finding that the levels of cAMP production in the JH10 wild-type cells were identical after 5 and 8 h of cAMP pulsing is not surprising, because cells pulsed for 5 h are fully aggregation competent and would not be expected to change appreciably in their physiological responses during the additional 3 h of pulsing. Figure 7. cAMP accumulation and ACA activation in the various ras mutant strains. Cells of strains JH10, JH10/ rasG −, JH10/ rasC −, and JH10/ rasC − rasG − were pulsed with cAMP... The potential roles of RasG and RasC in the cAMP relay were also examined by measuring in vitro GTPγS-mediated activation of ACA in lysates prepared from cAMP- pulsed cells. GTPγS stimulates ACA activity by uncoupling the Gβγ subunit from the heterotrimeric G-protein, thus bypassing the need for receptor activation. GTPγS stimulated the ACA activity of JH10 lysates ∼18-fold, JH10/ rasG − lysates ∼15-fold, AX2/ rasG − lysates ∼15-fold, JH10/ rasC − lysates ∼7-fold, and JH10/ rasC − rasG − lysates ∼2.5-fold over the basal levels. These results are consistent with the idea that RasC is more important than RasG for activating the cAMP relay. The ACA activity of lysates was also assayed in the presence of Mn 2+ to provide an accurate measure of the unstimulated ACA activity. This activity was comparable for JH10, JH10/ rasC −, and JH10/ rasG − lysates, indicating that the lower levels of activation in the cell lysates of these strains were not due to reduced levels of ACA. However, ACA activity was reduced in the lysates of JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells, suggesting that these cells expressed less ACA, a result consistent with the defect in early gene expression in this strain revealed by Northern blot analysis. DISCUSSION Previous studies with Dictyostelium ras null mutants had indicated a predominant role for RasG in growth and vegetative-cell functions and a predominant role for RasC in the regulation of aggregation. However, other studies had suggested a possible additional role for RasG in early development. For example, PI3K plays a pivotal role in the chemotactic response to cAMP, and because RasG interacts with the Ras binding domains of two of the Dictyostelium phosphoinositol kinases, it had been postulated that RasG is a regulator of PI3K activity and hence of the chemotactic response. In addition, the Dictyostelium protein Rip3 was identified as interacting with RasG, and cells lacking Rip3 are defective in aggregation. Finally, RasG has been shown to be activated in response to cAMP. These studies pointed to the possibility that RasG was involved in cAMP signal transduction during early development. However, definitive proof for a role of RasG had been lacking. To study further the possible role of RasG in early development, we isolated two new rasG null mutants, AX2/ rasG − and JH10 /rasG −. The new rasG − strains exhibited all the previously described vegetative-cell phenotypes, but both were stable and exhibited a consistent delay in aggregation. Because rasG − cells grow slowly, there is clearly an opportunity for a suppressor strain to take over the population. It is not apparent why the new strains were less susceptible than the originals to such suppression, but it did not appear to be related to parental background, because mutants in both AX2 and AX3 backgrounds were found to be stable in the current study. After being pulsed with cAMP, the rasG − strains in both backgrounds exhibited reduced polarity and reduced cAMP chemotaxis in a spatial gradient of cAMP. They also exhibited considerably reduced cGMP accumulation and a dramatic reduction in PKB phosphorylation in response to cAMP. These effects were far more pronounced than those observed for JH10/ rasC − mutant cells, suggesting that RasG is more important than RasC for chemotaxis. The opposite was true for cAMP accumulation and ACA activation. The defects in these properties were more pronounced in rasC − cells than in the rasG − cells, suggesting that signaling through RasC was more important for the cAMP relay than signaling through RasG. Because stimulation with cAMP does not activate RasC or RasG in gβ − cells, it is likely that the RasGEFs responsible for the activation of RasC and RasG act downstream of the heterotrimeric G-protein, Gα 2 βγ. Activation of ACA also requires the cytosolic protein CRAC, which translocates to the membrane in response to production of PIP3; another soluble protein, Pianissimo; RasGEFA; and Rip3. rasC −, gefA −, crac −, pia −, and rip3 − cells all share somewhat similar phenotypes. In a gefA − mutant, RasC does not become activated upon stimulation with cAMP, whereas RasG is fully activated, indicating that the guanine-nucleotide-exchange activity of RasGEFA is specific for RasC. In view of the finding that Rip3 interacts better with RasG than with other Dictyostelium Ras proteins in yeast two-hybrid assays, the interaction between Rip3 and RasC and RasG clearly needs to be reassessed. Although chemotaxis predominantly required RasG, whereas the cAMP relay predominantly required RasC, the mutant studies also provided evidence for some overlap of function. Signaling through RasC was capable of mediating PI3K activation in rasG − cells, although with reduced efficiency, and signaling through RasG was capable of mediating ACA activation in rasC − cells, although again with reduced efficiency. The finding that JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells were devoid of both the cAMP relay and chemotaxis is consistent with the idea that all cAMP signaling passes through the RasG and RasC proteins. However, we do not have formal proof of this proposal, because the defects in chemotaxis and the cAMP relay in the JH10/ rasC − rasG − cells might also be explained by the markedly reduced early developmental gene expression in this strain. The apparent overlap of function for RasC and RasG is less extensive than that observed with mammalian Ras proteins, suggesting that Dictyostelium may be a fruitful model to investigate the specificity of Ras-protein signal-transduction networks. Studies of the interaction of mammalian Ras proteins with their effector molecules have identified two highly flexible Ras domains, Switch I and Switch II, that dominate these interactions. It has been proposed that the essential residues in these regions have “multispecificities” that are influenced by neighboring amino acids, that is, that identical residues can interact with different effectors in different ways. RasC and RasG have identical sequences for the Switch II region, although the residues flanking this sequence differ slightly, providing possible explanations for both specificity and overlap of function. Furthermore, although there is considerable sequence conservation in the Switch I region, there are also some significant differences, again perhaps allowing for both functional specificity and overlap of function. The creation of stable gene disruptions in isogenic Dictyostelium backgrounds will provide a rich resource for functional studies to examine the role of these switch regions in Ras protein specificity. 