 The back door has been proposed to be an exit pathway from the myosin active site for phosphate generated by adenosine 5′-triphosphate hydrolysis. We used molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the interaction of P i with the back door and the plausibility of P i release via this route. Molecular dynamics simulations were performed on the Dictyostelium motor domain with bound Mg·adenosine 5′-diphosphate and P i, modeled upon the Mg·ADP·BeF x and Mg·ADP·V i structures. Simulations revealed that the relaxation of ADP and free P i from their initial positions reduced the diameter of the back door via motions of switch 1 and switch 2 located in the upper and lower 50-kDa subdomains, respectively. In neither simulation could P i freely diffuse out the back door. Water molecules, however, could flux through the back door in the Mg·ADP·BeF x -based simulation but not in the Mg·ADP·V i -based simulation. In neither structure was water observed fluxing through the main entrance. These observations suggest that the ability of P i to leave via the back door is linked tightly to conformational changes between the upper and lower 50-kDa subdomains. The simulations offer structural explanations for 18 O-exchange with P i at the active site, and P i release being the rate-limiting step in the myosin adenosine 5′-triphosphatase. INTRODUCTION Myosin is the motor protein responsible for converting the chemical energy of adenosine 5′-triphosphate into the mechanical energy of movement in muscle contraction and many other cellular processes. The release of phosphate from the myosin·ADP·P i complex is a crucial step in the chemomechanical transduction process, in that P i release accompanies the transition to force generating states in actively contracting muscle. To understand P i release, and its influence on force production, the interaction of P i with the protein and the exit route of the ion must be characterized. The most common mechanism for product release in enzymes has the products leaving the active site via the original entrance route for the substrate. However, the x-ray structures of myosin suggest the existence of a secondary entrance/exit to the active site that, drawing upon terminology developed for tryptophan synthase, has been termed the back door. In recent years, several additional enzymes have been demonstrated or postulated to utilize back door mechanisms for product release: acetylcholinesterase, Rap1A, the α -subunit of G-protein, actin, creatine kinase, polyamine oxidase, formiminotransferase-cyclodeaminase, and glutamine amidotransferases. Molecular modeling of ATP into the chicken skeletal myosin subfragment 1 crystal structure first suggested a possible secondary entrance/exit to the active site. The docked protein-ligand structure suggested vectorial binding of ATP within the active site. In the model, the adenine ring of ATP projected out of the protein and into the solvent via the front door, whereas the triphosphate moiety, on the opposite end of the molecule, was tightly bound in a tube-like structure, termed the phosphate tube. The phosphate tube pointed into the interior of the protein, and was formed by three structurally conserved elements, the P-loop, switch 1, and switch 2, found in all members of the G-protein superfamily and extended into the interior of myosin, well beyond the binding location of the γ -phosphate of ATP. The rear opening of the phosphate tube, the proposed back door, was located at the apex of a large cleft that splits the 50-kDa tryptic fragment into upper and lower subdomains. Thus the back door appeared to be both a likely approach route for the water molecule that attacks the γ -phosphate during hydrolysis, and a likely exit route of the cleaved γ -phosphate after hydrolysis. The existence of the phosphate tube, and its opening into the 50-kDa cleft, was subsequently confirmed in the crystal structure of truncated Dictyostelium myosin II motor domain complexed with Mg·ADP·BeF x at the active site. In this structure there is a clear opening of the phosphate tube into the 50-kDa cleft. It is interesting to note, however, that in the MD dc structure complexed with Mg·ADP·V i, the opening of the phosphate tube is blocked off by a closure of the 50-kDa cleft. The crystal structure of scallop adductor muscle subfragment 1 complexed with Mg·ADP also shows the back door opening into the 50-kDa cleft, but it is clearly in a different state than the state observed in the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x structure. Although it is clear that the phosphate tube and the opening into the 50-kDa cleft exist in at least some conformational states of myosin, evidence that P i could potentially leave the active site via this route comes from a combination of kinetic data and molecular modeling. Biochemical data suggest that P i can exchange in and out of the active site, whereas ADP remains bound. Modeling of the active site area based upon the myosin x-ray structures, however, indicates that P i is unlikely to egress through the nucleotide-binding pocket via the front door without ADP dissociating first. This is because in all myosin x-ray structures, the phosphate tube very tightly encloses α - and β -phosphates via numerous side-chain-nucleotide interactions. Thus, there would be severe steric hindrance of P i egress through the front door in the presence of bound ADP. Posthydrolysis, there would additionally be electrostatic repulsion from the charges on the α - and β -phosphates that would inhibit the cleaved P i from moving toward the front door. Furthermore, it could actually help repel P i down the phosphate tube toward the back door. Additionally, 18 O-exchange experiments have demonstrated that the actual hydrolysis step occurs on the myosin head before product release with a readily reversible transition between M·ATP and M·ADP·P i states. In the presence of bound ADP, the backdoor again yields an appealing entry site for water. FIGURE 1 Comparison of solvent-accessible surface representations of the nucleotide-binding and back door region of myosin in three different conformations. This figure shows relative states of the back door in the three crystal structure observed conformations... This study examines the relative states of the back door in three different myosin motor domain conformations that have been observed in x-ray crystal structures. To accomplish this, molecular modeling was used to determine the structural features of the motor domain that are involved in the opening and closing of the back door. In addition, molecular dynamics simulations of the active site/back door region of MD dc were performed with Mg·ADP·P i bound at the active site in both the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x and MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i conformations. During the simulations, the movement of ADP, P i, and side chains lining the route from the γ -phosphate/P i -binding site to back door were also monitored. The ability of water to exchange between the γ -phosphate/P i -binding site and the exterior solvent was also determined during the time course of the simulations. METHODS Nucleotide and protein parameters Parameters were assigned for all protein and solvent atoms, as well as the Mg +2 ion, according to the AMBER forcefield as implemented in the Accelrys InsightII 3.0.0 software package. Parameters for ADP and P i were assigned using a custom parameter set based on AMBER parameters and Wriggers' ab initio ADP and P i parameters. Note that the force constant used for the phosphate O–P–OH bond was double the AMBER value to maintain the ion's tetrahedral structure. The parameters are available upon request from David Lawson. Modeling and molecular dynamics simulations All modeling and visualization was performed on a SGI Indigo R4400 workstation using Accelrys InsightII 3.0.0 software. All minimizations and dynamics simulations were performed using Accelrys Discover 2.9.7 software with the AMBER forcefield. The structures used as a starting point for the molecular dynamics simulations in this study were x-ray crystal structures of the truncated Dictyostelium myosin subfragment 1 complexed with Mg·ADP·BeF x and MD dc complexed with Mg·ADP·V i. To avoid problems with the large amount of unresolved structure in the C-terminal converter domain portion of the motor domain, only residues 2–693 from the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i structure were used. The structures of scallop adductor muscle myosin S1 complexed with Mg·ADP was also used for modeling of the back door region. P i was modeled in the singly protonated state that dominates at physiological pH. The ADP·BeF x complex in the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x structure was converted to ADP·P i by placing the P i with its three sp 2 oxygens overlaying the fluorides of BeF x. The hydroxyl group was pointed down the phosphate tube toward the back door. The BeF x moiety was then deleted. Similarly, for the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i structure, ADP·V i was converted to ADP·P i by overlaying P i with its three sp 2 oxygens as closely as possible with the equatorial oxygens of the V i moiety. The hydroxyl group was oriented down the phosphate tube. The V i moiety was then subsequently deleted. All hydrogens and sulfur lone pairs were represented explicitly and were added using the Insight interface. Ionizable groups were protonated to represent pH = 7.0. Histidines were modified as follows to be consistent with local hydrogen bonding patterns. Histidines 408, 550, and 572 in the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x structure were protonated on their δ -nitrogens. Histidines 12, 297, 408, 550, and 572 in the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i structure were protonated on their δ -nitrogens and His-484 was doubly protonated. All other histidines in both structures were protonated on their ɛ -nitrogens. In addition, the imidizole rings of His-12 and His-408 were rotated 180° in the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i structure. Unresolved residues and regions of the crystal structure were added as follows. All residues with unresolved side chains were added manually using Insight's “Change Residue” function. Unresolved loops were added by modeling a peptide based on the sequence of each loop and constraining its ends to a distance equal to the distance between resolved residues on either side of the loop. The loop was then minimized for 250 steps of steepest descent and 750 steps of conjugate gradient minimization and subsequently merged into the MD dc structure. All unresolved residues and loops were solvated with a 10-Å shell of water. This inner shell of water was surrounded by another 4-Å semifixed shell of water. The oxygens of this outer shell of water were fixed to keep the solvent from spreading along the fixed protein surface or diffusing into vacuum. Crystal waters were likewise free to move, semifixed or fixed, based on their distance from the subset. In the subsequent minimization and dynamics, the unresolved residues were free to move freely, whereas the remainder of the protein and ligands were fixed in place. Note that none of the unresolved loops were mobile in the data production simulation described below. The data production simulations were carried out as follows. A protein subset was created in a 14-Å radius around ADP·P i. Residues were added and deleted from this subset to provide structural continuity within the subset. The resulting subset was allowed to move freely during the simulations, whereas the remainder of the protein was fixed. The dynamic subset was solvated with a 10-Å shell of water. This inner shell of water was surrounded by a 4-Å semifixed shell of water. Crystal waters were likewise free to move, semifixed or fixed, based on their distance from the subset. A total of 17961 atoms were contained in MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x conformation simulations of which 6854 atoms were free to move. This system contains 375 crystal waters, 969 dynamic waters, 564 semifixed waters, and 761 protein residues. A total of 17333 atoms were contained in MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i conformation simulations of which 7584 atoms were free to move. This system contains 705 crystal waters, 810 dynamic waters, 575 semifixed waters, and 761 protein residues. All minimizations and dynamics simulations were run with a 7.5-Å cutoff and a 2.0-Å switching distance. All dynamic water molecules were minimized for 250 steps of steepest descent and 750 steps of conjugate gradients. The dynamic protein subset and solvent was then minimized for 250 steps of steepest descent and 750 steps of conjugate gradients with the oxygens in the outer 4-Å shell of water fixed in place. The data collection simulation was then initiated with the dynamic solvent and dynamic protein subsets free to move. The system was equilibrated by increasing the temperature from 0 K to 300 K in 30-K steps. Each step was run for 2.5 ps. Trajectory data were recorded every 500 fs during the equilibration. The production phase of the simulations then continued for another 200 ps or 500 ps, with trajectory data recorded every 100 fs. No significant difference was seen between 200-ps and 500-ps simulations suggesting that an equilibrium had been reached. Analysis of water movement For analysis of water movement in and around the back door area, trajectory structures were sampled every 5 ps to determine if a given water molecule had approached within 10.0 Å of the phosphorus atom in P i. A second check was made to see if the water's position changed more than 5.0 Å during the simulation. The trajectories of waters that met these standards were visually analyzed along with a solvent-accessible surface of the back door area. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The phosphate tube structures in the x-ray structures of the myosin II motor domain can be classified into three different conformations, MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i -like, MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x -like, and S1 sc ·Mg·ADP-like. Each conformation is defined by the relative positions of the various subdomains within the motor domain that can undergo rigid body rotation and translations relative to each other. Two of these subdomains act as a communications link between the actin-binding site and the nucleotide-binding site. The state of bound nucleotide can affect the position of the switch 2 loop, so called due to its homology to the G-protein nucleotide sensing switch 2 loop. This can in turn move the lower 50-kDa subdomain away from or toward the upper 50-kDa subdomain, opening or closing the 50-kDa cleft between the two subdomains. The state of the 50-kDa cleft and the relationship of the upper and lower 50-kDa subdomains influences the state of the back door to various extents in each of the conformational classes. Fig. 1, b, d, and f, shows solvent-accessible surfaces of the nucleotide-binding region and the back door region in each of the three conformational classes. Modeling the back door The modeling of the back door region in the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x conformation reveals an open 50-kDa cleft and an open back door. Immediately below the position of the BeF x γ -phosphate analog, the phosphate tube is slightly constricted by the side chains of residues Ser-181, Arg-238, Ser-456, and Glu-459, as well as by the backbone of Phe-239. There is room, however, for the phosphate to pass through this constriction as shown in Fig. 2. It should be noted that, with the exception of Ser-456, all of these residues are universally conserved within the myosin family of proteins. Mutation of Ser-181 to an Ala or Thr residue does not have an affect on myosin function. This is consistent with our interpretation of the back door crystal structure because Ser-181 forms only a small part of the phosphate tube constriction. Because of this, an additional methylene could easily be accommodated. Likewise, the mutation of Ser-456 to Ala has no affect on myosin functionality. Again, this is a consistent result since the less bulky alanine occupies this position in many myosin species. Furthermore, some species have a much larger tyrosine or phenylalanine at this position. It should also be noted that studies by Patterson and co-workers biochemically characterizing mutants of several residues in this region have shown that many of the residues are functionally linked to the rate of P i release. FIGURE 2 A comparison of the back door constriction and the size of P i in the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x structure. Three of the residues contributing to the constriction in the back door opening are shown. P i conformation reveals a closed back door. This results from the switch 2 loop moving closer to the γ -phosphate position, which causes Ser-456 to increase its blockage of the phosphate tube constriction. The movement of the switch 2 loop also allows the salt bridge between Arg-238 and Glu-459, which are 5.5 Å apart in the open conformation, to close down to 2.4 Å. Together, these three residues cause a complete blockage of the back door. Mutational studies of Arg-238 and Glu-459 suggest that these residues are necessary for the isomerization of myosin into a hydrolytically active conformation. This, in turn, suggests that the Arg-238/Glu-459 salt bridge is necessary for local closure of the 50-kDa cleft and concurrent closure of the back door. The third conformation, represented by the scallop S1 structure complexed with Mg·ADP reveals a back door that is even more open than the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x open conformation. The lower 50-kDa domain is rotated slightly relative to its position in the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x conformation, and the switch 2 loop has a slightly altered position. The overall displacement of the lower 50-kDa subdomain in the back door area is only ∼1.5 Å and primarily occurs in a direction parallel to the 50-kDa cleft. The change of Ser-456 to its smaller homolog, Ala-462 helps alleviate the phosphate tube constriction slightly, as does the movement of the lower 50-kDa domain. However, the major factor contributing to the increased openness of the back door is the flexibility of the Glu-465 side chain. The rotation of the lower 50-kDa subdomain and rearrangement of switch 2 cause the side chain of Glu-465 to angle away from its salt bridge partner, Arg-242 and thus destabilizes the interaction. In the S1 sc ·Mg·ADP structure, only the C β of the Glu-465 side chain is resolved. It is likely that the side-chain fluxes between a position similar to that seen in the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x structure and a position closer to Arg-236. Another factor contributing to the apparent openness of the S1 sc ·Mg·ADP structure is the repositioning of Arg-236. This repositioning, however, is not due to a subdomain rearrangement but rather to a difference in sequence. In the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x structure, the side chain of Arg-232 is positioned in the gap between the switch 2 loop, the P-loop, and the lower 50-kDa subdomain and forms a ∼4.0-Å salt bridge with Glu-180. In the S1 sc ·Mg·ADP structure, Arg-236 moves ∼4.3 Å away from the back door and forms a bifurcated salt bridge between Glu-177 and Glu-675. This is shown in Fig. 3. The reason that this conformation does not occur in the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x structure is that Glu-675 is replaced by an asparagine that cannot form a salt bridge with the arginine. FIGURE 3 Comparison of the back door region of the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x and S1 sc ·Mg·ADP crystal structures. The MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x and S1 sc ·Mg·ADP crystal... Active site rearrangements During the molecular dynamics simulations of MD dc ·Mg·ADP·P i, significant rearrangements of both protein and nucleotide were observed in the active site and the back door regions. 5 ). The driving force of these rearrangements appears to be the Coulombic repulsion between the nucleotide diphosphate and the P i. Because all simulations were started with ADP·P i but based on a crystal structure with an ATP analog, some rearrangement is expected as the protein relaxes to optimize its nonbonded interactions with the new ligands. FIGURE 4 Protein and ligand movements in the active site and back door regions during a 200-ps simulation based on the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x protein conformation. The movements of ADP·P i, protein, side chains, and the switch 1 backbone... FIGURE 5 Protein and ligand movements in the active site and back door regions during a 200-ps simulation based on the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i protein conformation. The movements of ADP·P i, protein, side chains, and the switch 1 backbone... In the simulation performed using the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x crystal structure, the movement of P i is associated with a protein rearrangement. There is an increased constriction of the phosphate tube, which leads to a closed back door state during the simulation. The average structure of the last 5 ps of the 200-ps simulation is compared with the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x crystal structure in Fig. 4. During the simulation, P i moves away from the diphosphate moiety of ADP toward the switch 1 loop. This slightly bulges out the backbone of switch 2 into the 50-kDa cleft. As this occurs, P i maintains its electrostatic interaction with Arg-238 in switch 1 and forms a new 3.8-Å salt bridge with Lys-241. The charge-charge interactions with these two side chains appear to help stabilize P i in its new position. Although P i maintains its hydrogen bond with Ser-237, its hydrogen bond with Ser-236 is lost as Ser-236 moves to form a new hydrogen bond with the β -phosphate. Furthermore, with the increase in positive charge due to the movement of the Lys-241 side chain toward P i, and the increased separation between P i and P β, the Mg +2 ion moves to coordinate P α and P β instead of P β and P i. Unlike the many rearrangements of the phosphates and their ligands, there is relatively little movement of the ribose and the adenine ring. Both maintain all of their interactions with the protein. Finally, switch 2 moves up toward the active site ∼1.5 Å along with Glu-459. This combination of switch 1 bulging out and switch 2 moving up causes a decrease in the cross section of the phosphate tube that effectively closes the back door. In these first simulations of the myosin back door, we have modeled the posthydrolysis leaving group as. This choice was motivated by the fact that it is the species that predominates at physiological pH. The precise phosphate species has not been experimentally determined, and an alternative could be. In this case, the dissociating force between MgADP − and would still remain, although diminished in magnitude. Likewise, the interaction with the positively charged side chains of Lys-241 and Arg-238 would still be possible. However, the increased size of relative to would make it even more difficult for the diprotonated species to egress through the closed back door. Thus, our fundamental conclusion remains valid irrespective of the precise phosphate species involved. In the simulation performed using the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i crystal structure, the movement of P i causes a reorganization of salt bridges near the P i -binding site. The average structure of the last 5 ps of the 200-ps simulation is compared with the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i crystal structure in Fig. 5. As P i moves away from the nucleotide diphosphate moiety, it causes the switch 2 loop to bulge ∼2.0 Å into the 50-kDa cleft. This movement and resulting concentration of negative charge causes Arg-232 to move from its starting position between the lower 50-kDa domain and the P-loop to a new position in which it forms a salt bridge with both P i and Glu-459. Unlike the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x -based simulation, this simulation also resulted in a movement of the adenine ring. The ring angles away from its starting position by ∼35° but still remains in the purine-binding cleft and retains a majority of its protein contacts. The P i induced rearrangements of switch 1 observed in the simulations appear to be roughly similar to those observed in the crystal structures of mutated G-protein G i α 1 subunits. Comparison of the crystal structures of mutant G i α 1 complexed with ATP γ S and ADP·P i show that the switch 1 loop in G i α 1 bulges out ∼1.8 Å upon ATP hydrolysis. This is comparable to the 1.5–2.0-Å movement of switch 1 seen in our MD dc simulations. In addition, the P i -P β distance in the G i α 1 ·ADP·P i structure is ∼4.7 Å, which is comparable to the ∼4.6 Å seen in our simulations. It should be noted, however, that a part of the increase in the P i -P β distance during the MD dc simulations is due to the movement of ADP, whereas only minimal ADP movement is observed in the G i α 1 structures. Water access to the active site Hydrolysis of ATP is widely postulated to occur via an in-line attack by a water molecule on the γ -phosphate of ATP bound at the active site. Experiments with 18 O-labeled P i have shown multiple exchanges with water in the active site of myosin, and experiments using 18 O-labeled waters have shown multiple exchanges with P i at the active site. These observations imply that the hydrolysis reaction, M·ATP↔M·ADP·P i, is readily reversible and can involve multiple water molecules. The x-ray structures and molecular dynamics simulations indicate that there is insufficient free space at the γ -phosphate location to accommodate a large number of water molecules. This suggests that the recruitment of additional waters is necessary to explain the 18 O-exchange experiments. Molecular dynamics simulations of MD dc ·Mg·ADP·P i were thus analyzed to determine the ability of water to access the P i -binding site via the back door, with the protein in either the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x or MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i conformation. In the simulation of the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x conformation, 28 waters were seen to pass within 10 Å of the P i phosphorous atom and move at least 5 Å during the simulation. As noted previously, the presence of the free P i in the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x simulations resulted in some additional closing of the back door entrance. However, the opening was still sufficiently large to allow the passage of water molecules, and 17 of these waters actually were observed to move through the back door during a 200-ps simulation. In a simulation of the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i conformation, only 22 waters were observed passing within 10 Å of the P i phosphorous atom and moving at least 5 Å. However, none of these waters was seen to pass through the more constricted back door of the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i structure. All were confined exclusively in the exterior solvent. In addition, no waters in either simulation were observed accessing the P i -binding site via the front door. This supports our previous suggestion that the large amount of steric hindrance created by the binding of Mg·ADP would preclude water attack on the γ -P i position from this direction. We additionally note that 500-ps simulations were also performed with similar results. FIGURE 6 Mobility of waters through the back door during a 200-ps simulation. This figure demonstrates the ability of waters to exchange between the γ -phosphate/P i -binding site and the exterior solvent during a simulation of MD dc ·Mg·ADP·P... Phosphate rotation The 18 O-exchange experiments likewise indicate that the γ -phosphate oxygens are equivalent during reversible hydrolysis, implying an ability of the P i moiety to rotate in the active site. During the molecular dynamics simulations, the orientation of P i was specifically monitored to detect rotational events. Although only partial rotations were observed during the 300-K simulations, a full rotation was observed in a simulation performed at 450 K using the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x conformation for the protein starting structure. As previously observed by others, the phosphate tube remained intact during the simulation at higher temperature. The rotation was detected by monitoring the angles between each P i oxygen, the P i phosphorous atom, and an arbitrary fixed point during the course of the simulation. Fig. 7 shows the angle at one of the P i oxygens as a function of time. Fig. 8 shows the rotation monitored in Fig. 7. The angular change in Fig. 7 is slightly different to that expected from a perfect tetraheydral arrangement of the oxygens. This is due to both the different bond angle for a hydroxyl oxygen and steric influences of the protein on the hydroxyl group. FIGURE 7 Rotation of P i in the active site during a 200-ps simulation. During the course of the simulation, the relative rotational orientation of P i was monitored by measuring the angles between each P i oxygen, the P i phosphorous atom, and an arbitrary fixed... FIGURE 8 Relative orientations of P i before and after rotation. The trajectory data from the simulation shown in Fig. 7 were averaged over 3 ps immediately before and immediately after the rotational event. The relative... The role of the back door in the contractile cycle Our analyses allow us to relate structural conformations of the back door to the myosin ATPase cycle. The MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x crystal structure of myosin shows the opening of the back door to be sufficiently dilated to allow free P i to pass through the opening and out into the 50-kDa cleft. Our molecular dynamics simulations now permit us to investigate the subsequent, posthydrolysis interaction of the free P i with the adjacent protein in the back door region. The simulations imply that this P i -protein interaction results in the back door now narrowing sufficiently to prevent the unimpeded passage of P i in and out of the phosphate tube due to motions of switch 1 and switch 2. However, the back door remains sufficiently open to allow the passage of water. Via homology with other ATPases, hydrolysis is widely postulated to occur via an in-line water attack on the γ -phosphate. In the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i structure, which represents this hydrolysis transition-state intermediate, the back door completely shuts off to preclude additional water exchange. The interaction of myosin with actin is obligatory to convert the free energy of ATP hydrolysis into biologically useful force and motion. Thus myosin has evolved to have an extremely low ATPase rate in the absence of actin, resulting in a highly efficient relaxed state in living muscle. At physiological temperatures, the rate-limiting step in the myosin ATPase is the release of P i from the M·ADP·P i complex. Thus our molecular dynamics simulations of static x-ray structures now provide a structural explanation for both 18 O-exchange with water and the low basal ATPase rate via a slow rate of P i release after ATP hydrolysis on the myosin head. Our original working hypothesis was that the back door would also provide an egress route for P i after hydrolysis. The simulations still do not preclude this possibility. The dissociation rate for P i has been measured in the range from 0.01 s −1 to 0.06 s −1. Thermal fluctuations could potentially result in a dilation of the back door sufficient for P i release on this timescale. This, of course, would be an extremely rare, and thus unseen, event on the 200-ps timescale of our molecular dynamics simulations. It is clear that the back door as represented by the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x and MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i structures is not able to release P i at the dramatically enhanced, actin-activated rate of 35 s −1. Thus, the conformation of myosin in the strongly bound actomyosin complex must be different from that observed in either of these structures. As suggested by a number of investigators, a possible model of the strongly bound state is that the prepowerstroke state corresponds to the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·V i structure, and the strongly bound rigor state corresponds to the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x structure or some slight variation thereof. Comparison of the MD dc ·Mg·ADP·BeF x and S1 sc ·Mg·ADP structures demonstrates that small changes in the position of the lower 50-kDa subdomain relative to the upper 50-kDa subdomain can lead to significant changes in the state of the back door. Such changes could be induced by actin binding, for which ΔG is ∼−8 kcal/mol, based on a K d = 10 −6 M for the actoS1 complex. Similarly, crystal-packing forces have been reported as high as 3 kcal/mol. Such forces could influence the conformation observed in the crystal structure. Other studies have suggested that the 50-kDa cleft is closed during strong binding and an alternate route for P i release opens. The closing of the 50-kDa cleft was first suggested by Rayment and co-workers comparing the chicken skeletal myosin subfragment 1 x-ray crystal structure to the actomyosin complex from cryoelectron microscopy data. Fluorescence studies have also been interpreted to imply that the 50-kDa cleft closes in the strongly bound state. Higher resolution cryoelectron microscopy studies supported the original hypothesis of Rayment and co-workers, with the additional conclusion that the closing of the 50-kDa cleft was accompanied by an opening of the phosphate tube via a displacement of switch 1. Biochemical, cross-linking, spectroscopic, and biomechanical studies first demonstrated that the phosphate tube opened, with the suggestion that hydrolysis products release could be modulated via a “trap door” mechanism involving a displacement of switch 1. The trap door has received additional support from an x-ray structure of myosin with a displaced switch 1. However, the physiological relationship between this structure and all previous myosin structures showing a closed phosphate tube remains unresolved. It should also be noted that recent evidence suggests that an alternative route for P i release may modulate force production in myosin. Shaw and co-workers used 18 O-exchange between the solvent and the cleaved P i to study the kinetics of several nucleotide and nanalog nonnucleoside triphosphate substrates. The species had varying abilities to promote force transduction in myosin. Modeling of the 18 O-exchange data suggested two separate kinetic pathways occurring in myosin. It was concluded that the P i release route plays an integral role in the production of force. Substrates with exchange data similar to ATP supported force transduction and used a back door mechanism for P i release. Substrates that uncoupled hydrolysis from mechanics appeared to use a diphosphate-first release pathway via the front door. In summary, to our knowledge, our studies provide the first structural explanation for 18 O-exchange in myosin. We also provide the first structural explanation for the rate-limiting step of myosin ATPase activity in the absence of actin. The precise relationship between P i release and force production remains unresolved. Indeed, one cannot rule out back door release being the preferred pathway in the absence of actin and an alternative structural pathway resulting in an acceleration of P i release in the presence of actin. 