 Cells are perpetually challenged by pathogens, protein aggregates or chemicals, that induce plasma membrane or endolysosomal compartments damage. This severe stress is recognised and controlled by the endosomal sorting complex required for transport and the autophagy machineries, which are recruited to damaged membranes to either repair or to remove membrane remnants. Yet, insight is limited about how damage is sensed and which effectors lead to extensive tagging of the damaged organelles with signals, such as K63-polyubiquitin, required for the recruitment of membrane repair or removal machineries. To explore the key factors responsible for detection and marking of damaged compartments, we use the professional phagocyte Dictyostelium discoideum. We found an evolutionary conserved E3-ligase, TrafE, that is robustly recruited to intracellular compartments disrupted after infection with Mycobacterium marinum or after sterile damage caused by chemical compounds. TrafE acts at the intersection of ESCRT and autophagy pathways and plays a key role in functional recruitment of the ESCRT subunits ALIX, Vps32 and Vps4 to damage sites. Importantly, we show that the absence of TrafE severely compromises the xenophagy restriction of mycobacteria as well as ESCRT-mediated and autophagy-mediated endolysosomal membrane damage repair, resulting in early cell death. Research organism: Dictyostelium Introduction After its internalisation by professional phagocytes, the first strategy of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and its close relative Mycobacterium marinum to escape the bactericidal phagosome is to impede its maturation and tailor the Mycobacterium -Containing Vacuole as a permissive niche allowing the proliferation of the pathogen. From the very beginning, bacteria progressively gain access to the cytosol through the action of the ESX-1 secretion system, via the secretion of the membranolytic effector EsxA and the mycobacterial branched apolar lipids phthiocerol dimycocerosates. The ESX-1 secretion system plays a crucial role for M. marinum virulence and intracellular growth, and is primarily encoded by the genes within the ‘region of difference 1’ locus. M. marinum mutants with non-functional ESX-1 inflict significantly less MCV membrane damage and fail to become exposed to or escape to the cytosol, hampering their detection by the host cell-autonomous defence machineries. Once in contact with the cytosol, the wild-type bacteria within damaged MCVs are detected and tagged with signals that promote MCV damage repair as well as selective anti-bacterial autophagy, termed xenophagy. To complete the infection cycle, the pathogen must reach the cytosol and be released by host-cell lysis, exocytosis or ejection in order to disseminate to adjacent bystander cells. Xenophagy is fundamental for eukaryotic cell-autonomous immunity. It requires the coordinated action of about 15 autophagy-related genes and is initiated by the recruitment of the core-autophagy factors Atg1 kinase complex and Atg9 to the nascent phagophore – a double membrane crescent-like structure. Its closure around the cargo depends on the Atg16-Atg12-Atg5 E3-like complex, and the lipidation of Atg8, which marks the phagophore. The resulting autophagosome fuses with lysosomes allowing the degradation of its content. Xenophagy requires detection and selective recruitment of the pathogen to the phagophore by means of autophagy cargo receptors such as p62 that link ubiquitin-tagged bacteria and host components with Atg8 family proteins on the phagophore membranes, thereby enforcing proximity between the pathogen and the autophagosome. Autophagy is involved in the removal of extensively damaged compartments by a specific macroautophagy termed lysophagy. Autophagy also cooperates with ESCRT to repair sterile- or pathogen-induced membrane damage. The ESCRT-III complex functions in membrane deformation away from the cytosol and plays a critical role in various membrane remodelling processes, including phagophore closure, autophagosome-lysosome fusion, plasma membrane, and lysosome membrane repair. One thoroughly studied ESCRT function is the coupling of cargo sorting and intralumenal vesicles formation required for degradation of receptors. The endolysosomal and MCV membrane ruptures generate morphological and topological landscape for the detection machineries which deposit ‘repair-me’ and ‘eat-me’ signals. Ubiquitination is a well-studied, highly conserved and versatile post-translational modification used as a signalling platform in diverse catabolic processes and playing a role during infection with various intracellular bacteria. In mammalian cells, the RING domain E3 ligases LRSAM1 and TRAF6 have been shown to promote ubiquitination of vacuoles containing Salmonella Typhimurium and Chlamydia trachomatis bacteria, and the protozoan parasite Toxoplasma gondii, and NEDD4, Parkin, Smurf1 to mediate ubiquitination of mycobacteria and host proteins during infection. In addition, the mammalian cytosolic lectins, galectins, recognize damage by binding exposed glycans on the lumenal membrane leaflets and components of bacteria cell wall, thereby serving as ‘eat-me’ tags for autophagy. Moreover, complexes such as TRIM16-Galectin3 also mediate autophagy removal of damaged phagosomes and lysosomes during pathogen invasion. The human tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated factors function in a number of biological processes such as innate and adaptive immunity and cell death as E3 ubiquitin ligases and scaffold proteins. TRAFs are composed of several domains: the N-terminal domain containing a RING motif, a series of Zn-finger motifs that connect the N- and C-terminal regions and the C-terminal TRAF domain subdivided in TRAF-N coiled-coil domain and TRAF-C domain comprised of seven to eight antiparallel β -strands. The RING domain and the Zn-finger motifs of TRAF6 are required for the E3 ligase activity and together with the dimeric E2-conjugating enzyme complex Ubc13-UeV1A, TRAF6 catalyses the generation of poly-Ub chains linked via the lysine K63 of Ub, in a homo- or hetero-oligomerisation-dependent manner with other TRAF members. The RING domain is also important for dimerization of trimeric TRAF proteins allowing the formation of signalling networks. The TRAF-N domain enables TRAF proteins homo- and hetero-oligomerisation that is also crucial for their E3 ligase activity. The TRAF-C domain allows interaction with receptor and adaptor proteins. Endomembrane ruptures on one hand permit the pathogen to gain access to the cytosol, but on the other hand to be detected. Then, together with the vacuole membrane remnants, bacteria are targeted to the autophagy machinery. Defects in endomembrane repair and lysophagy correlate with weakened cellular defences against pathogens, ageing, cancer and neurodegeneration. Even though the role of ‘eat-me’ signals in autophagy is well understood, little is known about their implication in detection and repair of pathogen-induced or sterile membrane damage. Furthermore, how pathogen and membrane damages are detected, leading to the deposition of such ‘eat-me’ signals, remains unknown. Using the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum – M. marinum model system for host-pathogen interactions, we have shown previously, that upon infection, M. marinum does colocalize with and the autophagy markers Atg8 and p62, and that autophagy deficiency results in drastic increase in bacteria proliferation, and that failure to repair or recycle damaged MCVs results in increased cell death. Here, we have unravelled a novel function of a TRAF-like family protein RING domain-containing E3 ligase. Among half a dozen candidates explored, we found that the evolutionary conserved E3-ligase TrafE is recruited to MCVs or endolysosomes in a membrane damage- or tension-dependent manner. Importantly, we provide evidence that in the absence of TrafE, the autophagy restriction of M. marinum as well as the autophagy-mediated and ESCRT-mediated endolysosomal membrane damage repair are severely compromised, leading to precocious cell death. Results The E3-ligase TrafE is upregulated early-on after infection and is recruited to MCVs Using the sequence of the human TRAF6 as a reference we searched and identified bioinformatically a number of D. discoideum TRAF-like proteins, five of which, namely TrafA, TrafB, TrafC, TrafD, and TrafE harbour all the stereotypical TRAF protein family domains, share remarkable structural similarity with human TRAF6 and are expressed during the vegetative stage of the life cycle. In parallel, RNA-sequencing transcriptomic comparison between control and M. marinum -infected D. discoideum cells showed that out of the aforementioned candidates only trafE is upregulated early after infection. TrafE is also enriched at the early MCV, as revealed by organelle proteomics. To validate a possible role in infection of the aforementioned TRAF-like proteins, we first sought to identify candidates that display remarkable relocalization during infection. To do so, we generated stably transformed cell lines ectopically expressing TrafA, TrafB, TrafC, TrafD and TrafE candidate proteins, N- or C-terminally fused to GFP, under a constitutive promoter. We monitored the subcellular localization of these GFP fusions by live confocal microscopy over a period of 24 hr in the context of an infection with M. marinum, compared to a mock-infected control. As early as 1 hour post infection, GFP-TrafE showed robust recruitment to MCVs, sustained over the infection time course, predominantly in the area of M. marinum bacteria poles consistent with previously demonstrated localization of ubiquitin and the autophagy-related Atg8. GFP-TrafA and GFP-TrafB remained solely cytosolic or nuclear, respectively, in control and infection conditions at all time points. We confirmed in silico that TrafB harbours a nuclear localization signal similarly to human TRAF4, as predicted by both NLS Mapper and NLStradamus. Interestingly, despite TrafC and TrafD being 95.56% similar in terms of amino acid sequence, they displayed different behaviour upon infection. GFP-TrafC like GFP-TrafE was recruited to MCV, which was not the case for GFP-TrafD. Figure 1. Upon infection TrafE is upregulated and recruited to MCVs. Real-Time quantitative-PCR carried out to monitor the transcriptional profile in control and infected cells confirmed up to fourfold upregulation of trafE already at 1 hpi, consistent with the RNA-seq data. We also evaluated a possible overexpression phenotype of TrafC, TrafD, and TrafE during infection with bioluminescent M. marinum. Whilst the intracellular growth of M. marinum WT remained unaffected in cells overexpressing TrafC or TrafD, this growth was significantly hampered when TrafE was overexpressed. These results persuaded us to explore further the role of TrafE in infection as potentially the major E3-ligase candidate. In order to assess potential artefacts of overexpression, a TrafE-GFP chromosomal knock-in was generated and tested functionally by monitoring intracellular growth of M. marinum -lux. Importantly, bacteria growth in the TrafE-GFP KI strain was comparable to that in WT cells, indicating that C-terminal GFP fusion of TrafE does not interfere with its function. In addition, the endogenous TrafE-GFP colocalized with MCVs already 1.5 hr after infection like the ectopically expressed GFP-TrafE. Thus, our data points to TrafE involvement in the early MCV membrane damage detection and the MCV or M. marinum ubiquitination, necessary for repair or degradation. We conclude that TrafE is a conserved E3-ligase upregulated and recruited to the M. marinum compartment upon infection and likely involved in D. discoideum cell-autonomous defence. Loss of TrafE promotes M. marinum early release and replication, and is highly toxic for host cells To explore further whether TrafE is either involved in the host defence response or is exploited by bacteria to favour their proliferation, we generated cell lines in which the trafE coding sequence was ablated, and strains overexpressing TrafE. We observed that the intracellular load of M. marinum -lux was increased in trafE- KO cells in a way comparable to the growth of the pathogen in the autophagy-impaired atg1- KO mutant cells. This result, together with the decreased M. marinum growth in WT cells overexpressing TrafE, indicate that the endogenous amount and activity of TrafE is limiting for bacterial restriction. Figure 2. Loss of TrafE is detrimental for D. discoideum cells after infection with M. marinum. It has been demonstrated that atg1- KO cells suffer from a complete loss of autophagy resulting in the absence of xenophagy and thus were strongly impaired in the restriction of cytosolic bacteria. To examine whether absence of TrafE also results in a complete autophagy block or in a more specific and limited phenotype, we monitored the progression of the two mutant strains through the developmental cycle. Upon starvation, atg1- KO cells displayed severe developmental phenotypes and did not proceed beyond aggregation. In contrast, trafE- KO cells successfully completed their developmental cycle and formed viable spores, suggesting that TrafE may not function as a general autophagy regulator but may be more specifically linked to infection- or membrane damage-related activities. Earlier studies also indicated that in the absence of autophagy or ESCRT-III-mediated membrane damage repair, bacteria escape the MCV precociously to the cytosol. As a reporter for M. marinum escape to the cytosol, we monitored Plin, the D. discoideum homolog of the mammalian perilipins known to bind the hydrophobic cell wall of mycobacteria exposed to the cytosol. The proportion of mCherry-Plin-positive bacteria indicated that, in trafE- KO host cells, M. marinum was exposed to the cytosol significantly earlier compared to WT cells, but similarly to atg1- KO cells. Importantly, in atg1- KO and tsg101- KO cells, M. marinum escapes precociously to the cytosol but has distinct and even opposite fates. In atg1- KO cells, cytosolic bacteria accumulate Ub but proliferate significantly due to a lack of functional xenophagy. In tsg101- KO cells M. marinum is ubiquitinated and delivered to the autophagy machinery, leading to higher restriction of bacterial growth than in WT cells. Interestingly, similarly to autophagy deficient atg1- KO cells, in trafE- KO host cells M. marinum escapes earlier and displays high proliferation, suggesting that both MCV damage repair and xenophagy restriction of bacteria are impaired. To monitor this, we infected WT and trafE- KO cells with mCherry-expressing bacteria and monitored the infection progression by high-content confocal microscopy. Surprisingly, after 30 hpi we observed a significant decrease in the number of infected trafE- KO cells compared to infected WT cells. This was paralleled by a high number of extracellular M. marinum that had likely been released by lysis from host trafE mutant cells near 30 hpi. In conclusion, we hypothesized that M. marinum escapes precociously to the cytosol of trafE- KO cells, proliferate unrestrictedly and, as a likely consequence, kills its host faster. To validate this hypothesis, we employed a microfluidic device, the InfectChip, in which single infected cells are trapped to allow long-term recording of host and pathogen fate. We confirmed that M. marinum is highly toxic for trafE- KO cells, a phenotype almost fully complemented by GFP-TrafE overexpression. Surprisingly, the survival probability of infected autophagy-deficient atg1- KO host cells was not significantly affected under these conditions and time-frame, even though M. marinum intracellular growth is also drastically increased in these mutants compared to WT. Increased cell death likely occurs later in atg1- KO compared to trafE- KO cells. Altogether, these results reveal that as previously observed in atg1- KO cells, absence of TrafE leads to M. marinum early escape from the MCV to the cytosol, and strongly affects its targeting by the xenophagy machinery. Importantly, the acute toxicity of M. marinum in trafE- KO cells indicates that, in contrast to Atg1, TrafE is maybe more broadly involved in cell survival mechanisms. TrafE action is triggered by M. marinum -induced MCV membrane damage Previously, we have shown that mycobacteria escaping to the cytosol are captured and restricted by xenophagy. Taking into account that MCV membrane disruption prompts the recruitment of both the ESCRT and the autophagy machineries, we hypothesized that TrafE colocalization with M. marinum depends on membrane damage. Both, M. tuberculosis and M. marinum share the genomic locus Region of Difference 1 encoding the ESX-I secretion system required for the secretion of the membranolytic virulence factor EsxA and its chaperone EsxB. As previously shown, in D. discoideum cells infected with M. marinum ∆RD1, which induces less MCV damages, ubiquitination of bacteria and their compartment is significantly decreased. In addition, nearly 80% of GFP-TrafE recruitment to MCVs was observed in the vicinity of bacteria poles, where ESX-1 is localized and active in both M. tuberculosis and M. marinum. Interestingly, upon infection with M. marinum ∆RD1, TrafE-GFP recruitment to MCV was severely reduced. Previously, we showed that both intracellular growth of WT M. marinum as well as autophagosome formation depend on a functional ESX-1 system. Consequently, the bacteria load of M. marinum ∆RD1 was significantly and similarly reduced in both WT and atg1- KO cells. Therefore, we measured the intracellular growth of WT and M. marinum ∆RD1 bacteria. Lack of the ESX-1 system drastically reduced bacterial proliferation in both WT and trafE- KO cells, indicating that the growth advantage of WT M. marinum in trafE- KO cells is strictly dependent on MCV damage and escape to the cytosol. In addition, the same microfluidic device for long-term recording of single infected cells also revealed that the survival probability of both trafE- KO and atg1- KO host cells was not affected during infection with M. marinum ∆RD1. In conclusion, we propose that membrane damage is required for TrafE recruitment to MCVs and subsequent restriction of bacteria proliferation by xenophagy. Figure 3. TrafE recruitment to MCVs/bacteria is membrane damage-dependent. K63-ubiquitination levels are decreased in the absence of TrafE A hallmark of damaged MCVs is ubiquitination known to play an essential role in pathways such as cell survival, intracellular pathogen clearance and cell death. We carried out immunofluorescence assays using antibodies specific to K63-linkage polyubiquitin and determined that GFP-TrafE colocalized with K63-Ub on MCVs. Next, we compared the total levels of polyubiquitin-positive MCVs or K63-linked polyubiquitinylated MCVs in M. marinum -infected WT or trafE- KO cells, using a global anti-polyubiquitin antibody or the specific K63-linkage polyubiquitin antibody. Interestingly, at 6 hpi the global levels of polyubiquitination between trafE- KO and WT cells remained comparable, while the fraction of K63-linkage positive MCVs was drastically reduced in trafE- KO cells, suggesting that TrafE is involved in K63-linked polyubiquitin tagging of MCVs and bacteria. Figure 4. K-63-linked polyubiquitination decrease in D. discoideum trafE- KO cells. TrafE recruitment to bacteria is mediated by its RING domain It has been previously reported, that TRAF E3-ligase activity depends on the RING domain that mediates the interaction between the E2-conjugating enzymes and their substrates, and TRAF-N and RING domains-dependent homo- or hetero-oligomerizations with other members of the TRAF family. Therefore, in order to dissect the functional importance of the RING and the TRAF-N regions during M. marinum infection, we generated truncated versions of TrafE that were expressed in the trafE- KO background. Absence of the N-terminal RING domain resulted in complete loss of TrafE recruitment to MCVs throughout the infection time-course, in contrast to the truncated TRAF-N domain version or the full-length protein. Despite that, functional assays using M. marinum -lux indicated that both truncated proteins failed to complement the trafE- KO. We reason that the absence of RING domain phenocopies the truncation of the TRAF-N region because both are required for the TrafE E3 ligase activity. Additionally, the RING domain permits dimerization of TRAF trimers and formation of networks, and also determines substrate recognition and binding to E2-conjugating enzymes, which might explain why in its absence, TrafE is not recruited to damaged MCVs. Figure 5. TrafE recruitment to MCV is RING domain-dependent. Sterile damage triggers TrafE recruitment on endolysosomes Late endosomes and lysosomes are involved in the degradation of molecules endocytosed from the extracellular space or captured by the autophagy machinery in the cytosol. In D. discoideum, autophagy and ESCRT cooperate to promote membrane repair, however, extensively damaged endolysosomes are targeted to the autophagy machinery for removal. To address whether TrafE recruitment to bacteria is specific to infection-induced MCV damage or represents a general reaction to membrane damage, we employed the esterified dipeptide named L-leucyl-L-leucine methyl ester which perforates acidic endolysosomes, making them permeable to protons and small molecules of less than 10 kDa, resulting in endolysosomal pH increase and leading to apoptosis at concentrations above 4 mM in HeLa cells. Surprisingly, minutes after treatment with 4.5 mM LLOMe, the homogenous cytosolic distribution of GFP-TrafE changed dramatically to dispersed puncta and rings. The cytosolic GFP-TrafE ∆TRAF-N was slowly recruited on the LLOMe-damaged compartments, but the cytosolic pattern of GFP-TrafE ∆RING remained unchanged until the end of the monitoring period. A large fraction of TrafE was clearly recruited to Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated 10 kDa dextran-loaded endolysosomes. Our data suggest that the RING domain is essential for TrafE recruitment to damaged membranes, consistent with the function of TRAF6 RING domain in formation of signalling networks. Figure 6. LLOMe-induced damage triggers TrafE recruitment to endolysosomes. TrafE is essential for the maintenance of endolysosomal integrity Previous results indicated that defects in the ESCRT and autophagy machineries, both known to contribute to membrane repair, lead to increased proton leakage upon LLOMe-induced sterile damage. To monitor how LLOMe affects the endolysosomal integrity and pH in the context of trafE- KO, we used lysosensor DND-189 which is a fluorescent pH tracer that accumulates in acidic compartments, where protonation relieves quenching. The addition of 4.5 mM LLOMe was followed by a decrease of lysosensor fluorescence intensity in both WT and trafE- KO cells, indicating proton leakage and pH increase within the endolysosomal compartments. In WT cells, the lysosensor intensity first decreased but was restored to the initial level, indicating that WT cells completed repair and recovery in the course of the 25 min of LLOMe treatment. In contrast, the lysosensor fluorescence intensity remained low in the trafE mutant cells, indicating a more pronounced and perhaps irreversible proton leakage. The results show that cells can fully repair damage to endolysosomes and restore their pH, while absence of TrafE has a strong negative impact on the integrity and the repair of damaged compartments. TrafE is recruited to endolysosomes after hypertonic shock LLOMe-induced membrane damage reduces membrane tension similarly to hyperosmotic conditions. Indeed, water expulsion from the cytosol and from the endolysosomal compartments results in a membrane tension decrease that is sufficient to trigger the recruitment of Alix and the ESCRT-III component CHMP4B and subsequent formation of intralumenal vesicles. To reveal possible mechanisms of TrafE recruitment to endolysosomes, we asked whether a membrane tension decrease might be sufficient to trigger recruitment of TrafE to endo-membranes. For this, we monitored D. discoideum cells expressing GFP-TrafE under hypertonic conditions, using as control GFP-Vps32, the D. discoideum homolog of the mammalian CHMP4B. Strikingly, similarly to GFP-Vps32, cytosolic GFP-TrafE also relocated to endolysosomal compartments only seconds after the addition of sorbitol. In addition, when cells adapted and regained their initial shape and motility, TrafE regained a cytosolic distribution. The pH-tracer lysosensor was used again to address whether the hyperosmotic shock induced membrane perforations. Addition of high 5 mM LLOMe concentration resulted in a decrease of lysosensor fluorescence intensity indicative of proton leakage from damaged endolysosomes. In contrast, under hypertonic conditions, the lysosensor fluorescence intensity remained stable, indicating that the membrane integrity of acidic compartment was uncompromised. Our data suggest that a decrease of membrane tension alone is enough to trigger TrafE recruitment to endolysosomal membranes. Figure 7. TrafE is relocalized to endolysosomes following hypertonic shock. Absence of TrafE confers acute susceptibility to sterile damage In the absence of TrafE, the probability of survival of M. marinum- infected D. discoideum cells was drastically decreased compared to infected WT cells. In addition, recent studies showed that disruption of lysosomal membrane leads to increase of cytosol acidity and necrosis or lysosome-dependent cell death. We hypothesized that the observed failure to repair damaged MCVs would correlate with an increased susceptibility of trafE- KO cells to severe sterile endolysosomal damage caused by LLOMe. To test this, the fluorescent DNA stain propidium iodide, which penetrates dead or dying cells and intercalates and stains their DNA, but is excluded from live intact cells, was used as a reporter for lytic cell death. In vivo time-lapse confocal microscopy was carried out to compare viability of WT, atg1- KO and trafE -KO cells 55 min after treatment with high 5 mM LLOMe. Paralleling the results on infected cells, cells lacking TrafE showed a highest susceptibility to LLOMe-induced sterile perforations. These results suggest that the severity of the phenotypes caused by the absence of TrafE are a cumulative consequence of non-functional autophagy- and ESCRT-dependent membrane repair. Loss of TrafE affects the transcription of autophagy- and ESCRT-related gene sets To investigate possible explanations for the rapid infection- or LLOMe-induced death of trafE null cells, as well as to identify genes and pathways underlying TrafE-mediated M. marinum restriction and endolysosomal homeostasis, we performed a genome-wide transcriptome analysis. RNA of trafE- KO mutant cells was collected, sequenced and compared to RNA of WT cells, revealing 283 genes with significantly differential expression. Importantly, the steady-state levels of all of the ATG-related transcripts, including atg1, atg9, atg8a and the autophagy cargo adaptors p62/sqstsm1 were clearly upregulated. The respective genes are listed under the KEGG term ‘autophagy-other’, which is significantly enriched by gene set enrichment analysis. Earlier studies have demonstrated that high, uncontrolled autophagy activity could be harmful for cells and may lead to accelerated cell death or promote replication and spread of intracellular pathogens or cancer cells. In addition, despite the fact that the read counts of the ESCRT-related genes do not show a clear overall pattern, they indicate an upregulation of ALG-2-interacting-protein-X and downregulation of its putative interacting partner Alg2A. Pathway enrichment analysis previously performed in our lab following RNA-seq transcriptomic comparison of non-infected or M. marinum -infected D. discoideum cells showed that most of the Biological Processes of genes upregulated during infection comprise those involved in damage response and cellular defence, particularly in the specific pathways involved in membrane repair and bacteria elimination. The steady-state transcriptomics comparison between WT and trafE- KO mutant cells reveals that lack of TrafE alone is sufficient to affect the expression of genes belonging to the autophagy and the ESCRT families, indicating that TrafE might function at the intersection of both ESCRT and autophagy pathways. Figure 8. RNA-seq results. Absence of TrafE does not impair autophagy induction In D. discoideum cells, infection with M. marinum, LLOMe-induced sterile membrane damage or starvation trigger an increase of LC3/Atg8 puncta. To address whether TrafE is involved in the initiation of autophagy, a GFP-Atg8a fusion was monitored in starvation conditions, or during LLOMe-induced sterile damage. As expected in WT cells, 1.5 hr after a shift to the SorMC-Sorbitol starvation medium, the number of GFP-Atg8a puncta increased and to our surprise in trafE- KO cells the number of structures was significantly higher than in WT cells, indicating that TrafE is apparently not required for autophagy initiation. In contrast, upon generation of sterile damage, trafE- KO cells exhibited a lower number of GFP-Atg8a structures compared to WT cells. Notably, the absence of TrafE in cells treated with LLOMe lead to accumulation of large Atg8a-positive crescent-like structures. This phenotype is reminiscent of the accumulation of Atg8/LC3 structures in yeast and mammalian cells lacking or expressing dominant-negative forms of ESCRT subunits required for autophagosome biogenesis, closure and maturation. Our data suggest that the D. discoideum E3-ligase TrafE acts downstream of Atg1 in the autophagy pathway. The accumulation of Atg8a puncta in starved trafE- KO cells is likely a consequence of a partial impairment but not a complete block of autophagy flux, because trafE- KO cells complete their developmental cycle unlike the fully autophagy deficient atg1- KO cells. Figure 9. TrafE absence promotes Atg8a accumulation or formation of aberrant structures in starved or LLOMe-treated cells. TrafE regulates ESCRT subunits dynamics on damaged membranes In mammalian and D. discoideum cells, LLOMe-induced sterile membrane damage triggers vigorous recruitment of the ESCRT subunits involved in membrane scission, ALIX and CHMP4B/Vps32, to damaged endolysosomal compartments. To understand better the connection between TrafE and the ESCRT pathway, we monitored the behaviour of ALIX and Vps32 GFP-fusions during LLOMe-induced sterile damage in the background of WT and trafE- KO cells. Interestingly, minutes after addition of LLOMe, as observed in mammalian cells, cytosolic ALIX-GFP was vigorously redistributed to damaged compartments. As expected, addition of LLOMe triggered recruitment of GFP-Vps32 to damaged endolysosomes. Most surprisingly, ALIX-GFP and GFP-Vps32 redistribution from the cytosol to damaged, dextran-positive, compartments was significantly more pronounced in trafE- KO compared to WT cells. Note that this ‘overshoot’ in the recruitment of ESCRT components is counterintuitive in the light of an expected repair defect. In order to further dissect the functionality of the recruited subunits, the behaviour of these ESCRT reporters was monitored in starvation conditions. In WT and trafE- KO cells starved for 1.5 hr, both ALIX-GFP and GFP-Vps32 redistributed to a high number of dextran-negative foci and structures, suggesting that the ESCRT machinery components are recruited to autophagosomes. This hypothesis was confirmed by the lack of a corresponding increase of ALIX-GFP or GFP-Vps32 structures in starved autophagy initiation-deficient atg1- KO cells. Remarkably, in starved trafE- KO cells, the number of both ALIX-GFP or GFP-Vps32 foci and structures was significantly higher relative to WT cells. The excessive accumulation of ESCRT components on damaged endolysosomes or autophagy-related structures observed in trafE- KO cells might reflect an incomplete engagement of both ESCRT and autophagy machineries, thereby placing TrafE at their intersection. Figure 10. TrafE is necessary for proper ESCRT turnover during membrane repair. Vps4 recruitment to membrane damage sites is TrafE-dependent Previous studies have demonstrated that the Vps4 ATPase is essential for the assembly, the disassembly and the dynamic turnover of ESCRT-III subunits during MVB formation and membrane remodelling, and that the absence of Vps4 leads to accumulation of ESCRT components on endosomes, formation of Atg8 clusters and defects in autophagosome closure. To investigate why absence of TrafE causes an accumulation of Atg8a, ALIX and Vps32 structures during starvation or sterile damage, we compared the behaviour of GFP-Vps4 between WT or trafE- KO cell lines. As expected, after addition of 4.5 mM LLOMe in WT cells, GFP-Vps4 was robustly redistributed from the cytosolic pool to damaged endolysosomes. In striking contrast, in trafE- KO cells the recruitment of GFP-Vps4 to endolysosomal damage sites was abolished. This phenotype was reversed by re-expression of mRFP-TrafE in GFP-Vps4 expressing trafE- KO cells, and mRFP-TrafE colocalized with Vps4 on damaged endolysosomes. We conclude that absence of the E3-ligase TrafE somehow impairs Vps4 recruitment to damage sites where ALIX-GFP and GFP-Vps32 accumulation results in non-functional ESCRT-mediated repair. Figure 11. TrafE regulates Vps4 recruitment to endolysosomal membrane damage sites. In trafE- KO cells, the absence of Vps4 correlates with low K63-polyubiquitination despite the aberrant presence of ALIX-GFP Previous studies have linked ALIX binding to K63-Ub chains with the establishment of a positive feedback loop resulting in the stimulation of Vps4 activity. It was demonstrated that failure of Vps4 to interact with Ub-bound ALIX results in major defects in cargo sorting. Comparison of D. discoideum ALIX with a group of structurally defined but evolutionary distant coiled-coil Ubiquitin Binding Domain -containing proteins revealed the presence of highly conserved residues, indicating a likely UBD. Therefore, to address mechanistically the functional significance of TrafE-deposited K63-linked polyubiquitin chains during sterile damage, we carried out immunofluorescence assays of mock-treated cells or 10 min after addition of LLOMe in WT, trafE- KO or atg1- KO cells expressing ALIX-GFP together with antibodies specific to K63-polyubiquitin. As expected, compared to mock-treated, LLOMe-treated WT and atg1- KO cells revealed a robust redistribution of cytosolic ALIX-GFP to damaged compartments where it colocalized with K63-linked polyubiquitin. Remarkably, TrafE mutants displayed the usual high number of ALIX-GFP structures in both the mock- and the LLOMe-treated conditions, however the K63-linked ubiquitination of damaged compartments was virtually abolished. Figure 12. In trafE- KO cells, the absence of Vps4 correlates with low K63-polyubiquitination despite the accumulation of ALIX-GFP and GFP-Vps32. We conclude that the D. discoideum E3-ligase TrafE is responsible for K63-linked polyubiquitination of MCV or endolysosomal membrane protein upon damage triggered by perforation-induced changes in membrane. According to our working model in WT cells, ALIX, Vps32 and TrafE are recruited to small size damage sites. TrafE-dependent ubiquitination of unknown endolysosomal membrane protein with K63-polyubiquitin promotes K63-Ub-ALIX interaction which enhances ALIX ability to stimulate Vps4 activity and triggers its functional recruitment to damage sites resulting in proper ESCRT-III turnover. In case of substantial damage, it is possible that TrafE deposited K63-Ub serves as a signal for the recruitment of the autophagy adaptor p62 and the autophagy machinery leading to formation of a phagophore-like structure which seals by membrane fusion the damage site. In atg1- KO cells, the ESCRT-dependent damage repair is functional, however the cells are autophagy deficient and therefore there is no formation of phagophore and no autophagy-dependent fusion-type membrane repair. Finally, there is no xenophagy. Figure 13. Working model. In trafE- KO cells, ALIX and Vps32 are recruited to damage sites; however, in the absence of ALIX interaction with TrafE-deposited K63-Ub, ALIX-dependent stimulation of Vps4 activity is insufficient to allow proper ESCRT-III turnover and functional ESCRT-dependent repair. In parallel, the absence of K63-Ub also impairs the autophagy-dependent fusion-type repair which altogether explains the severity of the trafE- KO phenotypes compared to atg1- KO mutant cells. Based on recent studies revealing the function of the ESCRT machinery in phagophore closure, we speculate that TrafE may also be involved in this process. Discussion In recent years, studies in mammals have revealed some of the components and the effector pathways that detect, repair and / or remove intracellular compartments disrupted by invading pathogens or by mechanical damage. Cells have developed molecular sensors that determine the size and the extent of membrane damage. Recent evidence indicate that small, pore-size damage is repaired by the ESCRT machinery, however extensive, and prolonged damage triggers the autophagy machinery. The latter appears to play both a repair as well as a remove role upon catastrophic damage. Despite intense research, we still need to extend our insight in the molecular factors involved in membrane damage detection and how it is translated into a vigorous and specific ubiquitination response. D. discoideum is a powerful model system to address the aforementioned questions thanks to its experimental versatility and the high evolutionary conservation of the ESCRT and the autophagy pathways with their mammalian counterparts. It was previously shown that in D. discoideum, M. marinum infection or LLOMe-induced sterile damage leads to an increase of Ub- and Atg8-positive structures and to recruitment of the ESCRT subunits Tsg101, Vps32 and Vps4, reportedly ahead of the recruitment of autophagy markers p62 and Atg8 at the MCV and endolysosomes. In this study, we demonstrate that early after infection, the D. discoideum E3 ubiquitin ligase TrafE is recruited to MCVs in a membrane damage-dependent manner. This recruitment was significantly attenuated upon infection with M. marinum ∆RD1 that produces PDIMs but lacks a functional ESX-1 secretion system. We also demonstrate that the intracellular growth of M. marinum -lux is significantly increased in atg1- KO and trafE- KO cells compared to WT cells, suggesting that xenophagy is the main M. marinum cell-autonomous restriction pathway. In addition, cells lacking the E3 ligase TrafE show exceptionally high and early susceptibility to infection with WT M. marinum which is not the case in the autophagy-deficient atg1- KO cells. Upon starvation, atg1- KO cells that are fully defective in autophagy, display severe developmental phenotypes and do not proceed beyond aggregation. In contrast, trafE- KO cells successfully complete their developmental cycle and form spores, emphasizing the functional specificity of TrafE to endolysosomal membrane damage. Altogether, our data indicate that trafE- KO phenocopies the autophagy-deficient atg1 mutants in terms of unrestricted M. marinum intracellular growth, however the higher cytotoxicity exerted by bacteria in trafE- KO cells compared to WT and atg1- KO cells 3D ) leads to the speculation that TrafE might be upstream of both ESCRT- and autophagy-mediated membrane repair pathways. Following that hypothesis, the particularly rapid death of infected trafE- KO cells likely results from inefficient MCV repair, and leads to early bacteria escape and release by host cell lysis. Ubiquitin is required for various aspects of autophagy, such as removal of protein aggregates, recycling of mitochondria and bacteria, or endolysosomal homeostasis. Xenophagy depends on decoration of intracellular pathogens with K63-linked Ub chains that bring bacteria to the phagophore membrane via autophagy cargo receptors such as p62 and NDP52. We demonstrated that although the levels of polyubiquitin-positive MCVs remain unaffected in M. marinum -infected trafE- KO cells, the levels of K63-linked polyUb-positive MCVs are significantly decreased but not abolished compared to wt D. discoideum cells, possibly due to the presence of other E3-ligases, such as for instance TrafC, which is also recruited to MCVs during infection and might have partially redundant functions. It has been shown that human TRAF6 forms heterodimers with TRAF2, TRAF3, and TRAF5 through their RING domains and that the resulting heterodimers are more stable than the TRAF6 homodimers. Therefore, the severity of the trafE- KO phenotypes during infection may be due to the instability or non-functionality of a potential heterodimerization redundant partner, such as other D. discoideum TRAFs. Furthermore, we found that the recruitment of TrafE to MCVs is abolished in the absence of its RING domain and not when the TRAF domain is deleted, likely because RING domains-mediated dimerization confers the specificity to the substrate via TrafE interaction with the E2-conjugating enzyme. Nevertheless, both domains are equally important for the restriction of M. marinum intracellular growth. Similar to xenophagy, lysophagy also depends on Ub and it has been shown that ubiquitination of Lysosome-Associated Membrane Protein 2 in damaged lysosomes leads to their autophagic degradation. In addition, recent studies in mammalian cells have demonstrated that disrupted lysosomes leak protons and reactive oxygen species that lead to pyroptotic cell death. Repair of damaged lysosomes is vital for the cells and depends both on the ESCRT machinery and lysophagy, which repair and / or remove extensively damaged compartments. Studies in HeLa Kyoto cells have demonstrated that membrane tension plays a role in endosomal membrane remodelling and that both hyperosmotic shock and LLOMe-induced perforations, result in a decrease of membrane tension sufficient to trigger the recruitment of the ESCRT-III subunit CHMP4B. Remarkably, we found that TrafE is recruited to endolysosomes minutes after LLOMe treatment or hyperosmotic shock, suggesting its involvement in endolysosomal membrane remodelling and repair signalling pathways. We also demonstrate that, unlike WT D. discoideum cells, trafE- KO cells fail to restore their endolysosomal pH after LLOMe-induced sterile damage. Furthermore, as observed during M. marinum infection, trafE- KO mutant cells are extremely susceptible to LLOMe compared to atg1- KO or WT cells, in agreement with our hypothesis that TrafE is upstream of ESCRT and autophagic membrane repair or removal pathways. Comparison of total RNA extracted from WT and trafE- KO cells under basal conditions indicated misregulation of nearly all genes belonging to the autophagy and the ESCRT families, pointing to a connection between these pathways which TrafE may link. Therefore, we set out to discern where ESCRT and autophagy intersect and importantly how TrafE may bridge the two pathways. As part of the cell survival mechanisms, autophagy is induced upon starvation to consume cytosolic constituents and to repair or remove extensively damaged compartments. As indicated by an increase of GFP-Atg8a puncta, we demonstrated that upon starvation autophagy is initiated in both WT and trafE- KO cells. Therefore, the absence of TrafE does not affect autophagy initiation but rather its effectiveness as revealed by accumulation of GFP-Atg8a-positive structures in trafE- KO cells. In a similar fashion, during sterile damage, despite the modest increase of GFP-Atg8a puncta in trafE- KO cells compared to WT, these autophagosome-like compartments persisted. The ESCRT machinery has been extensively studied for its involvement in membrane remodelling, including regulation of autophagosome maturation. In the present study, we show for the first time that in D. discoideum cells during starvation, the ESCRT accessory protein ALIX and ESCRT-III subunit Vps32 are recruited to dextran-negative compartments in contrast to starved atg1- KO cells. To our surprise, compared to starved WT cells, absence of TrafE lead to a strong accumulation of ALIX-GFP and GFP-Vps32 while the number of GFP-Vps4 foci remained at its basal level. Importantly, we showed that in trafE- KO cells, LLOMe causes significant build-up of ALIX-GFP or GFP-Vps32 structures relative to WT cells, without concomitant and functionally crucial GFP-Vps4 recruitment. Furthermore, in complemented trafE- KO cells, cytosolic GFP-Vps4 was redistributed to LLOMe-damaged compartments and colocalized with mRFP-TrafE. Significantly, whilst in TrafE mutant cells the number ALIX-GFP structures was abnormal in mock- and LLOMe-treated cells, the K63-polyubiquitination of damaged compartments was severely reduced. Altogether, these results demonstrate that in D. discoideum cells ESCRT and autophagy pathways intersect during endolysosomal membrane repair in which the absence of TrafE leads to striking functional disruptions of both machineries. Materials and methods Dictyostelium discoideum strains, culture, and plasmids D. discoideum Ax2 WT and mutant strains, listed in Supplementary file 1a, were grown in axenic conditions at 22 °C in HL5c medium supplemented with 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin. Cell lines expressing fluorescent reporters and KO cell lines were cultured in the presence of the appropriate antibiotics, hygromycin, blasticidin, or Geneticin G418. D. discoideum WT, trafE knock-out or atg1- KO cell lines were stably transformed with GFP-TrafA, GFP-TrafB, GFP-TrafC, GFP-TrafD, GFP-TrafE, GFP-Atg8a, GFP-p62, GFP-Vps32, mCherry-Plin constructs. The trafE- KO was generated in Ax2 background by homologous recombination using a knock-out vector obtained following a one-step cloning in pKOSG-IBA-dicty1 as previously described. The trafE GFP knock-in was generated in Ax2 background by homologous recombination using a knock-in vector obtained following two-step cloning in pPI183. WT, trafE- KO and atg1- KO knock-in act5 ::ALIX-GFP, act5 ::GFP-Vps32, act5 ::GFP-Vps4 and act5 ::GFP-Atg8a cell lines were generated following homologous recombination after one-step cloning of ALIX CDS into pDM1515 or Vps32,Vps4 and Atg8a CDSs into pDM1513 as previously described. Mycobacterium marinum strains, culture, and plasmids M. marinum WT and ∆RD1 strains expressing GFP, mCherry or a bacterial luciferase operon were cultured in shaking at 150 rpm at 32 °C in Middlebrook 7H9 supplemented with 10% oleic acid-albumin-dextrose-catalase, 0.2% glycerol, and 0.05% Tween 80. Bacterial clumping was minimized by adding 5 mm glass beads during cultivation. Mutants and plasmid carriers were grown in medium supplemented with hygromycin or kanamycin, as appropriate. Infection assay. Infections were performed as previously described. M. marinum bacteria were spinoculated onto adherent D. discoideum cells and extracellular bacteria were rinsed off. The infected cells were resuspended in HL5c containing 5 U mL –1 of penicillin and 5 μg mL –1 of streptomycin to prevent extracellular bacterial growth. Infections were performed at a multiplicity of infection of 10 for M. marinum WT in D. discoideum WT. MOI used for M. marinum ΔRD1 mutant cells was double the MOI of M. marinum WT. Infected cells for time points analysis were incubated at 25 °C. Intracellular bacteria growth assay In this assay the bioluminescence intensity is measured in relative light units as a readout for bacterial growth. Measurements of luciferase-expressing M. marinum intracellular growth were carried out as previously described. Three different dilutions of infected cells were plated on non-treated, white F96 MicroWell plates with a gas permeable moisture barrier seal. Luminescence was measured at 1 hour intervals for 30–72 hours at a constant temperature of 25 °C using a Synergy Mx microplate reader. Starvation assay To induce starvation, Hl5c growth medium was removed and D. discoideum WT, trafE- KO or atg1- KO knock-in act5 ::ALIX-GFP, act5 ::GFP-Vps32, act5 ::GFP-Vps4 and act5 ::GFP-Atg8a cell lines were washed once with Soerensen buffer and incubated for 90 min in SorMC-Sorbitol buffer directly in 96-well black, glass-bottom plates. Images from triplicates with 9 positions per well were recorded using a 60 x water immersion objective with the ImageXpress Micro XL high-content microscope. The number of ALIX-GFP, GFP-Vps32, GFP-Vps4 or GFP-Atg8a structures and foci were counted using the MetaXpress software, and analysed using GraphPad Prism software. Live fluorescence microscopy Live microscopy was performed using inverted 3i Marianas or Nikon Ti CSU-W1 spinning disk microscopes with a 63 x glycerol / air or 100 x oil objectives. Three to 10 slices 0.5 µm apart were taken for z-stacks. For time-lapse experiments, images were acquired from non-infected or infected cells at intervals of 1 min, 5 min or at the indicated time points. Image analysis was performed using Fiji. D. discoideum cells were plated at 10 6 /ml in 35 mm Glass Bottom Dishes or in 4-wells μ-slides. Sterile damage in D. discoideum was induced using 4.5–5 mM of LLOMe from a 10-fold concentrated solution that was added 5 min after the start of imaging. To induce a hyperosmotic shock, 2 M sorbitol was added to a final concentration of 200 mM, as described previously. The lumen of endolysosomal compartments was visualized using 10–15 μg/mL of 10 kDa Alexa Fluor 647 Dextran added 3 hr prior to microscopy and washed 10–20 min before visualization of the sample. To detect neutralization of endolysosomes, 1 µM Lysosensor Green DND-189 was added 3 hr prior to microscopy and washed away 10–20 min before visualization of the sample. To distinguish live from dead cells 1 µg/mL of propidium iodide was added directly to the cell culture immediately prior to time-lapse imaging. For high-content live microscopy, M. marinum -infected WT and trafE- KO D. discoideum cells were deposited in 96-well black, glass-bottom plates and left to adhere for 30 min at room temperature. Images were recorded every 1 min for 30–60 min using a ×40 or ×60 objectives with the ImageXpress Micro XL high-content microscope. The number of infected cells and extracellular bacteria or ALIX-GFP-, GFP-Atg8a-, GFP-Vps32-, and GFP-Vps32-positive structures were counted using the MetaXpress software, and analysed using GraphPad Prism software. Antibodies and immunofluorescence D. discoideum cells on coverslips were rapidly fixed by immersion in –85 °C ultracold methanol as described previously. The GFP fluorescent signal was enhanced using anti-GFP rabbit polyclonal antibody, anti-Ub mouse monoclonal antibody, anti-K63-linkage-specific mouse monoclonal antibody. Nuclei were stained with 1 µM DAPI. Cells were embedded using ProlongGold antifade. As secondary antibodies we used goat anti-rabbit and anti-mouse coupled to Alexa 488 or Alexa 594. Images were acquired with a LSM700 or LSM800 microscope using an oil ×63 objective. Image analysis was performed using ImageJ. qRT-PCR sample collection and analysis To monitor trafE mRNA levels, mock- or M. marinum -infected WT D. discoideum cells were harvested, RNA was extracted, and cDNA was synthesized using the Bio-Rad iScript kit. The mean calculated threshold cycles were averaged and normalized to the CT of a reference gene with constant expression. The normalized CT was used to calculate the fold change using the ∆∆CT method. Relative levels of target mRNA, normalized with respect to an endogenous control, were expressed as 2-∆∆CT, where ∆CT = CT target gene–- CT reference gene, and ∆∆CT = ∆CT studied sample - ∆CT calibrator conditions. RNA extraction RNA was extracted from cells using the Direct-zol RNA extraction kit following the manufacturer’s instructions for total RNA isolation. To remove contaminating genomic DNA, samples were treated with 0.25 U of dNase I per 1 μg of RNA for 15 min at 25 °C. RNA was quantified using Qubit 4.0 and its quality was checked on the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. Sequencing As previously described, total RNAs were subjected to cDNA synthesis and NGS library construction using the Ovation Universal System. A total of 100 ng of total DNAse I-treated RNA was used for first- and then second-strand cDNA synthesis following the manufacturer’s protocol. In order to obtain comparable library size, a double bead cut strategy was applied using the 10 X genomics protocol. cDNA was recovered using magnetic beads with two ethanol washing steps, followed by enzymatic end repair of the fragments. Next, barcoded adapters were ligated to each sample, followed by an enzymatic strand selection step and magnetic bead recovery, as above. rRNAs were targeted for depletion by the addition of custom designed oligonucleotides specific for D. discoideum. To amplify the libraries, 18 cycles of PCR were performed based on QC experiments carried out using RT-PCR. The quality of the libraries was monitored by TapeStation. Eight-plexed samples were pooled in approximately equimolar amounts and run in 50 bp single read flow cells and run on a Hiseq 4000. RNA-seq analysis pipeline Alignment. RNA-seq libraries from infected and mock-treated cells taken at the indicated time points were analysed in pairwise comparisons. Fifty nt single-end reads were mapped to the D. discoideum genome using tophat and bowtie2 software. Multi hits were not allowed, by using option–-max-multi hits 1. The other parameters were set to default. The read counts per gene were generated using HTSeq software and the GFF annotation downloaded from dictybase. Options for htseq-count were -t exon–-stranded=yes m union. Analysis of differentially expressed genes. Gene counts were imported to R filtered for remaining ribosomal gene counts and subsequently analysed using DESeq2 employing the HTS filter. A binary comparison trafE- KO versus WT was performed, fold change was calculated using the ashr method in DESeq2, the p value was corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg. Correction. The resulting false discovery rate was used for downstream analysis. Hard thresholds to select differentially expressed genes were set at the absolute log2 fold change ≥ 0.585 and FDR ≤ 0.05. Pathway analysis of DE genes. Pathway analysis was performed using the R package clusterProfiler and GO and KEGG annotations. For GSEA genes were ranked by false discovery rate, a group was considered significant at p value ≤ 0.05, q-value ≤ 0.1, group size between 2 and 200, using 10000 permutations. Heatmap of normalized counts. Gene counts were filtered for remaining ribosomal genes and subsequently for low expressed genes with the function filterByExpr from the edgeR package, then normalized using the vst function from the limma package and batch corrected for the effect of the experimental date using the removeBatchEffect function from the limma package. Normalized counts were subjected to the heatmap.2 function from the package gplots, scaling and centering the data for each gene. Single-cell experiments Single-cell experiment were performed using the InfectChip device as described. Briefly, the device is composed of a microfluidic chip in PDMS with a micropatterned serpentine channel, two holders, plastic screws and a micropatterned coverslip. Cells were infected as described above and seeded onto the coverslip. The microfluidic chip was placed onto the PMMA holder and covered with an agarose sheet prepared as explained elsewhere. Then, the coverslip was placed onto the aluminium holder and the device was mounted and closed with the screws. A 60 mL syringe was filled with 35 mL of HL5c supplemented with 5 µg/mL of streptomycin and 5 U/mL of penicillin, and connected to the tubing of the microfluidic chip. Imaging was performed with a spinning disk confocal microscope ) with the following parameters: 63 X glycerol objective, transmitted light, excitation with laser lines 488 nm and 594 nm and temperature controlled at 25 °C. The loaded InfectChip device was placed on the stage and the syringe placed into a syringe pump with a flow rate of 10 µL/min. Z stacks of 8 slices of 1.5 µm each were acquired every 15 min using phase contrast and every 1 h for fluorescence for 20 hr total. Image analysis for the single-cell experiments was performed as follows. Briefly, using the ImageJ software, cells were manually tracked, and their time of death was recorded, and the results were presented in the form of a survival curves using the GraphPad Prism software. Statistics Microscopy images were analysed using Fiji ImageJ. Experiments in Figure 1B, C, Figure 2B, Figure 3B and Figure 4C, E were quantified manually. Experiments in Figures 6H and ​ and7D 7D were quantified automatically using Fiji ImageJ Time Series Analizer V3. Experiments in Figures 9B, C — 11B, 13E were quantified using MetaXpress. Experiments in Figures 6D, F, ​,7B, 7B, 12D and E were quantified automatically using Fiji ImageJ ValelabUtils SpotCounter. Plots and statistical tests were performed using GraphPad Prism software. In all plots, standard error of the mean is shown, unless explicitly mentioned. Two-tailed t-test, ANOVA or Two-way ANOVA were used. Bonferoni multiple comparison tests were performed when necessary. Acknowledgements We acknowledge the members of the Bioimaging and ACCESS Platforms of the Faculty of Science. We thank Dr Dimitri Moreau and Dr Vincent Mercier for their help with MetaX-press and Dr Nabil Hanna for his contribution to the conception and practical realization of the RNA-seq experiment. Appendix 1 Apppendix 1 Appendix 1—key resources table Reagent type or resource Designation Source or reference Identifiers Additional information Gene trafA Dictybase DDB_G0272454 Gene trafB Dictybase DDB_G0285149 Gene trafC Dictybase DDB_G0290883 Gene trafD Dictybase DDB_G0290961 Gene trafE Dictybase DDB_G0290971 Cell line Ax2 Dictybase WT, parental strain of the trafE KO, atg1 KO and GFP-trafE KI Cell line M L.Ramakrishnan WT Cell line Ax2 This paper trafE KO Cell line Ax2 This paper atg1 KO Cell line Ax2 This paper GFP-trafE KI Cell line maintained in T. Soldati lab Cell line Ax2 This paper WT; act5 ::Atg8a Cell line maintained in T. Soldati lab Cell line Ax2 This paper WT; act5 ::ALIX Cell line maintained in T. Soldati lab Cell line Ax2 This paper WT; act5 ::Vps32 Cell line maintained in T. Soldati lab Cell line Ax2 This paper WT; act5 ::Vps4 Cell line maintained in T. Soldati lab Cell line Ax2 This paper trafE KO; act5 ::Atg8a Cell line maintained in T. Soldati lab Cell line Ax2 This paper trafE KO; act5 ::ALIX Cell line maintained in T. Soldati lab Cell line Ax2 This paper trafE KO; act5 ::Vps32 Cell line maintained in T. Soldati lab Cell line Ax2 This paper trafE KO; act5 ::Vps4 Cell line maintained in T. Soldati lab Cell line ∆RD1 L.Ramakrishnan Volkman et al., 2004 RD1 locus ablation mutant Antibody anti-GFP MBL 598 IF, WB Antibody anti-Ub Enzo Life Sciences BML-PW8810 IF Antibody anti-K63-linkage-specific Enzo Life Sciences HWA4C4 IF Recombinant DNA reagent pDM317 Veltman et al., 2009 Dictybase GFP Recombinant DNA reagent pDM1513 Paschke et al., 2018 108998 GFP Recombinant DNA reagent pDM1515 Paschke et al., 2018 109000 GFP Recombinant DNA reagent pDM318 Veltman et al., 2009 Dictybase dsRed Sequence-based reagent LR32F This paper PCR primers; trafE 5’ CAGGATCCAAAATGACAGTAAAATATTCAATTAATG Sequence-based reagent LR32R This paper PCR primers; trafE 3’ CAACTAGTTGGTAAAACTTGAATTCTAAG Sequence-based reagent LR63F This paper PCR primers; trafE; qPCR GAGTCTTGTAAAAAATCATTCCCAAG Sequence-based reagent LR63R This paper PCR primers; trafE; qPCR GTTGGTTATTTATAACTTTGTCCATC Sequence-based reagent LR7F This paper PCR primers; trafA 5’ CAGGATCCAAAATGGATATTTCTCAAATCC Sequence-based reagent LR7R This paper PCR primers; trafA 3’ CAACTAGTATGTTTATCACATTGAGAC Sequence-based reagent LR8F This paper PCR primers; trafB 5’ CAGGATCCAAAATGACAGAGTTTAAAATTAG Sequence-based reagent LR8R This paper PCR primers; trafB 3’ CAACTAGTTTTAGTAGTTAAAGGATC Sequence-based reagent LR9/10 F This paper PCR primers; trafC 5’ CAGGATCCAAAATGTCAATTGATATAAAATTTAC Sequence-based reagent LR9R This paper PCR primers; trafC 3’ CAACTAGTAGACTCCAATGGTTCATATTC Sequence-based reagent LR9/10 F This paper PCR primers; trafD 5’ CAGGATCCAAAATGTCAATTGATATAAAATTTAC Sequence-based reagent LR10R This paper PCR primers; trafD 3’ CAACTAGTAGACTCCAATGGTTCATATTC Commercial kit RNA extraction kit Direct-zol Zymo research R2062 Other Lysosensor Green DND-189 Invitrogen L7535 Fluorescent Dye;1 µM Other 10 kDa Alexa Fluor 647 Dextran Invitrogen } D22914 Alexa fluorophore labelled dextran;10 µg/mL Other DAPI stain Invitrogen D1306 1:50 Other PI stain ThermoFisher } R37108 1 µg/mL Chemical compound LLOMe Bachem 16689-14-8 4.5–5 mM Open in a separate window Funding Statement The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication. Contributor Information Noboru Mizushima, University of Tokyo Japan. David Ron, University of Cambridge United Kingdom. Funding Information This paper was supported by the following grants: Schweizerischer Nationalfonds zur Förderung der Wissenschaftlichen Forschung Project grant 310030_188813 to Lyudmil Raykov, Manon Mottet, Jahn Nitschke, Thierry Soldati. Schweizerischer Nationalfonds zur Förderung der Wissenschaftlichen Forschung Sinergia grant CRSII5_189921 to Lyudmil Raykov, Manon Mottet, Jahn Nitschke, Thierry Soldati. Additional information Competing interests No competing interests declared. Author contributions Conceptualization, Resources, Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing. Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology. Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - review and editing. Conceptualization, Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Project administration, Writing - review and editing. Additional files Supplementary file 1. D. discoideum material used in this study. The Supplementary file includes table with the D. discoideum strains used in this study, the overexpression plasmids and the plasmids used for generation of trafE knock-out and GFP knock-in. M. marinum material used in this study. The Supplementary file includes table with the M. marinum strains and M. marinum plasmids used in this study. Primers used in this study. The Supplementary file includes table with primers used to amplify trafA, trafB, trafC and trafE CDSs, primers used for knock-out, GFP knock-in generation, act5 locus integration and screenings. Click here to view. MDAR checklist Click here to view. Data availability All data generated or analysed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files; Source data files have been provided for Figures 1B, 1C, 1D, 1E, 2A, 2B, 2C, 2D, 2E, 3B, 3C, 3D, 4C, 4E, 5B, 5C, 6D, 6F, 6H, 7B, 7D, 7E, 8A, 8B, 8C, 9B, 9C, 10C, 10D, 11B, 12D, 12E and for Figure 1 - figure supplement 3A, B, C, D, 4A, B, Figure 10 - supplement 1C, 1D, 1E, 1F, 1G. The graph from Figure 1 - figure supplement 2 was generated by analysis of publicly available data. The MCV proteomics information was obtained from a publicly available dataset. Article information eLife. 2023; 12: e85727. Published online 2023 Apr 18. doi: 10.7554/eLife.85727 PMCID: PMC10181826 PMID: 37070811 Lyudmil Raykov, 1 Manon Mottet, 1 Jahn Nitschke, 1 and Thierry Soldati 1 Lyudmil Raykov 1 Départment de Biochimie, Faculté des Sciences, University of Geneva Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Lyudmil Raykov Manon Mottet 1 Départment de Biochimie, Faculté des Sciences, University of Geneva Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Manon Mottet Jahn Nitschke 1 Départment de Biochimie, Faculté des Sciences, University of Geneva Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Jahn Nitschke Thierry Soldati 1 Départment de Biochimie, Faculté des Sciences, University of Geneva Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Thierry Soldati Noboru Mizushima, Reviewing Editor and David Ron, Senior Editor Noboru Mizushima, University of Tokyo Japan ; Contributor Information. 1 Départment de Biochimie, Faculté des Sciences, University of Geneva Geneva, Switzerland Thierry Soldati: hc.eginu@itadlos.yrreiht Received 2022 Dec 21; Accepted 2023 Apr 17. Copyright © 2023, Raykov et al This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use and redistribution provided that the original author and source are credited. Previous version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint". Articles from eLife are provided here courtesy of eLife Sciences Publications, Ltd 