 Motile cells encounter microenvironments with locally heterogeneous mechanochemical composition. Individual compositional parameters, such as chemokines and extracellular matrix pore sizes, are well known to provide guidance cues for pathfinding. However, motile cells face diverse cues at the same time, raising the question of how they respond to multiple and potentially competing signals on their paths. Here, we reveal that amoeboid cells require nuclear repositioning, termed nucleokinesis, for adaptive pathfinding in heterogeneous mechanochemical micro‐environments. Using mammalian immune cells and the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, we discover that frequent, rapid and long‐distance nucleokinesis is a basic component of amoeboid pathfinding, enabling cells to reorientate quickly between locally competing cues. Amoeboid nucleokinesis comprises a two‐step polarity switch and is driven by myosin‐II forces that readjust the nuclear to the cellular path. Impaired nucleokinesis distorts path adaptions and causes cellular arrest in the microenvironment. Our findings establish that nucleokinesis is required for amoeboid cell navigation. Given that many immune cells, amoebae, and some cancer cells utilize an amoeboid migration strategy, these results suggest that nucleokinesis underlies cellular navigation during unicellular biology, immunity, and disease. Keywords: cell migration, cell polarity, mechanochemical cues, myosin, nuclear positioning Subject Categories: Cell Adhesion, Polarity & Cytoskeleton Integration of complex chemical and mechanical guidance cues by migrating immune cells and unicellular amoebae requires actomyosin‐dependent nuclear repositioning. Introduction The ability of cells to navigate their path while moving themselves forward is critical for innate and adaptive immune responses, organismal development, tissue maintenance, and single‐cell organisms. During navigational migration, cells are surrounded by local environments that are composed of extracellular matrix, interstitial fluid, and tissue cells in the case of cellular migration in multicellular organisms, or natural environments like soil in the case of motile single‐cell organisms. To efficiently navigate through these environments, migrating cells are equipped with mechanisms to follow diverse chemical as well as mechanical cues. Most well investigated are chemotactic signals like chemokines, which are detected by the respective cellular receptors and align intracellular force generation by the actin cytoskeleton toward the chemotactic cue, such as during the recruitment of immune cells to sites of inflammation or into lymphatics. Yet at the same time, motile cells also encounter mechanical guidance cues along their paths, such as differently sized pores in the extracellular matrix. Navigating motile cells frequently generate new protrusions next to preexisting ones, followed by a preference for one of the protrusions, along which the path of migration is subsequently orientated. This morphological characteristic of multiple simultaneous protrusions is particularly common in shallow chemotactic gradients, suggesting that cells employ these multiple protrusions to sense chemotactic cues at different micro‐locations in their immediate surrounding. This notion is supported by the observation that deficiency of the Arp2/3 regulator Hem1 in motile immune cells not only reduces protrusion formation but also impairs migration along chemotactic gradients. Collectively, these findings suggest that cells utilize alternative protrusions to simultaneously explore and measure guidance cues at different local sites in their immediate microenvironment. These explorative protrusions are most evident in fast‐migrating amoeboid cells, such as neutrophils and dendritic cells, which adopt highly dynamic and ramified cell shapes. While some principles of how migrating cells coordinate these complex cell shapes have been identified, it remains entirely unknown how motile cells deal with locally diverse and potentially competing mechanochemical inputs, and how they reorganize their intracellular content along the dominant protrusion once a path has been selected. Here, we address these open questions by investigating how amoeboid cells navigate their path in locally heterogeneous microenvironments. We identify thresholds at which chemical chemokine cues overrule mechanical pore size cues and vice versa. Furthermore, we reveal that protrusions extending through larger extracellular pores often contain the nucleus, necessitating rapid and large‐distant intracellular repositioning of the nucleus, when the cell decides to follow a path defined by an emerging stronger chemotactic cue. Active intracellular relocation of the nucleus to specific intracellular locations is known to occur in various model systems, including neurons and multinuclear muscle cells, and has been termed “nucleokinesis.” Yet, how amoeboid migrating cells position their nucleus by nucleokinesis to align the nuclear path to the cellular path, despite their high shape dynamics, fast migration velocity, and unusual forward position of the nucleus in front of the MTOC, remained unknown. Here, we identify nucleokinesis during amoeboid migration, elucidate its mechanistic basis, and uncover its role in adaptive pathfinding within microenvironments characterized by competing chemical and physical cues. Results Rapid and long‐distance nucleokinesis during amoeboid immune cell migration As a model system for cell migration in microenvironments of heterogeneous mechanochemical composition, we imaged dendritic cells migrating along a chemotactic gradient while being embedded in a three‐dimensional collagen matrix composed of varying pore sizes. Migrating dendritic cells frequently showed a ramified cell shape with multiple protrusions, continuously generating new protrusions next to existing ones and eventually favoring one protrusion to select the preferred path of migration. In line with the function of the nucleus to act as a mechanical ruler to guide migration along the path of larger pore sizes, the cellular path was frequently identical with the nuclear path. Yet, in one out of four path decisions we observed mispositioning of the nucleus into future ‘losing’ protrusions. This deviation of the nuclear path from the cellular path caused a subsequent long‐distance repositioning of the entire nucleus toward the winning protrusion, effectively realigning the nuclear with the cellular path. Additionally, we also often observed repositioning of only parts of the nucleus, when the nucleus itself deformed simultaneously towards alternative cell protrusions, without entirely locating into these protrusions. In these situations, only the subnuclear part locating inside the “losing” protrusion had to be repositioned towards the “winning” protrusion along the selected cell path. Figure 1 Immune cells employ rapid and long‐distance nucleokinesis during amoeboid cell migration The intracellular repositioning of the entire nucleus relative to the cell body, also called nucleokinesis, was very rapid with velocities of 2–9 μm/min and displayed rapid accelerations faster than the movement of the cell body. Nucleokinesis occurred approximately once per hour during DC migration within collagen matrices and over long intracellular distances of up to 45 μm. To test whether nucleokinesis is a general feature of amoeboid immune cell migration, we imaged T cells, which have a smaller and less‐branched cytoplasmic cell body, and still detected frequent and rapid repositioning of the entire nucleus from “losing” into winning protrusions. These findings identify nucleokinesis as a novel component of amoeboid immune cell migration. Nucleokinesis enables adaptive pathfinding in competing chemokine and pore size cues As migrating cells encounter chemical as well as mechanical cues at the same time, our observations suggested that cells may use nucleokinesis to flexibly adapt their path between locally competing guidance cues. To functionally test this hypothesis, we engineered reductionistic cellular path decision points, at which migrating cells encounter two path options with different strengths of chemotactic as well as pore size cues. To provide diverse pore size cues, we generated two differently sized pores at the path junction, with pore sizes ranging from 8 to 2 μm width. According to the previously described mechanism for sensing pore sizes, migrating cells did not differentiate between large 8 and 6 μm pores but when choosing between a small pore and a large 8 μm pore. Next, to test whether we can selectively guide cells towards a specific path based on a stronger chemokine cue, we engineered one path to be closer to the source of the chemokine than the alternative path, which follows a snake‐like pattern and thus is more distant to the chemokine source. Simulation of the diffusion of the chemotactic gradient over time showed that the snake‐like path indeed causes higher chemokine concentrations at the path junction towards the path closer to the chemokine source. We confirmed these results experimentally by visualizing the chemotactic gradient by using fluorescent 10 kDa dextran as a proxy for the chemokine CCL19, showing stably higher concentrations over time at the path junction towards the path closer to the chemokine source and lower concentrations towards the path more distant to the chemokine source. Figure 2 Nucleokinesis enables adaptive pathfinding in competing chemokine and pore size cues Figure EV1 Novel reductionistic assays to characterize cellular path choices in competing chemokine and pore size gradients Next, we investigated cellular decisions upon offering both chemokine and mechanical cues simultaneously at single path junctions. When both paths were composed of almost equally sized large pores at their entrances, exceeding the threshold of the nuclear pore size sensing mechanism, cells showed a strong preference for the path closer to the chemokine source. Yet, when we gradually narrowed the entrance pore of chemokine‐proximal path, cells increasingly favored the alternative path, which was more distant to the chemokine source but had a larger pore at the path entrance. In contrast, in the absence of a chemokine source, cells always preferentially selected the longer paths with wider pores. Thus, these findings reveal that chemokine and pore size cues are competitive and identify thresholds at which chemokine cues overrule pore size cues and vice versa. To test for the functional relevance of nucleokinesis, we imaged the spatiotemporal dynamics of nuclear behavior during these path decisions. While the nucleus was often immediately positioned in the future winning protrusion, we also observed frequent nucleokinesis events in which the nucleus was mispositioned far‐distantly into the future “wrong” path, necessitating long‐distance nucleokinesis to the “winning” protrusion. Notably, nucleokinesis occurred particularly frequently when the nucleus was initially positioned into the path bearing a larger pore entrance, but the cell selected the alternative path with a narrow pore entrance with a stronger chemotactic cue. These findings show that cells can overcome the nuclear pore size sensing mechanism by chemotactic inputs and that nucleokinesis is required to adapt the nuclear path to the cellular path along an appearing dominating cue. Thus, nucleokinesis enables adaptive pathfinding during amoeboid cell navigation to flexibly navigate along locally competing mechanochemical guidance cues. Two‐step amoeboid nucleokinesis by consecutive cell polarity switches It is well established that cytoskeletal forces are able to intracellularly move and position the nucleus in diverse cell types such as neurons, glial cells, muscle cells, and fibroblasts. Plotting the speed and distance of nucleokinesis in these cell types in comparison to the here measured parameters revealed an extraordinary efficiency of nucleokinesis in immune cells, being rapid as well as far distant. Notably, the intracellular behavior of the immune cell's nucleus was reminiscent of the amoeboid's cell body behavior, meaning that the nucleus moved rapidly, flexibly, and with continuous shape changes. As these parameters are hallmarks of amoeboid cell behavior, we propose to name nucleokinesis in amoeboid cells as “amoeboid nucleokinesis”. To unravel the mechanistic basis of amoeboid nucleokinesis, we next imaged the spatiotemporal dynamics of the centrosome‐to‐nucleus axis, an important indicator of cell polarity and cytoskeletal forces acting on the nucleus during nuclear movement. To uncouple nucleokinesis from effects caused by cellular squeezing, we established novel path junctions with equally large pore sizes but one blocked path, causing nucleokinesis events from the blocked to the open path. Using EB3‐mCherry expressing DCs as a marker for the centrosome ) and semi‐automated imaging analysis, we observed two rapid polarity switches in the nucleus‐MTOC axis configuration during amoeboid nucleokinesis : while DCs migrated with a typical amoeboid nucleus‐forward configuration before nucleokinesis, the repositioning of the nucleus from the “losing” into the “winning” protrusion coincided with a switch in the nucleus‐MTOC axis configuration as the cells moved with the MTOC in front of the nucleus during the first phase of nucleokinesis. When the DCs continued their path of migration after the first phase of nucleokinesis, the nucleus passed again the MTOC to restore the initial nucleus‐MTOC axis configuration, showing that the nucleus does not passively stay at the cell rear upon the retraction of the nucleus‐containing “losing” protrusion, but actively repositions to its original location frontward of the MTOC during the second phase of nucleokinesis. Together, these data show that nucleokinesis in migrating amoeboid cells is composed of two phases: in the first phase of nucleokinesis, the nucleus travels intracellularly from the “losing” into the “winning” protrusion. In the second phase of nucleokinesis, the nucleus travels from the rear of the MTOC to the front of the MTOC. Figure 3 Two‐step amoeboid nucleokinesis by consecutive cell polarity switches Figure EV2 Quantification of re‐orientations in the configuration of the nucleus‐MTOC axis during amoeboid nucleokinesis To corroborate these findings, we used the microtubule markers EMTB‐mCherry and Spy‐tubulin as additional MTOC markers, as well as manual mapping of the MTOC‐to‐nucleus axis during nucleokinesis, confirming both observed rapid polarity switches during the first and second phases of amoeboid nucleokinesis. Similarly, when we investigated the MTOC‐to‐nucleus axis during DC pathfinding in deformable collagen networks, we observed preferential MTOC‐forward configuration during the first phase of nucleokinesis, followed by the restoration of the nucleus‐forward configuration during the second phase of nucleokinesis. Together, these findings identify that amoeboid nucleokinesis is characterized by two rapid polarity switches in the MTOC‐to‐nucleus axis. Myosin‐based forces drive amoeboid nucleokinesis to ensure adaptive pathfinding When we measured the lengths of “losing” protrusions at path junctions, we observed that “losing” protrusion containing the nucleus were longer and required more time to retract compared to those without a nucleus, suggesting that retraction of protrusions containing the nucleus is a particular challenge. This raised the question of which forces drive nuclear repositioning during amoeboid nucleokinesis. The positioning of the MTOC in front of the nucleus during the first phase of nucleokinesis suggested the possibility that microtubules emanating from the MTOC may couple to the nucleus, and thereby exert forces on the nucleus to pull it from the “losing” protrusion back to the cellular path. Yet surprisingly, when we depolymerized microtubules, we did not observe any slowdown of amoeboid nucleokinesis. In contrary, nocodazole‐treated cells showed, if at all, rather an accelerated speed of nucleokinesis as well as repositioning frontward to the MTOC. As microtubule depolymerization is known to cause increased cellular contractility by releasing microtubule‐bound actomyosin regulators like the RhoA guanine nucleotide exchange factor GEF‐H1/Lfc1, this finding raised the possibility that actomyosin contractility could be a driving force of amoeboid nucleokinesis. This notion was supported when we quantified the distance as well as the change of distance between the nucleus and the MTOC, showing that the nucleus is even more distantly frontward positioned upon microtubule inhibition, as if the nucleus would be pushed to a frontward localization while the localization of the MTOC remains rather stable along the cell axis. Further, imaging of myosin‐IIA localization during amoeboid nucleokinesis using MYH9‐GFP encoding dendritic cells revealed an enriched myosin‐IIA localization in retracting protrusions closely behind the nucleus. Similarly, when we imaged the localization of actin and myosin in the environments with one blocked path that allow the specific observations of nucleokinesis, we observed relocalisation of myosin from the previous cell rear toward the back of the nucleus‐containing “losing” protrusion, as if myosin forces would drive nucleokinesis. Figure 4 Cell polarity switches during amoeboid nucleokinesis require a functional actomyosin cytoskeleton Figure EV3 Amoeboid nucleokinesis remains largely unaffected when microtubules are depolymerized To test whether myosin‐IIA indeed provides forces to reposition the nucleus during amoeboid nucleokinesis, we next exposed motile DCs to the myosin‐II inhibitor para‐nitroblebbistatin. Cells with inhibited myosin failed to efficiently switch cell polarities during nucleokinesis, showing a random nucleus‐to‐MTOC axis configuration before, during, and after nucleokinesis. To corroborate these results, we analyzed myosin‐IIA knockout DCs and also observed delayed reconfiguration of the nucleus‐to‐MTOC axis during amoeboid nucleokinesis. Given the concerted action of myosin together with the actin cytoskeleton, we next inhibited the actin cytoskeleton with low‐doses of latrunculin, which still enabled migration but reduced the rate of cell polarity switching during nuclear repositioning. Thus, actomyosin contractility is required for efficient cell polarity switching during amoeboid nucleokinesis. Figure EV4 Reduced amoeboid nucleokinesis speed and cell polarity switching upon myosin inhibition Figure EV5 Delayed cell polarity switching and amoeboid nucleokinesis upon low‐dose actin inhibition To test for the functional consequences of impaired amoeboid nucleokinesis, we next measured the speed of nucleokinesis and cellular path adaptions when myosin is nonfunctional. While the cellular speed before nucleokinesis was even mildly increased in the presence of the myosin‐II inhibitor para‐nitroblebbistatin, path adaptations in response to competing chemical and mechanical guidance cues occurred less rapidly and less frequently. Notably, “losing” protrusions containing the nucleus were more affected by myosin inhibition than “losing” protrusions without a nucleus, suggesting that myosin forces are not only required for protrusion retraction but are also particularly required when the protrusion contains a mispositioned nucleus. Similarly, when we analyzed path adaptions in environments completely independent of pore sizes, the repositioning of the nucleus from “dead”‐end paths to the selected cellular paths was slowed down upon myosin and actin inhibition, causing a longer duration of nucleokinesis and even entire failure to adapt the nuclear to the cellular path, resulting in cells stuck in the wrong path. Quantification of the retraction time of “losing” protrusions with and without nucleus showed again that nucleus‐containing protrusions are particularly susceptible for myosin inhibition. To confirm these findings, we employed DCs with a knockout of the myosin regulator GEF‐H1 and found a reduction in the retraction time of nucleus‐containing “losing” protrusions, but not in the retraction time of “losing protrusions” without a nucleus and also not during migration in straight channels. Together, these findings identify actomyosin forces as a major driving factor of amoeboid nucleokinesis. Figure 5 Myosin‐based forces drive amoeboid nucleokinesis to ensure adaptive pathfinding Adaptive pathfinding by nucleokinesis in the Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae To explore whether adaptive pathfinding by amoeboid nucleokinesis is a general feature of amoeboid cell migration, we investigated motile single cells of the amoebae Dictyostelium discoideum. Comparable to immune cells, Dictyostelium cells typically explore their surrounding microenvironment with at least two protrusions, until they select a path, followed by repeated cycles of protrusion formation, path exploration, and path selection. Using a nuclear marker during Dictyostelium pathfinding in an environmental maze along a chemotactic folate gradient, we discovered frequent nucleokinesis events from future “losing” into “winning” protrusions, with rapid speeds faster than the cell front in the range of 8 to 25 μm/min. Given the smaller cell body of Dictyostelium cells in comparison to DCs, the nucleokinesis distances of 10 μm represented far‐distant intracellular nuclear re‐positioning throughout the cell body. Thus, the basic parameters of nucleokinesis in Dictyostelium cells are highly comparable to nucleokinesis in immune cells. Next, to characterize the configuration of the nucleus‐MTOC axis, we employed Dictyostelium cells encoding mRFP‐histone as a marker for the nucleus and GFP‐α‐tubulin as a marker for the MTOC. Before a nucleokinesis event, Dictyostelium cells migrated in the typical amoeboid nucleus‐forward configuration, but then switched to an MTOC‐forward configuration during the first phase of nucleokinesis, followed by the restoration of the nucleus‐forward configuration during the second phase. Notably, as in amoeboid immune cells, this two‐step polarity switch is dependent on myosin‐II contractility, as the positioning of the nucleus to the front of the cell axis was strongly delayed in the presence of the myosin‐II inhibitor para‐nitroblebbistatin. To corroborate these results, we analyzed Dictyostelium cells bearing a well‐established myosin‐II null mutation strain HS2205), as well as genetically encoded markers for the nucleus and the MTOC, and also observed delayed nuclear relocalization frontward to the MTOC during nucleokinesis. Thus, despite the phylogenetic distance between mammalian immune cells and the amoebae D. discoideum, the mechanistic principles of amoeboid nucleokinesis during cellular navigation are conserved. Figure 6 Adaptive pathfinding by nucleokinesis in Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae Together, these findings identify amoeboid nucleokinesis as a conserved process in rapid amoeboid migrating cells, comprising a two‐step cell polarity switch driven by myosin‐II forces, sliding the nucleus from a “losing” to the “winning” protrusion to ensure adaptive pathfinding in complex microenvironments. Discussion Cellular organelles are often actively positioned to defined subcellular locations within the cytoplasm. This active positioning includes membrane‐surrounded organelles like the nucleus and mitochondria, but also membraneless‐organelles like the microtubule‐organizing center. The active positioning of the genome‐carrying nucleus is particularly challenging, as it is typically the largest and stiffest organelle. Cells solved this challenge by exerting forces from the cytoskeleton onto the nucleus, leading to its intracellular movement and positioning—a process referred to as nucleokinesis, by which the entire nucleus moves intracellularly in relation to the cell's shape. For instance, cells in the developing vertebrate neuroepithelium employ forces that are mainly generated by the actomyosin cytoskeleton to move their nuclei basally and apically during the progression of the cell cycle, whereas the movements of female and male pronuclei during fertilization are mainly driven by forces from the microtubule cytoskeleton. An additional complexity for nuclear positioning arises when cells are not stationary but motile, adding the challenge of coordinating nuclear positioning with the cellular advance along the migratory path. Key findings showed that motile fibroblasts reposition their nucleus to the cellular rear to start their movement into cell‐free tissue wounds. Mechanistically, this rearward nuclear positioning is driven by an actin cortex composed of actin cables that are coupled to the nucleus and move against the direction of cellular movement. Fibroblasts are mesenchymally migrating cells that adhere to their extracellular environments and migrate with velocities in the range of tens of micrometers per hour. Thus, the principles and mechanisms of nuclear positioning in stationary and slowly moving cells are increasingly well understood. However, how extremely fast migrating cells coordinate the intracellular positioning of the nucleus with their migration path remained entirely unknown. The high velocities of fast migrating cells, which are typically around 10 μm/min, even raised the question of whether nuclear movement can be at all faster than the cellular speed—a prerequisite for active nuclear repositioning in relation to the movement of the cell body. On top of this speed challenge, rapidly migrating cells also provide a morphological challenge: the fastest migrating cells are typically amoeboid cells, including many immune cells, which have complex, ramified cell shapes that dynamically and constantly change during navigation along the migration path, raising the question whether and how nuclear positioning is coordinated with these highly dynamic changes in cell shape. Here, we investigated major cellular models of fast amoeboid migrating cells, including immune cells and the single‐cell amoeba D. discoideum, and discovered that motile amoeboid cells actively move and reposition their nuclei during pathfinding. Nuclear movement in amoeboid cells is extraordinarily efficient and frequent, functioning in a very rapid manner over long intracellular distances. Given the similarity of this type of nuclear movement to the movement properties of entire amoeboid cells, we name this newly described mode of nuclear movement as “amoeboid nucleokinesis.” Amoeboid nucleokinesis appears to function independently of a direct role of the microtubule cytoskeleton, as microtubule depolymerization did not impair the speed of nuclear repositioning. Instead, our findings show that amoeboid nucleokinesis requires forces from the actomyosin cytoskeleton. While forces from actin and myosin are well known to be important for the advance and retraction of individual protrusions and the entire cell body, as well as for the squeezing of the cell body and the nucleus, our reductionistic microchannel approach enabled us to investigate the principles of amoeboid nucleokinesis independent of squeezing and general migration or retraction defects. This approach revealed that the retraction of a “losing” protrusion containing the nucleus is a particular challenge, requiring myosin forces to reposition the nucleus towards the “winning” protrusion during the first phase of nucleokinesis and into an intracellular location ahead of the MTOC during the second phase. Given the rapid temporal scale of nuclear repositioning and the two rapid switches in the nucleus‐MTOC axis configuration, it will be interesting to investigate whether amoeboid nucleokinesis may involve a tight anchorage between the actomyosin cytoskeleton and the nucleus, or may function through an anchorage‐independent mechanism driven by myosin forces located at the rear of the nucleus. Considering the accumulation of myosin behind the nucleus, it is tempting to speculate that myosin pushes the nucleus during amoeboid nucleokinesis. Alternatively, myosin may also pull the nucleus from the front, which though would likely require tight anchorage between actomyosin filaments and the nucleus, and adhesive cellular contacts with the microenvironment to stably attach the pulling force, the latter being less typical for non‐ or low‐adhesive amoeboid migrating cells. Functionally, we discover that amoeboid nucleokinesis is required for amoeboid cell migration in complex mechanochemical microenvironments. Specifically, amoeboid nucleokinesis allows cells to adapt their path flexibly when a dominant guidance cue emerges, in particular when the nucleus follows initially the path of least resistance through a larger pore but then the cell decides to migrate along the path of another, alternative protrusion along a dominating chemotactic cue. When amoeboid nucleokinesis is impaired, cells are less efficient to adapt their path and may become trapped. Tissue microenvironments typically present a variety of chemical and mechanical cues, including differently sized pores. These microenvironmental pores can be very heterogenous in size, typically in the range of 2–10 μm, and are thus considerably smaller than the cellular diameter. While motile amoeboid cells can use their nucleus as a gauge to probe for the pore size to select migration routes along larger, less detrimental pores, cells should be able to flexibly redirect their migration path upon the emergence of other cues. Here we showed this flexibility in microenvironments of competing chemokine and pores size cues, identifying that high chemokine concentrations can overrule pore size cues. Such a behavior appears to be highly relevant in physiological situations when cells are directed by chemotactic cues into dense or narrow tissue microenvironments, such as when mature dendritic cells have to squeeze themselves through tiny openings of lymph capillaries during their travel to the lymph node. Considering that virtually all motile cells simultaneously encounter a variety of chemical and mechanical signals in their immediate local microenvironment, our findings suggest that nucleokinesis plays a universally crucial role in the navigation of migrating cells. Materials and Methods Cell culture Mammalian cell culture All cells were kept at 37°C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO 2. DCs were differentiated either from the bone marrow of male C57B16/J wildtype mice, male or female MyoIIA‐Flox*CD11c‐Cre mice, or from Hoxb8 precursor lines and Lfc −/− ). Cells were differentiated in R10 medium, 2 mM L‐glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 mg/ml streptomycin, and 0.1 mM 2‐mercaptoethanol; all Gibco) supplemented with 10% granulocyte‐macrophage colony‐stimulating factor hybridoma supernatant. Fresh medium was added on differentiation days 3 and 6. To induce maturation, either fresh or thawed DCs were stimulated for 24 h with 200 ng/ml lipopolysaccharide and used for experiments on day 9. DCs derived from bone marrow from MyoIIA‐Flox*CD11c‐Cre mice were additionally differentiated for two more days : additional fresh medium was added at day 8 and the cells were frozen at day 10, followed by stimulation with LPS upon thawing, and usage of the cells for experiments on day 11. T cells were isolated from the spleen of male or female C57BL/6J mice using the EasySep mouse naive T cell isolation Kit. Cells were seeded onto cell culture plates coated with 1 μg/ml CD3 antibody and 1 μg/ml CD28 antibody and either used for experiments between differentiation days 3 and 6 or frozen at day 6 and thawed for experiments. Dictyostelium discoideum Cells of the D. discoideum strain AX2‐214, and the myosin‐II deficient strain HS2205 derived from it were used. Nuclei and microtubules in both strains were visualized by expression of GFP‐α‐tubulin and mRFP‐histone. Cells were cultured in polystyrene Petri dishes containing HL5 medium supplemented with 10 μg/ml of blasticidin S, 20 μg/ml of geneticin, or 33 μg/ml hygromycin B at 22°C. While the myosin‐II‐deficient mutant has been reported to have cytokinesis defects causing multinucleation, our adhesive cell culture conditions mostly resulted in single‐nucleated cells and for analysis we only included those single‐nucleated cells. Mice Wild‐type animals were housed in the Core Facility Animal Models at the Biomedical Centre, and animal procedures and experiments were in accordance with the ministry of animal welfare of the region of Oberbayern and with the German law of animal welfare. Flow cytometry analysis DCs were routinely checked for surface marker expression using antibodies for CD11c and MHCII. After Fc receptor blockage using an antibody for CD16/32, stainings were performed in FACS buffer. Cells were analyzed using a Cytoflex S flow cytometer. Microfabricated devices Microfabricated devices were generated as described previously. In brief, wafers produced by photolithography or epoxy replicates thereof were used as templates for micro‐structures with defined lengths, widths, and heights. Micro‐channels had a width of 8 μm. For analysis of adaptive pathfinding in competing chemokine and pore‐size cues, pores were 2, 4, or 6 μm wide. Pore sizes in pillar forests were 5 and 9 μm for D. discoideum and DC migration, respectively. The height of the micro‐structures ranged from 4 to 5 μm to ensure cell confinement from all sides. Polydimethylsiloxane was cast on the template micro‐structures. PDMS was mixed in a Thinky mixer, and air bubbles were removed in a desiccator. After curing at 80°C overnight, PDMS was removed from the template and cut into single devices. Holes were punched on each side of the micro‐structures to enable cell and chemokine loading. Subsequently, PDMS pieces were bonded to cleaned coverslips using a plasma cleaner. PDMS devices were placed at 120°C for 10 min and at 80°C overnight to ensure permanent bonding. Simulation of chemokine diffusion The geometry of an exemplary channel of the microchannel design was traced from a transmitted light image in Fiji and subsequently exported. A 2D model of the channel was generated from this data, and time‐dependent diffusion was simulated using MATLAB's “solvepde” function. The boundary condition at the channel interface with the chemokine source was set to c 0, and at the interface with the drain, it was set to 0. We used a diffusion constant of 1.3e‐10 m 2 /s for CCL19, as previously described. Live‐cell migration assays To visualize the nucleus for live‐cell migration assays, cells were incubated with 1 drop of NucBlue in 1 ml of cell/media mixture for at least 30 min. SPY555‐tubulin was used according to the manufacturer's protocol to visualize the MTOC. For pharmacological inhibition experiments, cells were treated with final concentrations of 50 nM Latrunculin A, 25 μM para‐nitroblebbistatin, or 300 nM or 10 μM Nocodazole. Control samples were treated with the respective DMSO dilution. Microchannel migration assays PDMS devices were flushed with phenol‐free R10 medium supplemented with 50 μM L‐ascorbic acid and pharmacological inhibitors if applicable for the experimental setup. Devices were incubated at 37°C, 5% CO 2 for at least 1 h before the experiment. Subsequently, 0.625 μg/ml CCL19 or 100 μM folate were loaded into the chemokine loading hole to establish a gradient. Finally, 0.1–1 × 10 5 cells were added into the opposite loading hole. When performing experiments with Dictyostelium cells in microchannels using either folate or cAMP as chemotactic cue, we rarely observed cells reaching the path decision points, as the microchannel designs included a long straight path before the path decision point. Thus, when investigating nucleokinesis in Dictyostelium cells, we loaded Dictyostelium into pillar forests, in which the cells immediately encounter a microenvironment with alternative path options on their migration path, enabling the investigation of nucleokinesis. Visualization of chemokine gradient For indirect visualization of the CCL19 gradient in the microchannels with competing chemokine and pore size gradients, 200 μg/ml dextran coupled to Alexa Fluor™ 647 with a molecular weight and hydrodynamic radius comparable to CCL19 was added to the chemokine loading hole. Collagen migration assays Collagen migration assays were performed as described previously. Briefly, for DC or T cell migration in collagen, 1× minimum essential medium, 0.4% sodium biocarbonate, and Nutragen bovine collagen were mixed with 3–5 × 10 5 cells in R10 medium at a 2:1 ratio, resulting in a final collagen density of 3.3 mg/ml. The collagen‐cell solution was added into custom‐made migration chambers. After 75 min polymerization at 37°C, 5% CO 2, gels were overlaid with 80 μl CCL19. For pharmacological inhibition experiments, inhibitors were added to the chemokine solution as well as the collagen‐cell solution. Under‐agarose migration assays Under‐agarose migration assays were performed as described previously. In brief, 4% UltraPure agarose in sterile water was mixed with 55°C prewarmed phenol‐free RPMI‐1640 supplemented with 20% FCS and 1× Hanks buffered salt solution pH 7.3 in a 1:3 ratio resulting in a final agarose concentration of 1%. The 1% agarose mixture was allowed to cool to 37°C before introducing the inhibitor to the respective final concentration. 300 μl of the agarose mixture were poured into each well of imaging‐suitable 8‐well slides. The under‐agarose migration assay was left at room temperature for 1 h to polymerize and was subsequently transferred to an incubator for another hour to equilibrate. After equilibration, four 2 mm holes were punched in each well using tissue biopsy punchers. 2.5 μg/ml CCL19 in phenol‐free R10 were loaded into two adjacent loading holes. Finally, 1.5 × 10 5 cells were loaded into each of the two opposite loading holes. The under‐agarose migration assay was placed in the incubator for 4–5 h to let cells migrate under the agarose layer toward the chemokine source. Immunofluorescence stainings For immunofluorescence stainings, under‐agarose migration assays were prepared as described above. Subsequently, cells were fixed by adding prewarmed 3.7% paraformaldehyde on top of the agarose. After 1 h of fixation at 37°C, 5% CO 2, PFA, and the agarose block were carefully removed, and cells were washed 3 times with PBS. Permeabilization was conducted with 1× SAPO buffer for 30 min, followed by blocking with 5% BSA for another 30 min. Primary antibodies were incubated at 4°C overnight. Following washing of the cells with PBS, samples were stained with secondary antibodies and DAPI at room temperature for 1 h. Following washing with PBS, samples were mounted using Fluoromount‐G. Imaging Live‐cell imaging of dendritic cells and T cells was performed at 37°C and with 5% CO 2 in a humidified chamber. Live‐cell imaging of D. discoideum was conducted at room temperature. Data were recorded using inverted DMi8 microscopes with HC PL FLUOTAR 4×/0.5 PH0 air, HC PL APO 20×/0.80 PH2 air, or HC PL APO 40×/0.95 CORR air objectives. Additionally, the microscope was equipped with an LED5 or pE‐4000 light source, an incubation chamber, a heated stage, and a CO 2 mixer. Immunofluorescence stainings were imaged on an inverted wide‐field DMi8 microscope with an HC PL APO 100×/1.47 oil objective. Imaging data presented in Figs 1 and ​ and4 4 are available in the external repository “BioImage Archive” EMBL‐EBI via “BioStudies” under the accession number S‐BIAD901. Image analysis Fiji/ImageJ and Imaris were used for image processing. Generally, only single, noninteracting cells were used for quantification to exclude the influence of neighboring cells on cell path, speed, pore size decision, or the nucleus—MTOC axis. We defined nucleokinesis as intracellular movement of the nucleus for at least one nuclear length relative to cell body, moving from a “losing” protrusion toward a “wining” protrusion. The overall speed of cells in collagen matrices was analyzed using a custom‐made cell tracking tool for ImageJ. In brief, image sequences were background corrected, and particle filtering was used to exclude objects larger or smaller than cells. Each image of the sequence was matched with the optimal overlap in its lateral displacement to the previous frame. Finally, migration velocity was calculated from the y‐displacement and the time between two consecutive frames. Speed and distance of nucleus and MTOC in single migrating DCs, T cells, and Dictyostelium cells in collagen matrices as well as in pillar forests were analyzed using the manual tracking plugin in Fiji. Orientation of nucleus and MTOC, as well as nuclear repositioning, was quantified manually in Fiji. For the analysis of cells migrating in 1x dead end‐channels, the nuclei were tracked using the tracking function of Imaris v9.7.2 with the following settings: object diameter 10 μm, manually adjusted quality threshold, autoregressive motion tracking algorithm. MTOC signals were either tracked manually in Imaris or segmented in ilastik 1.4.0 and then tracked using the tracking function of Imaris v9.7.2 with the following settings: object diameter 3 μm, manually adjusted quality threshold, autoregressive motion tracking algorithm. Subsequently, all automated tracking was manually evaluated for errors. The cell rear was tracked manually in Imaris. Position data for nuclei and MTOCs were exported and analyzed by a custom‐made Matlab script. To accurately associate MTOC tracks with corresponding nuclei, track pairing is achieved by minimizing the convex hull volume between their points. For each nuclear track, the motion direction is calculated, followed by determining the MTOC's distance and orientation relative to the nucleus. To categorize distinct zones within the 1× dead end‐channels, their x / y coordinates, and orientations are initially computed using template matching. Subsequently, data from all tracks is consolidated, and maps depicting speed, orientation, and MTOC distance are generated for in‐depth analysis. To analyze retraction dynamics of protrusions with or without nucleus in cells migrating in the 1× dead‐end‐channels, retraction length, and duration were quantified manually in Imaris. To measure fluorescence intensities of dextran coupled to Alexa Fluor™ 647 in the microchannels with competing chemokine and pore size gradients, a rectangular ROI of a defined size was selected on each side of the bifurcation and the mean intensity was measured over multiple channels. Finally, the fold change was calculated by dividing the mean fluorescence intensity in the “close” channel part by the mean fluorescence intensity in the “distant” channel part. To visualize the actin and myosin distribution of cells migrating in 1× dead‐end‐channels, polyline regions of interest were manually drawn on each y‐channel separately. The Fiji plug‐in kymoreslicewide was then used to create kymographs that show the average of the myosin/actin associated fluorescence over the full width of the microfluidics channels. These kymographs were subsequently transformed from the lab frame of reference to co‐moving kymographs. To this end, the cell nuclei were tracked separately with Imaris. The exported center of mass coordinates were used to laterally shift each line of the raw kymographs, so that the nucleus stayed fixed, hence stabilizing the kymograph and yielding the co‐moving kymographs of the cells. Statistics All replicates were validated independently and represent biological replicates. Samples that did not show migrating cells were excluded. Statistical analysis was conducted using GraphPad Prism using the appropriate tests according to normal or non‐normal data distribution as stated in the figure legends. Error bars are defined in the figure legends. No blinding, randomization, and samples size estimations were performed. Author contributions Janina Kroll: Conceptualization; investigation; methodology; writing – original draft; writing – review and editing. Robert Hauschild: Software; writing – review and editing. Artur Kuznetcov: Investigation; writing – review and editing. Kasia Stefanowski: Investigation; writing – review and editing. Monika D Hermann: Investigation; writing – review and editing. Jack Merrin: Methodology; writing – review and editing. Lubuna Shafeek: Methodology; writing – review and editing. Annette Müller‐Taubenberger: Resources; writing – review and editing. Jörg Renkawitz: Conceptualization; supervision; funding acquisition; investigation; writing – original draft; project administration; writing – review and editing. Disclosure and competing interests statement The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. Supporting information Appendix Click here for additional data file. Expanded View Figures PDF Click here for additional data file. Movie EV1 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV2 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV3 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV4 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV5 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV6 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV7 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV8 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV9 Click here for additional data file. PDF+ Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 1 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 2 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 3 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 4 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 5 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 6 Click here for additional data file. Acknowledgements We thank Christoph Mayr and Bingzhi Wang for initial experiments on amoeboid nucleokinesis, Ana‐Maria Lennon‐Duménil and Aline Yatim for bone marrow from MyoIIA‐Flox*CD11c‐Cre mice, Michael Sixt and Aglaja Kopf for EMTB‐mCherry, EB3‐mCherry, Lifeact‐GFP, Lfc knockout, and Myh9‐GFP expressing HoxB8 cells, Malte Benjamin Braun, Mauricio Ruiz, and Madeleine T. Schmitt for critical reading of the manuscript, and the Core Facility Bioimaging, the Core Facility Flow Cytometry, and the Animal Core Facility of the Biomedical Center for excellent support. This study was supported by the Peter Hans Hofschneider Professorship of the foundation “Stiftung Experimentelle Biomedizin”, the LMU Institutional Strategy LMU‐Excellent within the framework of the German Excellence Initiative, and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, and the CZI grant DAF2020‐225401 from the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative DAF ). Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. Notes The EMBO Journal 42 : e114557 Data availability Imaging data presented in Figs 1 and ​ and4 4 are available in the external repository “BioImage Archive” EMBL‐EBI via “BioStudies” under the accession number S‐BIAD901. Computational image analysis scripts are available upon request. Article information EMBO J. 2023 Dec; 42: e114557. Published online 2023 Nov 21. doi: 10.15252/embj.2023114557 PMCID: PMC10711653 PMID: 37987147 Janina Kroll, 1 Robert Hauschild, 2 Artur Kuznetcov, 1 Kasia Stefanowski, 1 Monika D Hermann, 1 Jack Merrin, 2 Lubuna Shafeek, 2 Annette Müller‐Taubenberger, 3 and Jörg Renkawitz 1 Janina Kroll 1 Biomedical Center Munich, Walter Brendel Center of Experimental Medicine, Institute of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology, University Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, Munich Germany Find articles by Janina Kroll Robert Hauschild 2 Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg Austria Find articles by Robert Hauschild Artur Kuznetcov 1 Biomedical Center Munich, Walter Brendel Center of Experimental Medicine, Institute of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology, University Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, Munich Germany Find articles by Artur Kuznetcov Kasia Stefanowski 1 Biomedical Center Munich, Walter Brendel Center of Experimental Medicine, Institute of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology, University Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, Munich Germany Find articles by Kasia Stefanowski Monika D Hermann 1 Biomedical Center Munich, Walter Brendel Center of Experimental Medicine, Institute of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology, University Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, Munich Germany Find articles by Monika D Hermann Jack Merrin 2 Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg Austria Find articles by Jack Merrin Lubuna Shafeek 2 Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg Austria Find articles by Lubuna Shafeek Annette Müller‐Taubenberger 3 Biomedical Center Munich, Department of Cell Biology, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, Munich Germany Find articles by Annette Müller‐Taubenberger Jörg Renkawitz 1 Biomedical Center Munich, Walter Brendel Center of Experimental Medicine, Institute of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology, University Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, Munich Germany Find articles by Jörg Renkawitz 1 Biomedical Center Munich, Walter Brendel Center of Experimental Medicine, Institute of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology, University Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, Munich Germany 2 Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg Austria 3 Biomedical Center Munich, Department of Cell Biology, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, Munich Germany Jörg Renkawitz, Email: ed.nehcneum-inu.dem@ztiwakner.greoj. Corresponding author. * Corresponding author. Tel: + 49 089 2180 71516; E‐mail: ed.nehcneum-inu.dem@ztiwakner.greoj Received 2023 May 19; Revised 2023 Oct 31; Accepted 2023 Nov 3. Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license This is an open access article under the terms of the License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. Articles from The EMBO Journal are provided here courtesy of The European Molecular Biology Organization 