 Studies in the model systems, Dictyostelium amoebae and HL-60 neutrophils, have shown that local Ras activity directly regulates cell motility or polarity. Localized Ras activation on the membrane is spatiotemporally regulated by its activators, RasGEFs, and inhibitors, RasGAPs, which might be expected to create a stable ‘front’ and ‘back’, respectively, in migrating cells. Focusing on C2GAPB in amoebae and RASAL3 in neutrophils, we investigated how Ras activity along the cortex controls polarity. Since existing gene knockout and overexpression studies can be circumvented, we chose optogenetic approaches to assess the immediate, local effects of these Ras regulators on the cell cortex. In both cellular systems, optically targeting the respective RasGAPs to the cell front extinguished existing protrusions and changed the direction of migration, as might be expected. However, when the expression of C2GAPB was induced globally, amoebae polarized within hours. Furthermore, within minutes of globally recruiting either C2GAPB in amoebae or RASAL3 in neutrophils, each cell type polarized and moved more rapidly. Targeting the RasGAPs to the cell backs exaggerated these effects on migration and polarity. Overall, in both cell types, RasGAP-mediated polarization was brought about by increased actomyosin contractility at the back and sustained, localized F-actin polymerization at the front. These experimental results were accurately captured by computational simulations in which Ras levels control front and back feedback loops. The discovery that context-dependent Ras activity on the cell cortex has counterintuitive, unanticipated effects on cell polarity can have important implications for future drug-design strategies targeting oncogenic Ras. Full Text Availability The license terms selected by the author for this preprint version do not permit archiving in PMC. The full text is available from the preprint server. Article information Version 1. bioRxiv. Preprint. 2023 Sep 1. doi: 10.1101/2023.08.30.555648 PMCID: PMC10491231 PMID: 37693515 This is a preprint. It has not yet been peer reviewed by a journal. The National Library of Medicine is running a pilot to include preprints that result from research funded by NIH in PMC and PubMed. Yiyan Lin, Dhiman Sankar Pal, Parijat Banerjee, Tatsat Banerjee, Guanghui Qin, Yu Deng, Jane Borleis, Pablo A. Iglesias, and Peter N. Devreotes PMC Copyright notice The complete version history of this preprint is available at bioRxiv. Articles from bioRxiv are provided here courtesy of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Preprints