 O -GlcNAcylation is a prominent modification of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins in animals and plants and is mediated by a single O -GlcNAc transferase. Spindly, a paralog of OGT first discovered in higher plants, has an ortholog in the apicomplexan parasite Toxoplasma gondii, and both enzymes are now recognized as O -fucosyltransferases. Here we investigate the evolution of spy -like genes and experimentally confirm OFT activity in the social amoeba Dictyostelium —a protist that is more related to fungi and metazoa. Immunofluorescence probing with the fucose-specific Aleuria aurantia lectin and biochemical cell fractionation combined with western blotting suggested the occurrence of nucleocytoplasmic fucosylation. The absence of reactivity in mutants deleted in spy or gmd suggested monofucosylation mediated by Spy. Genetic ablation of the modE locus, previously predicted to encode a GDP-fucose transporter, confirmed its necessity for fucosylation in the secretory pathway but not for the nucleocytoplasmic proteins. Affinity capture of these proteins combined with mass spectrometry confirmed monofucosylation of Ser and Thr residues of several known nucleocytoplasmic proteins. As in Toxoplasma, the Spy OFT was required for optimal proliferation of Dictyostelium under laboratory conditions. These findings support a new phylogenetic analysis of OGT and OFT evolution that indicates their occurrence in the last eukaryotic common ancestor but mostly complementary presence in its eukaryotic descendants with the notable exception that both occur in red algae and plants. Their generally exclusive expression, high degree of conservation, and shared monoglycosylation targets suggest overlapping roles in physiological regulation. Keywords: cellular slime mold, evolution, fucosyltransferase, nucleocytoplasmic glycosylation, O-GlcNAc transferase Introduction The structure and function of most proteins in the nucleus and cytoplasm are tuned by posttranslational modifications; the addition of the monosaccharide O -GlcNAc is an important example. Like phosphorylation, O -GlcNAcylation modifies thousands of nucleocytoplasmic proteins in human and most animal cells, as well as higher plants and some protists. Unlike phosphorylation, O -GlcNAcylation is mediated by a single catalytic enzyme, O -GlcNAc-transferase. A previous phylogenetic analysis of OGT-like sequences indicated that they were broadly distributed as single-copy genes throughout bacterial and eukaryotic phylogeny, but not archaea, and that they could be classified into one of two large groups, possibly tracing back to an ancient gene duplication in bacteria. One group includes experimentally documented OGTs, referred to as Secret Agent, and the other as Spindly. Spindly referred originally to the morphology of Arabidopsis mutants, and the Arabidopsis paralog Secret Agent was named as a metonym of Spy. Recently, the Spy proteins from the higher plant Arabidopsis and the animal pathogen Toxoplasma gondii were identified as O -fucosyltransferases. This was surprising because it is rare for highly similar glycosyltransferase sequences to utilize donor substrates that differ in the nucleotide, in this case a GDP-sugar instead of a UDP-sugar. In Arabidopsis, the Spy OFT regulates both the activity of transcriptional repressors in response to hormone signaling and protein stability. In Toxoplasma, OFT contributes to optimal growth of the parasite in cultured fibroblasts and regulation of growth in a mouse infection model. Localization studies indicate that O -Fuc proteins are concentrated in assemblies that subtend the nuclear envelope in the vicinity of nuclear pores. In that study, glycoproteomic analyses identified 33 O-fucosylated proteins, with evidence for over 35 more. O -Fuc was frequently but not always found in Ser-rich sequences expected to be intrinsically disordered. Most of these proteins are associated with transcriptional and translational regulation, and a recent study of fusion proteins containing O -Fuc domains suggested that O -Fuc contributes to protein stability. These findings raise the question of how prevalent are OFTs throughout phylogeny. This information would be important not only for investigating their roles but also to search for conserved features that might have driven OFT evolution. Here we revisit the evolution of Spy- and Sec-like sequences in the context of expanded genomic sequence data across phylogeny. OFTs and OGTs share a common architecture consisting of clustered tetratricopeptide repeats, which are involved in acceptor substrate selection, that lie N-terminal to a Carbohydrate Active EnZyme GT41 family catalytic domain. We find evidence for both highly conserved sequences predictive of OFT activity and for divergent Spy-like sequences whose function cannot be confidently predicted given prior evidence for donor nucleotide variation in this group. The proximal TPR sequences appear generally to co-evolve with the catalytic domains, and the most striking conserved differences from OGTs lie in regions adjacent to the active site, the connector between the TPRs and the catalytic domain, and distal TPRs. Except for red algae and higher plants, the organisms surveyed appear to contain one or the other, but not both. Fig. 1 Domain diagrams of Sec and Spy sequences. Domains are colored according to the legend. TPR domains are numbered starting from the catalytic domain. The sequence between the half-TPR domain and the region designated as the catalytic domain is relatively... We selected a new protist far removed from Toxoplasma and plants that is predicted to express a conserved Spy for evidence of OFT activity. Dictyostelium discoideum is a social amoeba with an evolutionary affinity to fungi and metazoa. It resides in the soil and is a well-studied model for chemotaxis, development related to its multicellular life cycle phase, intercellular altruism, cooperation, and interstrain cheating, and as a reservoir for mutualistic and pathogenic bacteria. Findings presented here indicate conserved biochemical and cellular roles, which support the broad phylogenetic distribution of OFTs suggested by the sequence data. Results Evolution of Sec-like proteins OGT enzymes from humans and Arabidopsis have a characteristic arrangement of sequential TPR domains and a CAZy GT41 catalytic domain sequence, as illustrated in Fig. 1A, and these features are conserved for examples of OFT from Arabidopsis and Toxoplasma. To assess the phylogenetic distribution of potential OGTs and OFTs outside of the animal and plant realms where they were first discovered, BLASTP searches seeded with sequences of catalytic domains of known OGTs and OFTs were initiated in all protist, algal, and fungal groups for which sequence data were available as of December 2021. Owing to the dissimilar length and low sequence similarity of the region between the half-TPR and the first β-strand of the catalytic domain, we selected sequences starting at β1 through to the C-terminus to represent the catalytic domain, as originally represented in the structure of the OGT homolog from Xanthomonas campestris. Additional searches were initiated with high scoring candidates from different evolutionary groups for comprehensive coverage. Those sequences from proteins that also possessed multiple predicted TPR-like sequences N-terminal to the catalytic domain, together with five most related CAZy GT41 sequences that lack TPR-like sequences but are expected to localize in the cytoplasm, were manually aligned and subjected to maximum likelihood evolutionary analysis as recently applied to a set of GTA-fold GTs. To address potential co-evolution, trees were also generated for the proximal 3.5 TPR domains, which contact the catalytic domain and contribute to acceptor substrate specificity, and for a merge with the catalytic domain sequences. In pilot studies, independent iterations of the catalytic domain tree yielded similar topologies, as did implementation in MEGA. To compare the trees, they were rooted with the sequence from the bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens, because it was closest to the base of catalytic domain trees rooted with the GT41 sequence from bacterial N -glycosyltransferase, which lacks TPR domains. Fig 3 Comparison of AlphaFold-predicted structures of the catalytic domain, connector region, and the proximal 3.5 TPRs of OFTs and OGTs. For OFTs, each TPR is colored in alternating green and light green, and the helix in the connector to the catalytic domain... Figure 2, an abbreviated representation of the combined tree in which related subclades were collapsed for simplicity, shows that the sequences distributed into two large groups: OGT/Sec-like and OFT/Spy-like. The species of origin are color coded according to whether they belong to plants, algae, animals, fungi, amoebozoa, other protists, or bacteria. Within the OGT/Sec-like group, sequences from animals, fungi, plants, red algae, rhizaria, stramenopiles, and bacteria were organized into separate subclades. These include enzymatically confirmed OGTs from animals, plants, the excavate Giardia, and a protein from the Gram-negative bacterium X. campestris, which is likely to be an OGT based on its documented role in hydrolysis of UDP-GlcNAc, although GlcNAc transfer to a peptide has not been demonstrated. The evolutionary clustering of sequences from fungi, rhizaria, red algae, and stramenopiles with these OGTs, and the high degree of conservation of amino acids known to be critical for the activity of characterized OGTs indicate a high likelihood for enzymatic activity. However, their sequences do not clade precisely along with the current model for the evolution of the organisms, and some sequences are related via long arms, so it is premature to conclude that they utilize the same UDP-GlcNAc donor substrate. The GT41 domain sequence from a predicted stramenopile protein that lacks TPR domains also lies within this OGT clade, but its separation from other predicted stramenopile proteins may indicate a distinct function. Fig. 2 Evolution of OGT- and OFT-like amino acid sequences. 87 CAZy GT41 sequences associated with N -terminal TPR sequences were retrieved from across phylogeny and aligned. Phylogenetic trees of the CAZy GT41 catalytic domain sequences,... The sequence of the connector is well conserved in metazoan OGT-like sequences but increasingly diverges in earlier phylogeny. The region around H508 in human OGT, which contacts the GlcNAc of UDP-GlcNAc and is essential for activity, is the most conserved, although it is apparently absent in the X. campestris sequence. This region folds into 3 α-helices in crystal structures of human OGT and the X. campestris enzyme, H3, H1 and H2, numbered in this way because H1 and H2 are considered to initiate the catalytic domain. As a test for the ability of the more distantly related sequences to adopt this fold, the structure prediction program AlphaFold was applied to human OGT and OGT-like sequences from Neurospora crassa, Plasmodiophora brassicae, Giardia lamblia, and a Synechococcus bacterium. The catalytic domain, connector region, and the first 3.5 TPRs superimposed very similarly, as shown for the first 3 in Fig. 3B, which emphasizes the high degree of conservation of this region of the phylogenetically distant OGT-like proteins. However, the prominent intermediate domain that interrupts the catalytic domain in animal OGTs is abbreviated or essentially absent in the non-metazoan enzymes, and the dimerization motif found in human TPR-8 is not apparent in the sub-metazoan examples. Evolution of Spy-like proteins The remaining sequences with TPR domains form a separate group that includes the known OFTs from Arabidopsis and other plants, and the apicomplexan Toxoplasma gondii, which resides within the alveolate clade. In addition, this group includes sequences from Gram-negative bacteria, cryptophytes, red algae, green algae, mosses, higher plants, and amoebozoa. To avoid ambiguity, paralogs within a species are enumerated with the suffix “-1” or “-2” in Fig. 1, Supplementary Figs S1 and S2, and Spy-like paralogs are assigned to “group A” or “group B” in Fig. 2. OFT-like sequences were notably absent from the stramenopile, rhizaria, excavate, and fungal groups, where OGT-like proteins are found, whereas OGT-like sequences were not found in the currently available genomes of alveolates, cryptophytes, and amoebozoa. These distributions are mapped onto a current model for the eukaryotic tree of life in Fig. 2B. The evolutionary relationship of the OFT-like sequences approximately paralleled the evolution of the organisms, with Gram-negative sequences splitting off first, followed by protists, and then green algae, mosses, and higher plants. However, the relationship of protist sequences appeared scrambled, with red algae associating with the apicomplexans and the chromerids at their root, and cryptophytes aligning with amoebozoa; these relationships do not conform with the provisional tree of eukaryotic evolution depicted in Fig. 2B. Furthermore, several amoebozoans possess a second OFT-like sequence, which were separated from amoebozoa-group A and connected with long arms indicative of considerable divergence. A mapping of the relative evolution of the TPR and catalytic domains of these outliers indicated a high degree of independence, as was also observed for the Cryptosporidium and chromerid sequences. A possible explanation is horizontal gene transfer, but new searches for the most similar eubacterial sequences in the non-redundant database failed to identify potential candidates for their origin. Alternatively, these proteins may have evolved other functions. Despite their diverse phylogeny, the AlphaFold predicted structures of OFT-like sequences from the following organisms were quite similar to each other: Arabidopsis thaliana, Toxoplasma gondii, Dictyostelium discoideum, Acanthamoeba castellanii, Dictyostelium purpureum -2, Nostoc calcicole, Gracilariopsis chorda, and Guillardia theta. Examples from A. thaliana, T. gondii, and D. discoideum that include the proximal 3.5 TPR domains are overlaid in Fig. 3A. Comparison of Sec-like and Spy-like proteins An overlay of the AlphaFold predictions of human OGT and Arabidopsis OFT confirms the expected high degree of similarity of their catalytic domains, with a root mean square deviation of ~1.5 Å, except for the intermediate domain that interrupts the catalytic domain in the HsOGT image shown for illustration. The Spy-like sequences are unified by characteristic amino acid motifs that differentiate them as a group from the OGT-like group and can be used to predict to which group a sequence belongs. However, the positions of their proximal 3.5 TPR domains do not overlay. This correlates with the divergent sequences of the connector between the half-TPR and the first β-strand of their catalytic domains. In OFT-like proteins, where the sequence tends to be shorter and not well conserved, this region is predicted to form an α-helix that approximately superimposes upon α-helix H2 of the OGTs. A His residue potentially related to His508 of α-helix H1 of HsOGT is conserved in many but not all examples, but in a different sequence context. Possibly to accommodate the absence of H3 and H1, the half-TPR of OFTs is predicted to overlap the position of OGT H3 and H1. It is tempting to speculate that the half-TPR/H2 of OFTs comprises a TPR domain that was the ancestral arrangement until it was distorted in the OGTs, but confirming this hypothesis will require experimental structure studies. The structure of NGT from bacteria shows no better alignment with either the OGT or OFT organization. These differences may explain the considerable predicted shift of positions of the proximal three full TPRs between the two enzyme types but, nevertheless, the sequences of the proximal 3.5 TPR domains of OGT- and OFT-like sequences are more similar to others of their own kind than to the other group, indicating co-evolution of acceptor substrate specificity. The significance of distinctive positions of the 3 TPRs is not clear, but the superhelical arrangement of the entire set of TPRs is predicted by AlphaFold to be conserved as for OGTs. The distinct geometry still provides a groove between the catalytic domain and the TPRs that is expected to allow for an acceptor peptide to access the active site. The importance of conserved amino acids has been mutationally probed for both classes of enzymes. Of 8 positions where point mutations in mammalian OGT TPRs have yielded phenotypes, either generated by site-directed mutation of the mouse version or occurring in the human population, 7 are similar in all or subgroups of OFTs ; conversely, the positions of 2 Arabidopsis OFT TPR mutations are conserved in human OGT. In the comparison of catalytic domains, 9 positions differ in a manner that predicts classification as OGT- or OFT-like. By threading the Toxoplasma OFT sequence onto the human OGT structure, many of these distinct positions are found to lie in vicinity of the active site, and this may allow for acceptance of the bulkier purine base of the GDP-Fuc donor substrate of OFTs, compared to the pyridine of UDP-GlcNAc of OGTs. Significantly, of the 25 OGT catalytic domain sites where mutations generated phenotypes, 7 are identical in OFTs and 9 are similar ; conversely, of the 5 sites in the Arabidopsis OFT catalytic domain where point mutations yielded phenotypes, 4 are conserved in OGTs. The conservation of these features emphasizes the relatedness of OGTs and OFTs that is apparent from the sequence and predicted structural similarities, whereas the 9 discrete catalytic domain differences reinforce their predicted activities as OFTs or OGTs. However, biochemical confirmation is warranted, especially for more distantly related sequences, bacterial sequences, A. castellanii -2, which lacks a clear connector sequence, and the second copy of OFT-like sequences in some amoebozoa. Fig. 4 Conserved amino acid differences between the catalytic domains of OFTs and OGTs, mapped onto the crystal structure of human OGT. Amino acids that differentiate SEC- and SPY-like sequences are rendered in violet.... Evidence for nucleocytoplasmic O -Fuc in Dictyostelium The amoebozoan D. discoideum was chosen to test for the predicted occurrence of nucleocytoplasmic O -fucosylation in a phylogenetically distant organism relative to the apicomplexans and higher plants. As a first approach, fluorescence localization of AAL binding, as originally performed to detect O -Fuc in Toxoplasma, was performed. Probing of permeabilized amoebae revealed evidence of fucoconjugates throughout the cell, as expected because fucosylation in the secretory pathway is extensive as suggested by the schematic. A ring of labeling with AAL was also observed around the nucleus, consistent with the labeling pattern in Toxoplasma. To test whether any labeling was dependent on Spy, a spy -KO strain was generated by standard double crossover homologous recombination. Imaging of these cells showed selectively reduced labeling around the nucleus, suggesting that D. discoideum Spy is an authentic OFT. However, Dictyostelium applies Fuc to numerous proteins and lipids in the secretory pathway, which AAL likely recognizes thus confounding interpretation. To address this ambiguity, we took advantage of a facile method to generate highly enriched cytosolic fractions in Dictyostelium by filter lysis and ultracentrifugation to generate a cytosolic preparation referred to as an S100 fraction. These cytosolic fractions from wild-type and spy -KO cells were analyzed by probing western blots of SDS-PAGE gels with AAL. This approach identified several protein bands over the M r range of 80,000 to 160,000, which were absent in independent spy -KO strains and whose detection was inhibited by preincubating AAL with the hapten inhibitor L-Fuc. In addition, strains in which His 6 Spy overexpression was caused by stable multi-copy integration of a spy cDNA under control of the semiconstitutive discoidin 1γ promoter showed increased levels of these and additional protein bands, whose detection was also inhibited by free Fuc. These findings suggest that, in Dictyostelium, Spy is an OFT that mediates assembly of O -Fuc on numerous proteins that accumulate in the cytoplasm, a compartment which might also allow their access to the nucleus, as is suggested by the AAL localization and also occurs in Toxoplasma. Fig. 5 Schematic of cellular compartmentalization of GDP-Fuc synthesis, transport, and fucosylation. GDP-Fuc can be salvaged from external sources or synthesized de novo from GDP-Man. GDP-Fuc synthesis was blocked in Dictyostelium by genetic ablation of GDP-Fuc... Fig. 6 Evidence of nucleocytosolic O -fucosylation in Dictyostelium discoideum. A) Fixed and permeabilized vegetative amoebae were labeled with Alexa Fluor-594-AAL for localization of fucoconjugates by fluorescence and with DAPI to image the nucleus. Analysis... Elimination of interfering fucosylation in the secretory pathway Dictyostelium discoideum, like most eukaryotes, assembles a variety of fucoconjugates in the secretory pathway that are destined for lysosomes, the plasma membrane, extracellular matrices, and the secretome. Since Fuc is frequently a terminal sugar, many are recognized by AAL, which confounds its use as a probe and affinity reagent for O -Fuc proteins. In contrast, AAL was successful in Toxoplasma because Fuc is a rare modification of their glycans. In order to differentiate the two classes of targets, we hypothesized that action of the estimated 12 fucosyltransferases predicted to reside in the secretory pathway would be negated by blocking the transport of GDP-Fuc into the secretory pathway lumina, as illustrated in Fig. 5. We previously suggested that the modE locus of D. discoideum encodes a GDP-Fuc transporter of the type that had been described previously in yeast and other cells. A modE mutant allele was found in a mutant selected from a population of mutagenized amoebae for loss of the fucose-containing epitope GA-X recognized by mAbs 83.5 and MUD62, which is found on secretory proteins including the spore coat protein SP96. Parasexual crosses mapped the mutant allele modE 353 to linkage group II and showed the mutation to be recessive in diploids. Vesicle preparations from HU2471 were deficient in fucosylation in the presence of GDP-Fuc unless permeabilized with non-ionic detergent, suggestive of a deficiency in a GDP-Fuc transporter. Based on the recent identification of the GDP-Fuc transporter in Toxoplasma, we predicted the corresponding gene in D. discoideum based on genomic searching for homologous sequences. This yielded a single optimal hit, DDB_G0277007 on chromosome II, that not only aligned well with other described GDP-Fuc transporters but also possessed key sequence motifs that distinguish them from GDP-Man and other sugar nucleotide transporters. The DNA sequence of this locus in HU2471 revealed a nonsense mutation in exon 4 that resulted in premature translation termination with the effect of removing the last 3 transmembrane helices including the canonical Fuc recognition motif. The parental X22 strain exhibited the expected full-length coding sequence, suggesting that this locus was solely responsible for access to GDP-Fuc by the secretory pathway fucosyltransferase that assembles the GA-X epitope. Since HU2471 had been derived by chemical mutagenesis, it was expected to possess other mutations, and therefore, we rederived the mutant using targeted gene replacement based on double crossover homologous recombination. Polymerase chain reaction analysis of gDNA confirmed the expected replacement, and AAL western blotting confirmed loss of AAL reactivity associated with membranes in growing cells. As shown in Fig. 7C, mAb 83.5 recognizes several proteins in the M r range of 60,000–120,000 and, as expected for secretory pathway prespore coat fucoproteins, these are not detected in gft -KO cells. Probing of parallel blots with AAL results in a partially overlapping but distinct range of proteins, which are inferred to be secretory pathway fucoproteins owing to the absence of detection in gft -KO cells and sensitivity of labeling to inhibition by αMe-Fuc. Notably, no proteins were detected by AAL in gft -KO cells at this level of sensitivity, confirming the challenge of detecting O -Fuc proteins. Fig. 7 Disruption of the D. discoideum GDP-Fuc transporter. A) Domain diagrams of the GDP-Fuc transporter, the nonsense mutant, and the replacement mutant. Transmembrane domains, replacement DNA, and sequence motifs associated... Identification of nucleocytoplasmic O -Fuc proteins in D. discoideum To verify the origin of the AAL-reactive proteins observed in the cytosolic extracts of wild-type cells, parallel extracts prepared from amoebae of spy -KO-2 and gft -KO-2 strains, as well as from a previously characterized mutant of the GDP-mannose 4,6-dehydratase gene. This mutation inactivates the synthesis of GDP-Fuc synthesis from GDP-Man, which essentially blocks all fucosylation in the absence of exogenous fucose. In addition, filter-lysed cells were fractionated on discontinuous sucrose gradients according to previously described methods to generate a nucleus-enriched fraction, and a high-density fraction of unknown composition. As expected, several proteins in the M r range of 80,000 to 160,000 were detected using AAL in the S100 fraction of wild-type cells. These proteins appeared to possess O -Fuc based on their absence in the gmd -KO, absence in a spy -KO strain, and presence in the gft -KO strain. Similar or related protein bands in the nuclear fractions were observed to follow the same pattern as fractions in the wild-type parental strain Ax3. In contrast, most other proteins that were labeled with AAL in wild-type cells were also labeled in spy-KO cells, and absent in gft -KO and gmd -KO cells, indicating that they are the product of other fucosyltransferases in the secretory pathway. Fig. 8 Distribution of AAL reactive proteins in mutant cell fractions. A) Vegetative cells of the indicated strains were subjected to gentle filter lysis in the absence of detergent and ultracentrifuged to generate P100 and S100... To confirm whether Spy generates an O -Fuc linkage on its targets, bead-bound AAL was used to enrich for fucoconjugates from vegetative stage gft -KO cells, and, after proteolysis, the digests were analyzed by mass spectrometry, with attention focused on assignment of the glycopeptides. Three types of extracts were compared: cytosolic S100 to capture complexes and minimize non-specific interactions from non-cytosolic proteins; whole cell preparations, solubilized with SDS to encourage isolation of only direct targets; and whole-cell preparations solubilized with non-ionic detergent to minimize non-specific interactions. Parallel studies were performed on gmd -KO cells, which lack the GDP-Fuc required to fucosylate any targets. After elution of the AAL-beads using αMe-Fuc, western blotting with AAL showed specific elution of fucoconjugates from the gft -KO relative to gmd -KO extracts, and the titration analysis established the minimal bead amount required. As a first step in identifying O -Fuc proteins, these fractions were analyzed using tandem mass spectrometry. In the cytosolic S100 fraction, 20 proteins ranging in M r from 43,000 to 470,000 were confidently identified in the gft -KO but were not found in the gmd -KO strain. Lists of all proteins detected are enumerated in Supplementary Table SIV. Eight of the proteins found only in gft -KO cells were also detected in extracts prepared under more stringent conditions with the detergents, including 6 prepared in SDS, suggesting that they interacted directly with AAL rather than through an intermediary. Only 4 additional proteins were found in the detergent extracts. Thus, the great majority of proteins were present in the cytosolic preparation, though the possibility that these included proteins that bound indirectly via another O -Fuc protein or diffused from the nucleus during isolation cannot be excluded, as previously reported. A total of 24 proteins that satisfied these criteria were mostly associated with nuclear functions, including nuclear pore and other nuclear transport proteins, DNA and RNA processing proteins, and proteins associated with the ubiquitin–proteasome system. Table 1 O -Fuc candidate proteins. Several of the peptides used for protein identification were observed with a mass increment corresponding to one dHex residues, indicative of O -Fuc based on known monosaccharide compositions of Dictyostelium. MS/MS analysis of several of these peptides resulted in identification of fragment ions containing dHex, though mapping the exact location was challenging owing to the known lability of Fuc-Ser and Fuc-Thr linkages during collision-induced or higher energy collisional dissociation. For example, O -Fuc was mapped within the last 12 amino acids of a Ser/Thr-rich 21-mer peptide from the putative FG-rich nucleoporin Nup186. For a Ser-rich 29-mer peptide from a putative DNA helicase/transcription factor, the O -Fuc was mapped to any of 10 consecutive Ser residues. More specific assignments are possible when electron transfer dissociation is used as the dissociation mode for glycopeptides whose initial HCD MS/MS spectra contain the oxonium ion for dHex at m/z 147.0657. An example is a difucosylated 13-mer peptide from a RING/Zn-finger containing protein where the Fuc residues were precisely mapped by ETD, one to the Ser residue in the second position and the other to the Thr residue in the fifth position. A full enumeration of peptides detected, together with evidence for mono-modifications with dHex, Hex, HexNAc, and PO 4, is provided in Supplementary Table SIV. Further studies are required to validate the occurrence of other sugar modifications. Fig. 9 Identification of O -Fuc proteins in D. discoideum. AAL-enriched fractions from gft -KO-2 cells as described in Fig. 8B were digested using trypsin and analyzed by nLC/MS/MS in a high-resolution Fusion Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap analyzer. Peptides were fragmented... Role of OFT in cell proliferation To assess the impact of fucosylation for D. discoideum, we compared the rates of proliferation during the exponential growth phase of several of the mutants in axenic media. In a typical trial comparing the spy -KO-2 with the parental Ax3 strain, we observed a modest reduction in growth rate for the spy -KO-2. In an independent disruption of spy in strain Ax4, which has a slower growth rate than Ax3, a similar reduction was observed. In contrast, no effects of Spy overexpression, or deletion of gft, were observed in this assay. Summarizing the results from 5 independent trials, only the reduced growth rate of the spy-KO strains, plotted as doubling time, was statistically different from the respective parental strain. Fig. 10 Role of Spy in D. discoideum growth. Ax3, Ax4, and mutant cells were inoculated into HL-5 axenic media and monitored for cell density over time. A) Results from a single trial. Data points are average of 2 technical measurements... Discussion The O -Fuc modification Nucleocytoplasmic proteins of D. discoideum can be modified at their hydroxyamino acid side chains by O -Fuc according to the following evidence. Based on western blotting, a cytosolic extract was enriched in multiple proteins that are bound by AAL, a lectin that selectively recognizes terminal α-linked L-Fuc residues. The labeling reaction was inhibited by αMe-L-Fuc, confirming the sugar-dependent basis for recognition. The AAL-reactive proteins were not detected in a mutant that cannot synthesize GDP-Fuc, consistent with the sugar being L-Fuc. However, they were detected in a mutant that cannot transport GDP-Fuc into the secretory pathway, indicating their presence in the nucleocytoplasmic compartment. Recognition by AAL appeared to be associated with a single-sugar modification, because mass spectrometry analysis of tryptic peptides from AAL affinity-enriched proteins from cytosolic extracts recovered peptides with mass increments that corresponded to a deoxyhexose. Fuc is the only deoxyhexose described in Dictyostelium. These peptides were not detected in pull-downs from a mutant that cannot synthesize the sugar donor GDP-Fuc. As expected for O -linked Fuc, the dHex mass increment was labile in HCD MS/MS experiments but could be mapped to Ser-rich peptides from 3 nucleocytoplasmic proteins. O -fucosyltransferase The conclusion that AAL recognizes α-L-Fuc attached to Ser or Thr on nucleocytoplasmic proteins is further supported by the finding that western blot detection was abolished by disruption of the spy -like gene of D. discoideum. Furthermore, fluorescence microscopy with AAL revealed reactivity at the nuclear periphery, which was also absent from spy -KO cells. The domain structure and sequence of Dictyostelium Spy are highly similar to those of Toxoplasma Spy. Highly purified Toxoplasma Spy has been demonstrated to catalyze formation of a Fuc-Ser linkage from GDP-Fuc on target peptides and proteins in vitro and is required for the O -fucosylation of nucleocytoplasmic proteins of the parasite. Since Spy is also required to assemble O -Fuc linkages on Dictyostelium nucleocytoplasmic proteins, we conclude that it is an ortholog of Toxoplasma Spy and thus a protein O -fucosyltransferase. Evidence that L-Fuc is α-linked is reinforced by the similarity of OFT to OGT. Since OGT is an inverting glycosyltransferase that transfers D-GlcNAc from UDP-α-D-GlcNAc to form a β-linkage with the -OH of Ser or Thr, inversion is also expected to occur in the transfer of L-Fuc from GDP- β-L-Fuc to form an α-linkage with Ser or Thr. O -fucosylation was found to support efficient proliferation in axenic media based on the modestly increased doubling time of spy -KO mutants in these conditions. This effect was not observed in the GDP-Fuc transporter mutant that does not fucosylate proteins in the secretory pathway. Overexpression of Spy led to increased levels of nucleocytosolic O -fucosylation, suggesting that levels of O -Fuc might be tuned in cells by availability of GDP-Fuc or the expression level of Spy. However, Spy overexpression did not promote proliferation in the axenic growth assay. O -fucoproteins Twenty-four proteins were captured in AAL pull-downs from GDP-Fuc transporter mutant cells but not mutants unable to synthesize GDP-Fuc. Most of these were detected in cytosolic extracts that are effectively prepared with minimal contamination from organelle contents in Dictyostelium. However, the possibility that these proteins derived from nuclei after filter lysis of cells cannot be excluded based on findings for a ubiquitin ligase subunit. The presence of 8 of the proteins in AAL pull-downs after SDS-denaturation suggests that the interaction with AAL was direct, which is consistent with direct evidence of O -Fuc on the peptides of 3 of them based on mass spectrometry. These proteins are associated with a range of functions, including nuclear transport, ubiquitination, and transcription. Of interest was the detection of O -Fuc on 3 nucleoporins, as O -Fuc is a notable modification of Toxoplasma nucleoporins as well. O -fucosylation of nucleoporins is consistent with the Spy-dependent localization of AAL labeling at the nuclear periphery. Future studies will be required to assess which O -Fuc proteins contribute to optimal proliferation in axenic media. The availability of the GDP-Fuc transporter KO will enable new functional studies of the role of fucosylation in the secretory pathway. Phylogenetic conservation and distribution of OFTs O -Fuc and OFT have previously been described in higher plants and the protist parasite Toxoplasma gondii. The amoebozoa, to which Dictyostelium belongs, are members of the amorphea supergroup that also includes the opisthokonts, which represent fungi, choanoflagellates, and animals. They are thus evolutionarily far removed from both higher plants and the Alveolata supergroup to which the apicomplexan Toxoplasma gondii belongs, implying that related sequences in the evolutionary tree will also be OFTs. We identified Spy-like sequences in plants, where the gene was first characterized, as well as in green and red algae, apicomplexans including Toxoplasma and Cryptosporidium parvum, amoebozoa including Dictyostelium discoideum, and numerous bacteria. Using the catalytic domains of TgSpy and AtSpy as initial query sequences, we expanded the list of candidates to include a dinoflagellate and 2 chromerids in the larger group of alveolates that include the apicomplexans, additional amoebozoa including the opportunistic eye pathogen A. castellanii, and a new group—cryptophytes including Guillardia theta. Searching further using these new sequences as queries, we did not identify Spy-like sequences in fungi, metazoans, and archaea, or in the genomes of other major protist groups including kinetoplastids, Naegleria, and Trichomonas. It is important to note that the absence of a gene does not exclude its occurrence in other members of the group that have not yet been genomically sequenced, nor does finding the gene in a group imply its occurrence in closely related groups. For example, while close relatives of T. gondii that form oocysts in dogs, pigs, opossums, and an unknown primary host all contain homologs of Tg SPY, Spy is absent from less closely related relatives that form oocysts in humans and chickens. Current evidence suggests that OGT-like genes have a complementary though sometimes overlapping phylogenetic distribution. For example, within the SAR group, Sec-like sequences have been found only in stramenopiles and rhizaria, and SPY-like sequences only in alveolates. Spy-like sequences are also found in cryptophytes, which lack Sec-like sequences. Interestingly, both Spy- and Sec-like proteins are found in red algae, as occurs in higher plants, but thus far only Spy-like proteins have been found in green algae. Spy-like sequences are also well represented in amoebozoa, which lack Sec-like sequences. Interestingly, many amoebozoa harbor second related genes that, while still Spy-like, clade more closely with bacterial sequences and with long arms and varied motifs, so they resist ready assignment regarding their sugar nucleotide specificity. Spy-like sequences were not found in Giardia, fungi or metazoa, which instead possess Sec-like sequences. Nevertheless, it is striking that most organisms appear to have a single copy of either a Spy- or Sec-like sequence, suggesting that related functions might be served despite the distinct sugar involved. This concept is consistent with common substrates such as the FG-nucleoporins. Nevertheless, the evidence for co-evolution of substrate-determining TPR domains and connector regions along OFT or OGT lineages would allow for divergence of protein targets. The interlacing distribution of OFT- and OGT-like sequences across eukaryotic phyla suggests that both genes were present in the last eukaryotic common ancestor. However, whether the absence of OFT-like or OGT-like sequences from some eukaryotes stems from secondary loss, or the presence of the gene resulted from horizontal gene transfer events between eukaryotes or from prokaryotes cannot be confidently assessed at this time. The divergence of some sequences from the lineal relationships understood for the organisms carrying them is consistent with non-vertical derivation. For example, the Spy of alveolates might have been acquired by horizontal gene transfer during the endosymbiotic event with red algae that led to a plastid organelle, as suggested by the apparent presence of Spy in distantly related apicomplexans and other alveolates and subsequently followed by secondary loss from Plasmodium spp. and some sarcocystids. Alternatively, these sequences may have evolved specialized group-specific functions. Regardless of its origins, the new knowledge of the likely evolutionary breadth of O -Fuc, as confirmed by its occurrence in Dictyostelium, will allow correlation with the other shared features of Spy-expressing organisms as an aid predicting function. For example, Arabidopsis OFT has been implicated in gene expression regulation, possibly in opposition to OGT in the case of one example, and regulation of circadian rhythms via proteolysis. Furthermore, the close homologies with OGT invite speculation for roles in nutrient sensing and mediating stress responses. Nucleocytoplasmic monoglycosylation with different sugars is gaining growing recognition for roles throughout phylogeny. Material and methods Dictyostelium discoideum cell culture Axenic strains of D. discoideum were grown in HL5 axenic medium. Cells were harvested at a density of <5 × 10 6 /mL unless otherwise indicated, by centrifugation at 1,200 × g for 1 min, then resuspended in ice-cold KP Buffer, and the process repeated. For multicellular development to the slug or pre-culmination stages, cells were deposited onto filters and harvested after 14 or 18 h, as described. Non-axenic strains were grown on SM agar plates in the presence of Klebsiella aerogenes. Table 2 Strains used in this study. Immunofluorescence Cells were allowed to settle on polylysine-coated coverslips in a 6-well plate in the presence of HL5 media and 100 μg/mL ampicillin and fixed in 4% PFA in phosphate buffer for 20 min. After permeabilization for 10 min in 0.1% Triton X-100 in phosphate-buffered saline, coverslips were blocked in 3% bovine serum albumin in PBS. Using a humid chamber, cells were incubated with AAL conjugated to Alexafluor594 at 1:250 in 3% bovine serum albumin in PBS for 1 h in the dark. Nuclei were stained in 1 μg/mL DAPI in PBS for 15 min. All procedures were conducted at room temperature. Coverslips were mounted on glass slides using Vectashield mounting medium and cells were imaged with a 63×/1.4 oil immersion objective on a Zeiss AXIO inverted microscope with a Colibri LED operated via ZEN software. After deconvolution, single optical sections were processed using Fiji. Disruption of spy The spy -like coding sequence is annotated as an OGT in UniProtKB: } Q54NH1 ; GenBank: } EAL64795.1, and DDB_G0285263 at dictybase.org. The full-length intron-less coding region was predicted to encode a protein of 864 amino acids with M r 98,797. As described in Supplementary Fig. S4, the coding region was amplified from CsCl-purified genomic DNA of strain Ax3 in a PCR reaction using primer U2 from near the start codon and primer L1 located 62 nucleotides downstream from the stop codon, and cloned into pCR4-TOPO, yielding pTOPO-Spy. pTOPO-Spy was linearized with HindIII, which interrupts the third TPR upstream of the catalytic domain, and ligated with the blasticidin S-resistance cassette released from pBSR519 with the same enzyme, yielding pSPY-BSR. The replacement DNA was released by the treatment of pTOPO-Spy with EcoRV and NotI, whose cut sites flank the Spy insert in pCR4-TOPO, and NcoI, which cleaves the pCR4-TOPO vector. The 3.8-kb product was gel purified and treated with 0.5 units of Bal-31 exonuclease, for 1 min at 30 °C, to remove incompatible termini. The linear DNA was electroporated into strain Ax3 and blasticidin S-resistant clones were isolated as described. Correct integration of the disruption DNA by double homologous recombination was confirmed by PCR. Spy overexpression The Spy insert was released from pTOPO-Spy by digestion with NheI, ligated with pET-15b-TEV after linearization with NheI and treatment with shrimp alkaline phosphatase followed by heat inactivation at 65 °C for 30 min, and transformed into Top 10 Escherichia coli chemically competent cells. After confirmation of the insert sequence by DNA sequencing, this vector was named pET-Spy and was suitable for expression of His 6 -Spy in E. coli, though pilot trials indicated substantial protein degradation. For expression in Dictyostelium, the insert encoding His 6 -Spy was released from pET-Spy by digestion with NotI and NcoI, gel purified, and employed as the template for a PCR reaction using primers HOMEF and HOME2 in order to generate terminal restriction sites for KpnI and BamHI. The PCR product was gel purified and, following sequence confirmation, was ligated into pCR4-TOPO and amplified in E. coli TOP10 cells. The insert was released using KpnI and BamHI and ligated with similarly digested pVS4, which controls expression under the discoidin 1γ promoter and actin 8-terminator. After cloning and sequence confirmation, this expression construct, named pVS-Spy, was electroporated into Ax3 cells, transformants were selected in the presence of 100 μg/mL of G418, and two independent clonal isolates were examined. Disruption of gft The predicted gft locus is described at UniProtKB as } Q550W6 and at dictyBase.org as DDB0305516|DDB_G0277007, on chromosome 2. The central coding region of the gene was disrupted by replacement based on double crossover homologous recombination, as described in Supplementary Fig. S7. The 5′-homology region was amplified from genomic DNA by PCR using GFTKO-5′-S1 and GFTKO-5′-AS1, yielding a 658 bp product, which was cloned into pCR4TOPO and propagated in TOP10 cells yielding pTOPO-GFTKO-5′. The 3′-homology region was amplified using GFTKO-3′-S1 and GFTKO-3-AS2, yielding a 772 bp product that was cloned into pMiniT 2.0, and amplified in TOP10 cells, yielding pMini-GFTKO-3′. pTOPO-GFTKO-5′ was digested with BssHII and BamHI and ligated with the vector backbone of similarly digested pVSCulEΔBglII, yielding pVS5'GFTKO3'CulE. The GFTKO-3′-homology region was excised from pMini-GFTKO-3′ using PstI and KpnI and ligated into similarly digested pVS5'GFTKO3'CulE, yielding pVS-GFTKO. The ligation product was cloned in TOP10 cells. pVS-GFTKO was digested with BssHII and KpnI and the linear replacement fragment of 3,164 bp was gel-purified and electroporated into strain Ax3 cells. Transformants were selected in the presence of 10 μg/mL blasticidin S and cloned in the presence of K. aerogenes. Modification of the gft locus was confirmed by PCR as described in Supplementary Fig. S7. Genome sequencing Growing cells from small plaques on bacterial lawns were scraped and suspended in 15 μL PCR-lysate buffer NP40, 0.45% Tween-20, and 0.8 mg/mL Proteinase K), incubated for 15 min at room temperature, then placed for 2 min at 95 °C to inactivate the Proteinase K. 2.5 μL was provided to PCR reactions with Taq DNA polymerase and the indicated primers in a final volume of 25 μL. For analysis of gDNA from strains X22 and HU2471, gft sequences were amplified with oligonucleotides p1 and p4, cloned into pMiniT 2.0, and sequenced using pMiniT-specific sequencing primers for exons 1 and 4 and gft -specific primers for exons 2 and 3. Western and lectin blot analysis For Dictyostelium samples, 2.5 × 10 5 vegetative cells or 10 6 slug or preculmination stage cells were loaded per lane of a 4%–12% NuPage B/T gel in 1× MOPS buffer. Proteins from the gel were electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose using an iblot2 apparatus, and the membrane was blocked in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.25% bovine serum albumin, 0.05% NP-40. Membranes were probed by overnight incubation in 0.4 μg/mL biotinylated AAL in blocking buffer, +/− pre-incubation with 0.2 M αMe-Fuc for 30 min at room temperature. After washing, blots were reprobed for 1 h in 1:10,000 dilution of streptavidin Alexa 680 in blocking buffer. Other blots were blocked in 5% milk in TBS for 1 h and incubated overnight in 1:1,000 dilution of mAb 83.5 ascites or anti-actin. After washing, the blots were scanned on an Odyssey CLx fluorescence scanner at 700 nm. Cell fractionation for western blotting Washed vegetative amoebae were resuspended in 20 mL ice-cold KP buffer supplemented with 2 μM cytochalasin A, using a method modified after Batsios et al.. Cells were centrifuged for 5 min at 4 °C at 400 × g and resuspended in 20 mL 0.1 M HEPES, pH 6.9, 2 mM MgCl 2, 10% sucrose, 1 mM Na-ATP, 2 μM cytochalasin A, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 10 μg/mL aprotinin, 10 μg/mL leupeptin. The cells were quickly filter-lysed by forced passage through a 5 μm Isopore filter, and the suspension was layered on a pre-prepared sucrose cushion, consisting of 1 mL 50% sucrose in 0.1 M HEPES-NaOH, 2 mM MgCl 2, 2 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 10 μg/mL aprotinin, 10 μg/mL leupeptin, on which was overlaid 2 mL 30% sucrose in the same buffer, all in a 15-mL conical tube. The preparations were immediately centrifuged at 3,220 × g for 12 min at 4 °C and decelerated with the brake off. The top layer sucrose) was retrieved for ultracentrifugation at 100,000 × g for 70 min at 4 °C, generating the S100 cytosolic preparation and the P100 particulate fraction. The material at the 10%/30% interface and most of the 30% layer were aspirated away. The material at the 30%/50% interface was collected as the nucleus-enriched fraction, diluted 1:1 with 0.1 M HEPES-NaOH, pH 6.9, 2 mM MgCl 2, and protease inhibitors, and collected by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 5 min at 4 °C. Cell fractionation and AAL capture Amoebae from gft -KO-2 and gmd -KO strains were processed in parallel. Washed vegetative stage cells were resuspended in 5 mL of ice-cold 0.25 M sucrose in 50 mM Tris-HCl, lysed by forced passage through a 5-μm diameter Isopore filter, and centrifuged at 200,000 × g for 30 min. The supernatant was collected as a cytosolic preparation. The S100 from 10 8 cells was used to resuspend a preformed complex of AAL-biotin and commercial Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin T1 magnetic beads. The complex was prepared by thrice washing, using magnetic capture, 250 μL of the Streptavidin magnetic bead suspension with 1 mL PD-Buffer CHAPS, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 10 μg/mL aprotinin, 10 μg/mL leupeptin). After resuspension in 450 μL PD-buffer, the beads were mixed with 50 μL of 2 mg/mL biotinylated AAL and incubated for 30 min on a rotator at 4 °C. The beads were captured magnetically and washed thrice with PD-Buffer before use. After incubation with the S100 sample for 2 h at 4 °C on a rotator, beads were recovered and washed 4× with 1 mL PD-Buffer, transferred to a Lo-Bind microcentrifuge tube, and washed again with 1 mL PD-buffer, which contains 40 mM NaCl instead of 150 mM NaCl. The beads were then eluted with 0.2 M Me-αFuc in PD-buffer overnight at 4 °C on a Vortex rotator. Subsequently, the eluted sample was incubated with one-fourth of the original volume of fresh streptavidin beads for 30 min with shaking at 4 °C, to capture residual biotin-AAL. The final supernatant was subjected either to SDS-PAGE and western blotting or processed for proteomics analysis. Subsequent post-elution with Me-αFuc supplemented with 0.5% CHAPS yielded no fucoproteins by western blot analysis. Samples for proteomics were reduced and alkylated in 8 M urea, digested with trypsin, cleaned up using C18 Zip-tips, and dried, as described in. As an alternative, washed amoebae were resuspended in 0.1% NP-40 and centrifuged at 200,000 × g for 30 min. The supernatant was processed as above except that elution was performed with 0.2 M Me-αFuc in PD-buffer containing 0.8% octyl-thio-glucoside. Prior to proteomics analysis, samples were precipitated by the addition of 8 vols of precipitation buffer. After overnight incubation at −20 °C, samples were centrifuged at 21,000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed, and the pellet was surface washed with precipitation buffer and centrifuged again. As a second alternative, a 2% SDS extract of washed amoebae was prepared and diluted 10-fold in 0.5% CHAPS buffer prior to binding to AAL-beads. 0.5% CHAPS was used in the wash and elution buffers, and samples were precipitated using precipitation buffer as above. Mass spectrometry The analyses were performed on an Acquity M-Class nanoUPLC system coupled to a TriVersa NanoMate ion source mounted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Samples were reconstituted in 20 μL and 1 μL was loaded onto the trapping column. After washing with 100% buffer A for 4 min, peptides were separated using a capillary column: 75 μm × 10 cm, 1.8 μm 100 Å nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 C 18 under a 75-min linear gradient of 2%–40% buffer B at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/min. The samples were subjected to nanoelectrospray ionization using a capillary voltage of 1.7 kV and the ions were introduced in the mass analyzer through a capillary tube maintained at 320 °C. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 300 to 2,000 at 120k resolution, and MS/MS scans following higher-energy collisional dissociation with fixed collision energy were recorded for product ions separated in the Orbitrap at 30k resolution. For a subset of samples, additional full MS scans were acquired from m / z 300 to 2,000 at 120k resolution and MS/MS scans following HCD with fixed collision energy were recorded for product ions separated in the Orbitrap at 30k resolution. If HCD dissociation generated any Hex or dHex oxonium ions, additional MS/MS scans were also recorded following ETD for product ions separated in the Orbitrap at 30k resolution, in order to locate the position of the dHex modification on the peptide and to obtain a better coverage of the peptide backbone. For ETD, fluoranthene was used as the anion reagent. Mass accuracy was 1–2 ppm for MS1 spectra and <10 ppm for MS/MS spectra. Automated database searches were performed with the PEAKS software suite, using as reference database the Uniprot Dictyostelium discoideum proteome. The search criteria were set as follows: trypsin as the enzyme with ≤3 missed cleavages and ≤1 non-specific cleavage, an error tolerance for the precursor of 15 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modification in addition to dHex, Hex, Hex1HexNAc1, HexNAc, and PO 4. The peptide match threshold was set to 30, and only proteins with a minimum of 2 unique peptides were considered as confident assignments. All cited assignments were checked manually. Calculated values for peptide fragment ions were generated using Protein Prospector. The mass spectrometry proteomics raw files are enumerated in Supplementary Table SIII and deposited in the Figshare server with dataset identifiers 10.6084/m9.figshare.20216759 and 10.6084/m9.figshare.20216783. Phylogenetic analyses SPY-like sequences described in Olszewski et al. were used as query sequences to search comprehensively for related candidates in protists using BLASTp in databases listed in Supplementary Fig. S1A and incorporated into the previously described alignment of OGT/SEC- and SPY-like sequences. After removal of all but 21 OGT sequences, a new phylogenetic tree was generated using a maximum likelihood method implemented in the IQtree pipeline using the LG + G4 model, as described. Support values indicated in the tree were generated using bootstrapping from 10,000 replicates. An independent approach using a maximum likelihood method implemented in Mega yielded a similar topology. OFT and OGT structure prediction AlphaFold 2.2.0 was accessed via the NMRbox server and used to calculate and predict the structures of OFTs and OGTs, as indicated by the presence of asterisks over the TPR region alignments. Protein sequences were compiled as. FASTA files and used as inputs for AlphaFold using the following command:. The top scoring models were used for analysis and were visualized and imaged using PyMOL. Abbreviations AAL, Aleuria aurantia lectin; αMe-Fuc, α-methyl l - fucopyranoside; CAZy, Carbohydrate Active EnZyme; Dd Gft, Dictyostelium discoideum GDP-fucose transporter; ETD, electron transfer dissociation; FG-Nup, Phe/Gly-repeats nucleoporin; GT41, glycosyltransferase 41; HCD, higher-energy collisional dissociation; Me-αFuc, α-methyl L-fucopyranoside; MS/MS, tandem mass spectrometry; O -Fuc, O -linked fucose; OFT, O -Fuc transferase; OGT, O -GlcNAc transferase; TPR, tetratricopeptide repeat Supplementary Material GLYCO-2022-00094_Supplement_r2_cwac071 Click here for additional data file. TableSIV_proteins_prots-pepts_cwac071 Click here for additional data file. 