 AP180, one of many assembly proteins and adaptors for clathrin, stimulates the assembly of clathrin lattices on membranes, but its unique contribution to clathrin function remains elusive. In this study we identified the Dictyostelium discoideum ortholog of the adaptor protein AP180 and characterized a mutant strain carrying a deletion in this gene. Imaging GFP-labeled AP180 showed that it localized to punctae at the plasma membrane, the contractile vacuole, and the cytoplasm and associated with clathrin. AP180 null cells did not display defects characteristic of clathrin mutants and continued to localize clathrin punctae on their plasma membrane and within the cytoplasm. However, like clathrin mutants, AP180 mutants, were osmosensitive. When immersed in water, AP180 null cells formed abnormally large contractile vacuoles. Furthermore, the cycle of expansion and contraction for contractile vacuoles in AP80 null cells was twice as long as that of wild-type cells. Taken together, our results suggest that AP180 plays a unique role as a regulator of contractile vacuole morphology and activity in Dictyostelium. INTRODUCTION Endocytosis via clathrin-coated vesicles is an essential process for the regulated uptake of nutrients and the trafficking of membrane receptors. Although clathrin is the principal structural player in building a coated vesicle, numerous adaptor and accessory proteins fine tune and regulate endocytosis. Together they assemble clathrin triskelia onto membranes to construct a clathrin-coated pit. Four heterotetrameric adaptor proteins have been identified; each is thought to function at a different cellular location. At the plasma membrane the heterotetrameric protein AP-2 recruits clathrin and initiates the assembly of clathrin triskelia into lattices. Recently, monomeric assembly proteins have been identified at the plasma membrane that could also regulate clathrin traffic. The monomeric assembly protein, AP180, was first purified from coated vesicles of bovine brain, although a nonneuronal homologue of AP180, CALM, was identified more recently. AP180 binds directly to clathrin and promotes assembly of clathrin triskelia into cages of uniform size. Analysis of mutants of the AP180 orthologues in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans shows that AP180 regulates synaptic vesicle size as well as the sorting of synaptic proteins such as synaptobrevin. In mammalian cells, reduction of AP180 results in irregular clathrin lattices, demonstrating an important role for AP180 in the assembly of clathrin into geometrically precise coated vesicles. Furthermore, recent studies show that AP180 is involved in the internalization of some receptors like the EGF receptor, but not of others such as the transferrin receptor. In yeast, the role of AP180 in clathrin-mediated endocytosis is less clear. Deletion of both genes encoding the AP180 orthologues show no defects in any clathrin-mediated processes. In vitro experiments show that AP180 binds clathrin and phosphoinositides such as PIP2 and promotes clathrin assembly on lipid monolayers. Binding of AP180 to PIP2 is mediated by an NH 2 -terminal homology domain called the ANTH domain that is conserved in all members of the AP180 family. Other endocytic proteins such as epsin have at their amino terminus a structurally similar ENTH domain. Interestingly, binding of ENTH-domain–containing proteins such as epsin, to PIP2 induces curvature of a lipid monolayer, whereas AP180 fails to do so. This points to important mechanistic differences between various protein components of the endocytic machinery. Here we examined the intracellular role of AP180 in the social amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum. Although Dictyostelium AP180 colocalized with clathrin on the plasma membrane of wild-type cells, AP180 null cells displayed a normal distribution of clathrin on the plasma membrane. However AP180 knockouts were deficient in osmoregulation mediated by the contractile vacuole, a process where clathrin is also a key regulator. Collectively our results suggest that AP180 is a clathrin assembly protein with unique contributions to the regulation of contractile vacuole size. MATERIALS AND METHODS Strains and Cell Culture Dictyostelium discoideum wild-type Ax2 cells were grown axenically in HL-5 medium supplemented with 0.6% penicillin-streptomycin at 20°C on Petri dishes. Clathrin heavy-chain mutants were derived from Ax2 wild-type cells, and clathrin light-chain mutants were derived from the wild-type axenic strain NC4A2. Both mutant strains were grown in HL-5 media supplemented with 5 μg/ml blasticidin. Cloning of clmA and GFP-AP180 Construct The clmA gene encoding the AP180 gene product was identified from a Dictyostelium genome database using a BLAST search with the first 300 amino acids of the mammalian neuronal AP180. Predicted protein domains at GeneDB identified an ANTH domain in the first 300 amino acids. Alignment and analysis of the predicted Dictyostelium AP180 protein sequence with protein sequences from other members of the AP180 family were performed using the Megalign program. The percent identity between the Dictyostelium AP180 and those of other species was determined using the ClustalV parameters. A cDNA for the clmA gene was amplified using the PCR with primers selected from the genomic sequence, 5′GGATCCATGTCGACACCAT GGGGAAAAGC3′ and 5′CCCGGGCTCGAGTATTTAAAAGTAAATATTTTGAAC CTTTTGTTGTTG3′. The 2.1-kb amplified product was subcloned into the pTX-GFP expression vector at the BamHI and XhoI sites. This plasmid, pTX-GFP-AP180, was then introduced into cells by electroporation and transformants were selected in HL-5 medium supplemented with 10 μg/ml G418. Protein Expression and Generation of AP180 Polyclonal Antibody The amplified AP180 cDNA was subcloned into the glutathione-S-transferase bacterial expression vector pGEX-2T using the BamHI and SmaI sites. GST-AP180 was transformed into Escherichia coli BL-21 cells, and the expressed protein was purified from bacteria lysates as previously described. The purified protein was used to raise rabbit polyclonal antisera against AP180. Disruption of clmA by Gene Replacement A 1.3-kb fragment from the 5′coding sequence of clmA was cloned into the pSP72-Bsr vector, a derivative of pBluescriptII that encodes a 1.4-kb gene for blasticidin resistance, using the BamHI and XbaI sites. Similarly, a 1.6-kb fragment from the 3′ coding sequence of clmA was cloned into the pSP72-Bsr vector using the HindIII and XhoI sites. The two clmA fragments flanking the blasticidin -resistant gene cassette had 20 nucleotides missing from the clmA coding sequence, which were replaced by the Bsr gene. The resulting vector, pSP72-Bsr-AP180 was linearized with BamHI and XhoI and transformed into wild-type Ax2 cells via electroporation. Transformed cells were diluted in HL-5 media supplemented with 5 μg/ml blasticidin and plated in 96-well plates. Resulting clones were screened for the absence of clmA gene by PCR and verified for the absence of the AP180 protein by Western blot analysis. Western Blot Analysis, Endocytosis Assay, and Differential Fractionation Samples for Western blotting were prepared by resuspending cells in hot sample buffer and running 1 × 10 6 cells/lane on a 10% SDS polyacrylamide gel. The gel was transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane and probed with a 1:2000 dilution of our rabbit anti-AP180 polyclonal antibody followed by a goat anti-rabbit Ig-HRP. Signal was detected using an ECL kit. For the fluid-phase uptake assay, 2 mg/ml FITC-Dextran was added to 3 × 10 6 cells/ml growing in HL-5 suspension cultures. Sodium azide was added to a control flask. To stop uptake of FITC-Dextran, cells were chilled on ice. Samples were taken at 0-, 15-, 30-, 60-, 90-, and 120-min time points and centrifuged at 1100 rpm at 4°C for 5 min. Cells were washed twice and resuspended in HL-5 containing 0.02% sodium azide and kept on ice until all samples were collected. All samples were centrifuged at 1100 rpm at 4°C for 5 min, and the pellet was resuspended in cold Na 2 HPO 4 buffer. The cells were lysed with 20% Triton X-100, and fluorescence uptake was analyzed immediately using a Bio-Rad VersaFluor fluorometer. A sample of the lysate was taken after the addition of Triton X-100 and assessed for protein concentration using Bio-Rad protein Assay. Differential centrifugation experiments were performed according to Wang et al.. Briefly, cells were collected and washed in isolation buffer Click here to view. 