 Some endosymbionts living within a host must modulate their hosts' immune systems in order to infect and persist. We studied the effect of a bacterial endosymbiont on a facultatively multicellular social amoeba host. Aggregates of the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum contain a subpopulation of sentinel cells that function akin to the immune systems of more conventional multicellular organisms. Sentinel cells sequester and discard toxins from D. discoideum aggregates and may play a central role in defence against pathogens. We measured the number and functionality of sentinel cells in aggregates of D. discoideum infected by bacterial endosymbionts in the genus Paraburkholderia. Infected D. discoideum produced fewer and less functional sentinel cells, suggesting that Paraburkholderia may interfere with its host's immune system. Despite impaired sentinel cells, however, infected D. discoideum were less sensitive to ethidium bromide toxicity, suggesting that Paraburkholderia may also have a protective effect on its host. By contrast, D. discoideum infected by Paraburkholderia did not show differences in their sensitivity to two non-symbiotic pathogens. Our results expand previous work on yet another aspect of the complicated relationship between D. discoideum and Paraburkholderia, which has considerable potential as a model for the study of symbiosis. Keywords: sentinel cells, symbiosis, pathogens, Dictyostelium, Paraburkholderia 1. Introduction Microbes live in a world replete with other microbes with which they must interact. The most intimate interactions are symbioses, in which unlike organisms live closely associated with or even inside of one another. Symbioses can have many different effects on the participants' fitness, abilities and evolutionary fate. Many symbioses enable organisms to survive in ways otherwise beyond them—some symbionts expand the resources their partners can use, increase their resistance to abiotic stress, or protect them from hostile organisms. Some of the most dramatic examples of symbiosis have had enormous impacts on the history of life, from enabling the development of complex multicellular organisms to shifting the composition of the planet's atmosphere on a grand scale. However, the line between friend and foe can be blurry. Wherever organisms come together, there will be conflict, even within the most intimate and long-lasting friendships. Many beneficial symbioses are thought to have evolved from initially antagonistic relationships between partners that later buried the proverbial hatchet. Other symbioses may be neither clearly antagonistic nor clearly mutualistic, but rather involve partners that either help or hurt one another depending on the environmental context or the genotypes of the partners involved. Because symbiotic partners do not always have each other's best interests at heart, it may sometimes be necessary for symbionts to defend themselves from their partners, even in apparently mutualistic symbioses. Conflict will often drive a need for symbionts to modify their own behaviour—or that of their partners—to coexist stably, and how symbiotic partners attune to one another is of special interest to understanding how symbioses start and which symbioses endure. In this study, we focus on the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum and endosymbiotic bacteria in the genus Paraburkholderia. Dictyostelium discoideum is a normally unicellular eukaryote with a long history of being used as a model organism for scientists interested in its many multicellular behaviours. Dictyostelium discoideum and its relatives are facultatively multicellular organisms that spend most of their time as single, amoeboid cells, moving through forest soil, hunting bacteria, and reproducing vegetatively. In adverse conditions, however, D. discoideum cells will aggregate into multicellular groups and undergo a sophisticated developmental process to form first a slug-like body that can travel to find a suitable site and then a fruiting body with which to remain dormant until they can disperse to greener pastures. Formation of the fruiting body requires the sacrifice of some cells within the aggregate to form a stalk to hold the other cells aloft. These sacrificial stalk cells are akin to the somatic cells of more conventional multicellular organisms, performing some non-reproductive function so that other cells can reproduce. Many aspects of D. discoideum's development and evolution have been the focus of studies within a variety of fields. Though they are the most obvious, the cells that die to form D. discoideum's stalk during the last stage of its development are not the only cells that perform somatic functions within D. discoideum aggregates. During the slug stage that precedes fruiting, another, smaller subpopulation of ‘sentinel cells' circulate within the aggregate collecting foreign bacteria and toxins, and are eventually sloughed off the slug and left behind prior to fruiting. Though the adaptive significance of the sentinel cells' efforts to clear bacteria and toxins from the slug is not known, it seems likely they serve as a primitive immune system for D. discoideum. Dictyostelium discoideum interacts with a wide variety of soil bacteria in nature. Some are its prey, some are its pathogens, and some lie somewhere in between. Among this latter category are Paraburkholderia agricolaris, P. hayleyella and P. bonniea, which persistently infect D. discoideum cells as intracellular passengers. Though in many respects Paraburkholderia acts as a pathogen, reducing the apparent fitness of its host, infection by Paraburkholderia imbues D. discoideum with the ability to carry prey bacteria with it throughout the social stages of its life cycle. This bacterial carriage can enable D. discoideum to disperse to prey-impoverished environments not available to uninfected D. discoideum. Under the right conditions, therefore, Paraburkholderia may have a net benefit for its hosts and behave more like a mutualistic symbiont rather than a pathogen. The interaction between D. discoideum and these Paraburkholderia species has both positive and negative consequences for both participants, and is a rising model system in the study of the evolution of interspecific interactions. A heretofore largely unexplored direction, however, is how infection by Paraburkholderia may modulate D. discoideum's interactions with other bacteria in the soil environment. In this study, we examine Paraburkholderia's effect on D. discoideum sentinel cells, and explore the consequences of these effects on D. discoideum's interactions with other bacterial pathogens that it might encounter in its natural habitat. This work builds on a previous study where we discovered that wild D. discoideum isolates infected by Paraburkholderia produce fewer sentinel cells than uninfected isolates. If in fact sentinel cells perform an important immune function for D. discoideum, it seems intuitive that any disruption of sentinel cell function could render D. discoideum hosts more sensitive to toxins and pathogens. However, earlier work suggests that Paraburkholderia infection may actually increase hosts' resistance to ethidium bromide, despite interfering with the sentinel cells that would otherwise remove such toxins from D. discoideum aggregates. We hypothesized that it might provide a similar protective effect against intracellular pathogens that might otherwise threaten it and its hosts' fitness. In this study, we take advantage of recent advances in our understanding of the diversity of Paraburkholderia to further explore the consequences of its relationship with its D. discoideum hosts. 2. Material and methods 2.1. Culture conditions for Dictyostelium discoideum clones and bacteria symbionts We used D. discoideum clones collected from Virginia, Texas and North Carolina. We grew D. discoideum clones from frozen spore stocks on SM/5 nutrient agar plates ) and food bacteria Klebsiella pneumoniae at room temperature. We obtained K. pneumoniae from the Dicty Stock Center. Klebsiella pneumoniae was streaked onto SM/5 plates from frozen stocks and allowed to grow until stationary phase. We prepared K. pneumoniae bacterial suspensions with an optical density of A600 1.50 in KK2 buffer using a BioPhotometer. The D. discoideum clones and specific symbionts used in these experiments are included in table 1. We removed Paraburkholderia from the infected clones using either ampicillin-streptomycin or tetracycline antibiotic treatment. We verified Paraburkholderia removal using polymerase chain reaction with Paraburkholderia specific primers. Table 1. Table of strains. 2.2. Visualizing sentinel cells in slug trail assay To determine if D. discoideum sentinel cell numbers are reduced by Paraburkholderia presence, we used four clones colonized with P. agricolaris and four clones colonized with P. hayleyella. These clones include QS70, QS159, QS161 and NC21 for P. agricolaris and QS11, QS21, QS22 and QS23 for P. hayleyella. We used the same eight clones cured of their Paraburkholderia infections as our uninfected control to compare against the infected D. discoideum clones. We adapted methods from Brock et al. to visualize and collect sentinel cells by staining D. discoideum isolates with a low dose of ethidium bromide, an intercalating agent that interferes with nucleic acid synthesis and is commonly used as a fluorescent tag. Using a low dose of ethidium bromide allowed us to visualize sentinel cells, which pick up the chemical and fluoresce, without increasing cell death. However, sentinel cell identify is thus confounded with ethidium bromide treatment. To prepare ethidium bromide-treated plates, we used 50 × 15 mm Petri plates with non-nutrient agar containing 1.0 µg per ml EtBr. Sixty millilitres of non-nutrient agar was poured first and allowed to set. We laid three microscope slides touching each other on top of the cooled agar. Then the slides were embedded in the agar by adding 25 ml of the same non-nutrient agar on top of the slides. To set up the migration plates, we prepared a concentrated K. pneumoniae bacteria suspension. We used an overnight bacterial culture started from a single colony, and grown in Luria broth shaking at 25°C. Next day, we pelleted the overnight culture by centrifugation at 10 000 g for 5 min at 4°C discarding the supernatant. The bacterial pellet was resuspended and washed in KK2 buffer. We resuspended the final pellet in a small volume of KK2. The bacterial suspension was diluted accordingly to obtain an OD A600 of 35.00 using a BioPhotometer. We collected D. discoideum spores in KK2 buffer and determined the spore count using a haemacytometer and light microscope. We suspended 2.0 × 10 5 spores in 200 µl of prepared bacterial suspension, and 50 µl of the mixture was dispensed in a line parallel to the embedded microscope slides on one edge of the plate. The spore mixture was allowed to dry. The plate was wrapped in aluminium foil with a small hole poked on the opposite side of the line where the spores were deposited. The plates were placed so the hole faced a source of light, towards which the slugs would migrate, and were stored at room temperature for 168 h to allow for sufficient slug migration across the ethidium bromide starving agar Petri plate. To visualize sentinel cells present in slug trails, we excised the embedded microscope slides and placed microscope slide coverslips on top of the slug trails on the agar. These trails were imaged using a Nikon A1Si laser scanning confocal microscope, at 10× magnification under UV light. We used the ‘Scan Large Image' function in the software program to capture an image of the slug trails over a large span of area. This function captures multiple images over the selected area and stitches the images together. We then used the ‘Annotations and Measurements' tool to measure the length of the sectioned trails from which sentinel cells were counted. Present in the slug trails were both single and clumped groups of sentinel cells. We counted sentinel cells in clumped groups as an estimate based on the size of one sentinel cell. 2.3. Colonizing uninfected hosts with Paraburkholderia and migration assay To test if colonization with Paraburkholderia affects sentinel cell number, we first needed to determine what proportion of Paraburkholderia to mix with the food bacteria K. pneumoniae. Previously, we had determined that sufficiently high infectious doses of Paraburkholderia are toxic enough to prevent hosts from forming slugs or fruiting bodies. We prepared bacterial suspensions of K. pneumoniae, P. agricolaris BaQS159 and P. hayleyella BhQS11 at OD600 = 35.00 using the method described above. We then combined suspensions of food bacteria and either P. agricolaris or P. hayleyella at different ratios to compare the effects of different infectious doses. We performed 10-fold serial dilutions to test for slug formation from 1% Paraburkholderia + 99% K. pneumoniae down to 0.0001% Burkholderia + 99.9999% K. pneumoniae. The low percentage of Paraburkholderia was achieved by diluting the Paraburkholderia bacterial suspension down to a lower OD such that sufficient volume could be pipetted. We did not obtain adequate slug formation until we reduced the percentage of Paraburkholderia to 0.001% and 0.0001%. We followed the same steps to plate spores on ethidium bromide plates as described in the visualizing sentinel cells assay above. We used 100% K. pneumoniae as our control. After the slugs were allowed to migrate and fruit, we tested sori to determine if bacteria carriage was induced successfully in naturally uninfected clones. We adapted methods of the spot test described in Brock et al.. From the fruiting bodies formed at the ends of the slug trails, we randomly picked up individual sori using a filtered pipette tip. Each sorus was transferred onto SM/5 nutrient agar plates as individual spots. We incubated the plates at room temperature for 2 days, examined for bacteria growth, and recorded the number of positive spots of bacterial growth. 2.4. Bead uptake assay To determine if Paraburkholderia -infected sentinel cells are able to function as well as those from uninfected hosts, we counted the uptake of 0.5 µm diameter fluorescent latex beads in sentinel cells present in disassociated slugs. We used three types of host clones consisting of four naturally uninfected, three infected by P. agricolaris, and three infected by P. hayleyella. To remove extracellular bacteria, we washed log phase amoebae with KK2 buffer. These amoebae were then allowed to develop on filters until they formed aggregates. We collected aggregates with a pipette tip and disassociated cells by pipetting the collected aggregates several times. Disassociated cells were then mixed with fluorescent beads at a 1 : 10 ratio of cells to beads. Sentinel cells were identified by their ability to take up beads. We counted the number of beads present in each of 10 sentinel cells selected haphazardly for each D. discoideum clone in each set for a total of 100 sentinel cells. 2.5. Pathogen fitness assay To assess fitness effects associated with carriage of Paraburkholderia, we chose two pathogenic bacteria species known to infect D. discoideum intracellularly ATCC 29213, and Salmonella enterica ATCC 14028). For this assay, we tested four hosts naturally infected with P. agricolaris, four hosts cured of their P. agricolaris, four hosts naturally infected with P. hayleyella, four hosts cured of their P. hayleyella, and four naturally uninfected hosts. Table 1 for specific clone identities. Each clone was grown on either 100% St. aureus, Sa. enterica, or K. pneumoniae. We used total spore production as our measure of host fitness. To set up each assay, we plated 2 × 10 5 spores of each clone in each condition onto SM/5 agar plates in triplicate. All clones formed fruiting bodies within 2–3 days. We collected spores separately from two of the plates 5 days after fruiting using the method previously described in Brock et al.. Briefly, we collected spores by washing plates with KK2 buffer supplemented with 0.01% NP-40 alternative. Then, we counted spores using a haemacytometer and a light microscope. 2.6. Statistical analyses We performed statistical analyses in R. To compare the means of different groups, we fit models followed by pairwise contrasts calculated with the emmeans package using fdr to adjust for multiple comparisons. Sentinel cell data was collected from slug trails with multiple measures from each trail and multiple trails for each clone. To account for this nested structure of sentinel cell counts, we included the random effects of trail nested within clone in linear mixed models using the nlme package. We also log transformed sentinel cell counts to reduce the skew from high counts. For our bead results, we fit generalized linear mixed models in the lme4 package with a Poisson link function and clone as a random effect. To measure how pathogens affected spore production, we used a generalized least-squares model. Because infections with different pathogens resulted in groups with different variances, we weighted observations using the varIdent function in the nlme package. To reanalyse the spore data in Brock et al. that tested the effect of a high dose of ethidium bromide, we used a LMM. To account for the two technical replicates used in this experiment, we included clone as a random effect. We scaled spore production values by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. For both our pathogen and ethidium bromide models, we estimated effects relative to the control condition, where hosts are not expected to suffer reduced spore production. This effect relative to the control will also capture the inedibility of pathogens, which is a consequence of pathogens being able to evade phagocytosis. We are thus measuring the effect of some stressor relative to healthy hosts. We are mostly interested in the interaction effects between Paraburkholderia infection status and stressors. These effects would indicate that Paraburkholderia infection protects or causes increased harm for hosts when exposed to a stressor. 3. Results 3.1. Are symbiont Paraburkholderia the causal agents for immune-like sentinel cell number reduction? Both curing hosts of their Paraburkholderia and infecting naive hosts showed that Paraburkholderia are responsible for changes to sentinel cells. Curing hosts of P. agricolaris infections increased the number of sentinel cells by 35%. Curing hosts of P. hayleyella infections increased the number of sentinel cells by 40%. Infecting naturally uninfected hosts reduced the number of sentinel cells by 50% or more for both 0.001% and 0.0001% infection doses. Infecting hosts with P. agricolaris at 0.0001% and 0.001% resulted in about 60% fewer sentinel cells. Infecting hosts with P. hayleyella at 0.0001% and 0.001% resulted in about 50% fewer sentinel cells. Infecting hosts with different doses did not affect sentinel cell number for hosts infected with P. agricolaris or hosts infected with P. hayleyella. Figure 1. Paraburkholderia infection lowers the number of sentinel cells in D. discoideum hosts. Infected D. discoideum clones have significantly fewer sentinel cells than the same clones cured of Paraburkholderia by antibiotics. The small points represent... 3.2. Is the function of sentinel cells from infected hosts impaired? Because hosts infected with Paraburkholderia have fewer sentinel cells, we suspected Paraburkholderia infection may also impact sentinel cell function. To test sentinel cell function, we measured the number of beads that sentinel cells were able to phagocytose. We found that sentinel cells from P. agricolaris -infected hosts take up fewer beads compared with uninfected hosts, but this difference was not significant Sentinel cells from P. hayleyella -infected hosts take up about 30% fewer beads than uninfected hosts. Thus, hosts infected by P. hayleyella have reduced sentinel cell function. Figure 2. Sentinel cells from infected slugs are less functional than sentinel cells from uninfected slugs. Schematic of fluorescent bead assay. Number of beads phagocytosed by uninfected sentinel cells, sentinel cells infected with P. agricolaris, and... 3.3. How does Paraburkholderia infection affect host response to toxicity and pathogens? A prior study found that Paraburkholderia infection protected hosts when they were exposed to a toxically high amount of ethidium bromide. However, hosts in their natural soil environment are unlikely to come in contact with ethidium bromide. We instead sought a more natural stressor to understand how reduced sentinel cell function affected hosts. We suspected that reduced function of sentinel cells due to Paraburkholderia infection may make infected hosts more susceptible to harm from other pathogens. We first reanalysed the data from Brock et al. where infected, uninfected and cured hosts were grown on starving agar plates with or without toxic ethidium bromide. While the original study included hosts infected by both P. agricolaris and P. hayleyella, it did not draw a distinction between the two species.. We estimated the effects on host spore production of ethidium bromide, infection, curing, and the interactions between these categories relative to uninfected controls that were not exposed to ethidium bromide. We describe the estimated effects from top to bottom in figure 3 b. We found that ethidium bromide lowered host spore production. The harm of ethidium bromide was a similar magnitude as the characteristic cost of infection for both P. agricolaris and P. hayleyella. Interestingly, curing hosts of their P. hayleyella increased spore production relative to uninfected hosts. Validating the results of Brock et al. that found a protective effect of Paraburkholderia infection, we found that hosts infected with P. agricolaris or P. hayleyella produced more spores when exposed to ethidium bromide than expected from the separate effects of Paraburkholderia infection and ethidium bromide. This effect is due to Paraburkholderia infection, at least for P. hayleyella, as these hosts cured of their symbionts did not deviate from the additive effects of curing and ethidium bromide. Figure 3. Paraburkholderia infection protects hosts from high-dose ethidium bromide. Spore production from hosts with different infection statuses. These data are from Brock et al. broken up by the species of infecting Paraburkholderia. Control D. discoideum... To address the possibility that Paraburkholderia infection makes hosts more prone to harm from a more natural stressor, we tested spore production in the presence of two pathogenic bacteria, Salmonella enterica and Staphylococcus aureus. We used Klebsiella pneumoniae as our control food bacteria for comparison. To measure the harm of infection with these other pathogens, we counted the spores produced by D. discoideum. We asked two questions: Does infection with pathogens lower D. discoideum spore production relative to growing on food bacteria? Does infection with Paraburkholderia affect harm to hosts when infected with other pathogens? Figure 4. Paraburkholderia infection does not protect hosts from pathogenic Salmonella enterica or Staphylococcus aureus bacteria. Spore production of hosts when grown on food bacteria or pathogenic Salmonella enterica or pathogenic Staphylococcus... To answer these questions, we fit a generalized least-squares model with interaction terms between each pathogen infection status and each Paraburkholderia infection status to D. discoideum spore production measures. We used this model to estimate the effects of pathogen infection, Paraburkholderia status, and co-infections relative to uninfected D. discoideum that were grown on only food bacteria. Working down from the top of figure 4 b, we found that Sa. enterica is moderately pathogenic while St. aureus is highly pathogenic, reducing host spore production almost fourfold relative to Sa. enterica. Paraburkholderia infection by P. agricolaris or P. hayleyella is similarly pathogenic as Sa. enterica, and curing obviated this cost. Co-infection by Paraburkholderia and a pathogen did not increase or decrease harm from pathogens beyond the additive effects of both kinds of infection. These results show that Paraburkholderia and pathogen infections both reduce D. discoideum spore production, but that Paraburkholderia does not make hosts more susceptible to harm by pathogens. On the other hand, Paraburkholderia also offers no protection against the pathogens we tested in contrast to the results with ethidium bromide. 4. Discussion In this study, we investigated the effects of Paraburkholderia infection on the sentinel cells of D. discoideum hosts. Due to sentinel cells' presumed function as a primitive immune system within D. discoideum aggregates, we also explored the consequences of Paraburkholderia infection on D. discoideum 's sensitivity to toxins and pathogens. Dictyostelium discoideum aggregates produce a subpopulation of sentinel cells which seem to serve as an innate immune system for the multicellular stages of its life cycle. Like the cellular immune systems of more familiar multicellular organisms, sentinel cells circulate within D. discoideum aggregates, sequestering and disposing of potentially hazardous foreign material like toxins or pathogens. In a previous study, we observed that some wild D. discoideum isolates carrying certain Paraburkholderia bacteria through their social cycles also produced significantly fewer sentinel cells. To explore the role of D. discoideum's intracellular symbiont Paraburkholderia on its host's sentinel cells, we compared the number of sentinel cells produced in slugs made by wild D. discoideum strains known to harbour P. agricolaris or P. hayleyella symbionts with slugs made by the same strains after antibiotic treatment. We found that antibiotically treated D. discoideum, cured of their normal symbionts, produced significantly more sentinel cells than infected cells. When we then reinfected these cured strains with P. agricolaris or P. hayleyella in the laboratory, the effect was reversed and fewer sentinel cells were produced. These results establish a causal link between infection by Paraburkholderia and the previously observed reduced sentinel cell numbers in infected D. discoideum strains. Paraburkholderia infections reduced D. discoideum sentinel cell production even at very small infectious doses. In addition to quantifying the reduction in sentinel cell numbers in infected D. discoideum, we also tested sentinel cell functionality by measuring sentinel cells' ability to sequester fluorescently labelled beads. We found that individual sentinel cells produced by infected D. discoideum sequestered significantly fewer beads than sentinel cells from uninfected D. discoideum. We suspect that D. discoideum sentinel cells take up fewer beads because Paraburkholderia infection reduces their function. However, we cannot completely rule out that external Paraburkholderia are affecting bead engulfment. During the disassociation step, where D. discoideum cells in aggregates are separated, Paraburkholderia could be released. If these bacteria bind to beads and affect phagocytosis this could also explain our results. However, we think this explanation is less likely than infection lowering sentinel cell function. External bacteria should be rare in our experiments because infection doses were low and experiments were performed on filters without nutrients for bacterial proliferation. Our results suggest that D. discoideum infected by Paraburkholderia not only produces fewer sentinel cells, but those that it does produce are less functional. Insofar as sentinel cells serve an important role in clearing potentially damaging foreign substances from multicellular D. discoideum aggregates prior to the production of fruiting bodies, we expected infected D. discoideum to have impaired immune function and be more sensitive to toxins or pathogens. To test this, we first reanalysed data measuring the toxic effect of high-dose ethidium bromide on spore production in infected and uninfected D. discoideum. Uninfected D. discoideum exposed to toxic amounts of ethidium bromide produces fewer spores during its fruiting stage, presumably reflecting death or reduced functionality of cells within the aggregate. By contrast, however, D. discoideum infected by Paraburkholderia produced similar numbers of spores with and without the presence of ethidium bromide. While infected D. discoideum produce fewer spores overall due to the effects of Paraburkholderia infection itself, they no longer appear to be sensitive to ethidium bromide's toxic effects. One potential explanation for this reduced toxicity is that Paraburkholderia themselves are taking up ethidium bromide and reducing exposure to their hosts. Sentinel cells may represent an adaptation against threats posed by pathogens—either through infection or via the production of toxins. Dictyostelium discoideum is known to be susceptible to a wide variety of pathogens, which, combined with its similarities to human macrophages, has made it a common model for the study of pathogenesis and immunity. Previous work suggests that sentinel cells probably serve a protective function against pathogens, presumably by sequestering and removing them from D. discoideum slugs as they do with ethidium bromide. Sentinel cells were shown to upregulate their expression of the tirA and tirB genes, apparent homologues of genes known to be involved in animal and plant innate immunity signalling. Mutant strains lacking functional TirA showed increased sensitivity to the virulent pathogen Legionella pneumophila. In the light of sentinel cells' potential immune function, we explored whether Paraburkholderia's effects on sentinel cell number and functionality increased D. discoideum's sensitivity to other pathogens, as would be expected if sentinel cell activity played a key role in immunity. We exposed uninfected amoebae and amoebae carrying Paraburkholderia symbionts to Staphylococcus aureus and Salmonella enterica, two pathogens known to infect D. discoideum. Unsurprisingly, D. discoideum grown on either pathogen produced fewer spores relative to more edible bacteria, reflecting St. aureus and Sa. enterica's negative effects. Despite its effects on sentinel cell number and functionality, however, infection by Paraburkholderia did not have a significant effect on D. discoideum's sensitivity to either tested pathogen. Our results suggest that D. discoideum infected by Paraburkholderia experiences reduced sentinel cell production and function. Building upon previous work, this study demonstrates that Paraburkholderia itself is responsible for changes in sentinel cells. Naive D. discoideum strains with no known association with Paraburkholderia produce fewer sentinel cells when infected, and infected D. discoideum sentinel cell production is restored when Paraburkholderia symbionts are cleared by antibiotic treatment. It is unclear whether Paraburkholderia 's effect on its host's sentinel cells is adaptive. Given that some evidence suggests sentinel cells may be involved in clearing bacteria from D. discoideum slugs, it is intuitive to speculate that Paraburkholderia could benefit from inhibiting them. Alternatively, Paraburkholderia 's effects on sentinel cells may be pleiotropic consequences of other traits. Paraburkholderia 's intracellular lifestyle is probably only possible because it can waylay the mechanisms by which D. discoideum phagocytoses and destroys its prey. A recent study has shown that Paraburkholderia inhibit D. discoideum phagosomes from becoming acidic, potentially preventing digestion. If phagocytosis is also key to sentinel cell function during the slug stage, whatever mechanism Paraburkholderia uses to survive phagocytosis during its host's vegetative stage may inhibit sentinel cell function as a side effect. Despite its effect on sentinel cell number and function, Paraburkholderia infection also has the apparently paradoxical effect of reducing its host's sensitivity to the toxin ethidium bromide. One possible explanation is that Paraburkholderia may neutralize ethidium bromide in a way which compensates for the presumed loss of D. discoideum 's own defences resulting from fewer, less functional sentinel cells. Many bacteria have metabolic capabilities unavailable to eukaryotes, and these form the basis for various other symbioses. Previous work has suggested that Paraburkholderia and D. discoideum have a complex relationship with both antagonistic and cooperative elements, and it is likely that whether Paraburkholderia is a beneficial partner or a parasite depends on the specific context. If Paraburkholderia can protect its host from toxins, then the likelihood of encountering these toxins could play a role in whether Paraburkholderia behaves as a cooperative symbiont or a parasite. By contrast, we did not observe any effect of Paraburkholderia infection on D. discoideum's sensitivity to the pathogens St. aureus or Sa. enterica. A previous study demonstrated that D. discoideum mutants lacking a functional tirA gene—normally highly expressed in sentinel cells—were extremely sensitive to virulent L. pneumophila. This has been taken to imply an important role for sentinel cells in protecting D. discoideum from pathogens, but our results cast some doubt on this interpretation. Paraburkholderia- driven reductions in sentinel cell number and functionality did not seem to render D. discoideum any less capable of surviving St. aureus or Sa. enterica as would be expected if they served a vital immune function against these pathogens. It may be that sentinel cells' potential immune function is context specific, or that D. discoideum combats different pathogens in different ways. Alternatively, perhaps infected D. discoideum with fewer and less functional sentinel cells are more sensitive to pathogens but are compensated for somehow by the presence of Paraburkholderia. This compensation could result from competition between Paraburkholderia and pathogens that reduces pathogen density. Similar benefits from bacterial interactions inside hosts have been suggested for numerous other systems. The specific role of D. discoideum's sentinel cells in defending against specific pathogens is not yet fully clear, but we consider it likely that they function as a simple immune system for the multicellular portions of D. discoideum's life cycle. Previous studies demonstrate that sentinel cells sequester and discard toxic ethidium bromide, which may suggest a more general role in combatting toxins produced by other microbes in D. discoideum's environment. If sentinel cells do have an immune function, then Paraburkholderia's ability to reduce sentinel cell production and functionality may be an adaptation to actively interfere with its host's defences. Regardless of whether Paraburkholderia acts as a pathogen or a mutualist, this sort of immune interference has precedence in other systems. Pathogens, perpetually locked in antagonistic coevolutionary arms races with their hosts, have evolved myriad ways of interfering with every part of their hosts' immune systems. While this sort of antagonism might be expected between foes, it is also known to occur in apparently cooperative interactions. Research on other host/symbiont systems ranging from plants and their root symbionts to animals and their symbionts suggests that modulation of the host's immune system—whether imposed by the host itself or by interference from the symbiont—is often critical for establishment and persistence of symbioses. Paraburkholderia 's effect on D. discoideum 's sentinel cells adds an intriguing element to our understanding of their already complex relationship. This study has identified an additional cost of being infected by Paraburkholderia : reduced sentinel cell function. Further exploration into the mechanisms by which Paraburkholderia infects and persists within D. discoideum will help further develop the system as a model for symbiosis, cooperation and antagonism, and provide insights into how immune systems respond to symbionts. Acknowledgements We thank members of the Queller Strassmann laboratory for useful advice in the experiments and the writing. Part of this work was a senior thesis by Stacey Uhm. Ethics This work did not require ethical approval from a human subject or animal welfare committee. Data accessibility All data and code for this project are included as electronic supplemental material and publicly available at. Declaration of AI use We have not used AI-assisted technologies in creating this article. Authors' contributions T.J.S.: data curation, formal analysis, methodology, visualization, writing—original draft, writing—review and editing; T.J.L.: writing—original draft, writing—review and editing; D.A.B.: conceptualization, data curation, investigation, methodology, project administration; S.Y.S.U.: data curation, investigation, methodology; D.C.Q.: conceptualization, funding acquisition, project administration, writing—original draft, writing—review and editing; J.E.S.: conceptualization, funding acquisition, project administration, writing—original draft, writing—review and editing. All authors gave final approval for publication and agreed to be held accountable for the work performed therein. Conflict of interest declaration We declare we have no competing interests. Funding This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grant nos. IOS 1656756, DEB 1753743 and DEB 2237266. Article information R Soc Open Sci. 2023 Aug; 10: 230727. Published online August 16, 2023. doi: 10.1098/rsos.230727 PMCID: PMC10427822 PMID: 37593719 Trey J. Scott, Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Tyler J. Larsen, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Debra A. Brock, Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, So Yeon Stacey Uhm, Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, David C. Queller, Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, and Joan E. Strassmann, Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing Trey J. Scott Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA Find articles by Trey J. Scott Tyler J. Larsen Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA Find articles by Tyler J. Larsen Debra A. Brock Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA Find articles by Debra A. Brock So Yeon Stacey Uhm Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA Find articles by So Yeon Stacey Uhm David C. Queller Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA Find articles by David C. Queller Joan E. Strassmann Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA Find articles by Joan E. Strassmann Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA Corresponding author. Trey J. Scott: ude.ltsuw@ttocsjt Electronic supplementary material is available online at. Received May 29, 2023; Accepted July 27, 2023. Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by the Royal Society under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, provided the original author and source are credited. Articles from Royal Society Open Science are provided here courtesy of The Royal Society 