 During developmental and immune responses, cells move towards or away from some signals. Although much is known about chemoattraction, chemorepulsion remains poorly understood. Proliferating Dictyostelium discoideum cells secrete a chemorepellent protein called AprA. Examining existing knockout strains, we previously identified proteins required for AprA-induced chemorepulsion, and a genetic screen suggested that the enzyme phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase A might also be needed for chemorepulsion. Here, we show that cells lacking PIPkinA are not repelled by AprA, and that this phenotype is rescued by expression of PIPkinA. To bias cell movement, AprA inhibits Ras activation at the side of the cell closest to the source of AprA, and we find that PIPkinA is required for AprA to inhibit Ras activation. PIPkinA decreases levels of phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate and phosphatidylinositol -trisphosphate, and possibly because of these effects, potentiates phagocytosis and inhibits cell proliferation. Cells lacking PIPkinA show normal AprA binding, suggesting that PIPkinA regulates chemorepulsion at a step between the AprA receptor and AprA inhibition of Ras activation. Keywords: AprA, Dictyostelium discoideum, Phagocytosis, Phosphatidylinositol, Ras, Chemorepulsion Highlighted Article: This study expands upon the role of Dictyostelium PIPkinA, furthering our understanding of the underlying mechanism of chemorepulsion and informing development of therapeutics for acute respiratory distress syndrome. INTRODUCTION Biased cell migration is essential for the induction of development, morphogenesis and immune responses. Much of our understanding of eukaryotic chemoattraction, the movement of cells towards the source of a diffusible attractant chemical, has come from studies using the unicellular eukaryote Dictyostelium discoideum. During development, D. discoideum cells aggregate using chemoattraction to relayed pulses of cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Five major pathways downstream of the cAMP receptor cAR1, including the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2, guanylyl cyclase, mitogen-activated protein kinase, phosphoinositide 3-kinase –phosphatidylinositol -trisphosphate and phospholipase A pathways, appear to act synergistically to drive chemoattraction towards cAMP. Chemorepulsion is the biased movement of cells away from a signal. We have previously found an endogenous chemorepellent secreted by proliferating Dictyostelium cells called autocrine proliferation repressor protein A. In a colony of growing cells, the extracellular AprA concentration will be high within the colony and low outside the colony, creating a gradient. This AprA gradient causes cells at the edge of a colony to move away from the colony, possibly to find new sources of food. Cells such as Dictyostelium and neutrophils move by extending a pseudopod, attaching the pseudopod to the substrate and then essentially squeezing the cell into the pseudopod. In the absence of guidance cues, cells move in random directions. A localized activation of Ras initiates pseudopod formation. AprA inhibits Ras activation and thus pseudopod formation at the region of the cell closest to the source of the AprA, causing the normal random cell motility to be biased away from the AprA source. Major proteins involved in the AprA-induced chemorepulsion pathway include the G-protein-coupled AprA receptor GrlH, the Gβ and Gα8 G protein subunits, protein kinase A, components of the mTORC2 complex, phospholipase A, Erk1, p21-activated protein kinase D, and the Ras proteins RasC and RasG. Unlike chemoattraction towards cAMP, the PI3K–Akt/protein kinase B and guanylyl cyclase pathways are not required for AprA-induced chemorepulsion. In previous work to identify additional proteins in the AprA-induced chemorepulsion pathway, we utilized restriction enzyme-mediated integration to generate random insertional mutants. In a partial screen of these mutants, we found 26 insertions that disrupted AprA-induced chemorepulsion, and for 17 of these, the sequences of the genomic DNA at the insertion sites identified the location of the REMI insertion, and thus possibly the gene that when disrupted by REMI insertion caused a loss of AprA-induced chemorepulsion. One of the REMI insertions was in the gene encoding phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase A, a protein expressed during early development and throughout aggregation. Type 1 phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinases convert phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate to phosphatidylinositol -bisphosphate, while the type 2 enzymes convert phosphatidylinositol 5-phosphate to PIP 2. PIPkinA has 32% amino acid sequence similarity to human phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase 1 and 28% similarity to human phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase 2. Both PIP5KIα and PIP5KIIα convert PIP to PIP 2. Dictyostelium PIPkinA contains an enzymatically active conserved phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase domain that catalyzes the conversion of PIP to PIP 2. PIP 2 can act directly as a second messenger or act as a precursor to generate other second messengers, such as inositol -trisphosphate, diacylglycerol or PIP 3, that regulate cellular processes such as signal transduction, vesicle trafficking, actin cytoskeleton dynamics, cell adhesion and cell motility. Cells with an insertion in the pipkinA gene do not have the ability to develop, fail to form aggregates even after 48 h and have a reduced ability to undergo chemotaxis. During development, pulses of cAMP increase expression of the cAMP receptor and other key proteins needed for aggregation, but this effect does not occur in pipkinA ins cells. In previously published complementation assays, the PIP kinase domain of PIPkinA was replaced with the equivalent sequences from Saccharomyces cerevisiae Mss4, rat type Iβ and human type IIβ PIP 5-kinases, and cells expressing these chimeric proteins showed normal development, indicating that Dictyostelium PIPkinA is homologous to these other PIP kinases. In this report, we made a gene replacement knockout of pipkinA and found that PIPkinA is necessary for chemorepulsion from AprA, acting downstream from the AprA receptor to mediate the ability of AprA to inhibit Ras activation. We also find that PIPkinA decreases levels of the phosphatidylinositol phosphates PIP and PIP 3 without significantly affecting levels of PIP 2, suggesting the existence of a complex mechanism regulating phosphatidylinositol phosphate levels, and that PIPkinA inhibits cell proliferation and potentiates phagocytosis. RESULTS PIPkinA regulates D. discoideum development and cell size To verify the phenotype of cells lacking PIPkinA, we made a transformant lacking the complete pipkinA open reading frame. Blasticidin-resistant clones were screened for homologous recombination by PCR using a primer in the pipkinA 5′ flanking region and a primer in the coding region that gave a 1.77 kb product from wild-type DNA. Of eight transformant clones screened, four did not show the WT PCR product, and all four of these successful transformants aggregated into mounds but did not form fruiting bodies in the plaques when grown on a bacterial lawn, unlike the previously described pipkinA ins insertion transformant, which does not form aggregates on a Klebsiella aerogenes bacterial lawn or on filters after 48 h. This phenotype difference could be due to differences between the media and/or bacteria used in the Guo et al. study and our study. Four other transformants had the pipkinA PCR product, and these formed aggregates and fruiting bodies in the plaques. One of the transformants lacking the pipkinA open reading frame was chosen for further analysis and was designated pipkinA −. We then expressed PIPkinA as a fusion with a green fluorescent protein in pipkinA − cells to make the strain pipkinA − / pipkinA-GFP. Fluorescence microscopy confirmed that, as previously observed, expression of PIPkinA–GFP caused cells to show fluorescence. As previously observed for PIPkinA–GFP expression in pipkinA ins cells, expression of the PIPkinA–GFP fusion in pipkinA − cells rescued the abnormal development of pipkinA − cells. Compared to WT cells, the size of cells lacking PIPkinA was significantly reduced, and this phenotype was also rescued by expression of PIPkinA–GFP. Fig. 1. pipkinA − cells are abnormally small. Deletion of pipkinA was confirmed by PCR using primers for pipkinA, with gapdh used as a loading control. 1 kb ladder band sizes are shown in bp. Differential interference contrast and... PIPkinA decreases PIP and PIP 3 levels The localizations of PIP 2 and PIP 3 at the plasma membrane play a major role in cell migration. The kinase domain of PIPkinA fused to glutathione-S-transferase expressed in and then purified from bacteria phosphorylates PIP in vitro to generate PIP 2. To determine the effect of PIPkinA on PIP and PIP 2 levels in vivo, PIP, PIP 2 and PIP 3 levels were measured in WT and pipkinA − cells. Compared to WT cells, pipkinA − cells showed significantly higher basal levels of PIP and PIP 3. There was no significant difference between the basal levels of PIP 2 in WT cells and pipkinA − cells, indicating that pipkinA − cells are able to maintain basal levels of PIP 2 through other pathways. The addition of recombinant AprA to WT cells caused no significant change in PIP levels but increased PIP 2 levels at 10 min and decreased PIP 3 levels at 10 and 20 min. When added to pipkinA − cells, rAprA also increased PIP 2 levels, albeit with a different time course. Unlike in WT cells, rAprA caused an increase in PIP in pipkinA − cells and increased, rather than decreased, PIP 3 levels. These data suggest that PIPkinA decreases basal PIP and PIP 3 levels, and is necessary for the effect of AprA on PIP and PIP 3 levels as well as the timing of the effect of AprA on PIP 2 levels. Fig. 2. PIPkinA decreases PIP and PIP 3 levels. WT and pipkinA − cells were incubated in HL5 and treated with 300 ng/ml of rAprA for the indicated timepoints. Control is exposure to rAprA for 5 s. Graphs represent... PIPkinA is necessary for chemorepulsion and AprA-induced proliferation inhibition We have previously identified mutants that have defective chemorepulsion from AprA, and some mutants that show chemorepulsion from exogenous AprA. To determine whether PIPkinA is required for AprA-induced chemorepulsion, cells were exposed to a gradient of rAprA. Unlike WT cells, neither grlH − cells nor pipkinA − cells moved away from the source of rAprA. Similar to WT cells, aprA − and pipkinA − / pipkinA-GFP cells were repelled by rAprA. As previously observed, rAprA did not significantly affect the speed and persistence of WT, aprA − or grlH − cells, and pipkinA − and pipkinA − / pipkinA-GFP cells showed normal speed and persistence in the presence or absence of rAprA. These data indicate that, as suggested by the phenotype of the original pipkinA REMI mutant, PIPkinA is necessary for chemorepulsion from AprA. AprA inhibition of cell proliferation requires the G-protein-coupled receptor GrlH and the G protein subunits Gα8 and Gβ. Cells lacking the AprA transduction components GrlH, PakD, QkgA and RblA also exhibit faster proliferation and reach higher cell densities compared to cells of the WT Ax2 strain. aprA − cells grow faster than Ax2 WT cells in both shaken suspension growth medium cultures and on bacterial lawns. To determine whether PIPkinA is required for AprA regulation of cell proliferation, cells were grown in HL5 growth medium in shaken suspension culture. grlH −, pipkinA − and aprA − cells showed significantly faster proliferation than WT cells. As previously observed, grlH − cells died faster after reaching stationary phase than WT cells, whereas pipkinA − and aprA − cells died slower than WT cells after stationary phase. pipkinA − / pipkinA-GFP cells reached a similar cell density at the stationary phase and died at a similar rate as WT cells. As previously observed, grlH − cells showed a decreased sensitivity to AprA-induced proliferation inhibition, whereas aprA − cells had a response similar to that of WT cells. The pipkinA − cells had a decreased sensitivity to AprA-induced proliferation inhibition, and this was rescued by expression of PIPkinA–GFP. Fig. 3. PIPkinA is required for AprA-induced chemorepulsion, proliferation inhibition and colony expansion. The indicated strains were imaged for 40 min after 20 min of exposure to HL5 growth medium or to an rAprA gradient in HL5... It has previously been shown that aprA −, pakD −, rblA −, qkgA − and grlH − cells form abnormally small colonies on lawns of bacteria compared to Ax2 WT cells. The pipkinA − cells formed significantly larger colonies compared to WT cells, whereas as previously observed, aprA − and grlH − cells formed abnormally small colonies. Interestingly, pipkinA − / pipkinA-GFP cells had reduced colony sizes compared to those of WT cells. Taken together, these results suggest that PIPkinA is required for AprA inhibition of cell proliferation and AprA regulation of colony size, and that for unknown reasons PIPkinA reduces colony size. AprA inhibits pseudopod formation at the region of a WT cell closest to a source of AprA, and a high uniform concentration of rAprA causes WT cells to round up and decrease their motility speed. To determine whether rAprA affects the roundness and motility of pipkinA − cells, cells were exposed to a uniform concentration of buffer or 300 ng/ml rAprA and imaged for 60 min. The pipkinA − cells treated with rAprA did not significantly decrease cell speed or increase roundness in response to rAprA, and this effect was rescued by expression of PIPkinA–GFP. For these assays, cells were in submerged culture exposed to air, whereas for the chemorepulsion assays the cells were in a narrow space in an Insall chamber. The different conditions might account for the slower speed of cells in the Insall chamber compared to that of cells in submerged culture. The pipkinA − cell phenotypes described above are not due to a lack of extracellular AprA, as observed for grlH − cells ; pipkinA − and pipkinA − / pipkinA-GFP cells showed a normal extracellular accumulation of AprA compared to that of Ax2 WT cells. These data suggest that PIPkinA is required for rAprA-induced chemorepulsion and proliferation inhibition, and that PIPkinA mediates cell responses to extracellular rAprA. Fig. 4. PIPkinA is not required for extracellular accumulation of AprA. Spots of 4×10 5 cells of the indicated strains were placed in wells of 8-well slides and allowed to adhere, and 0.2 ml HL5 was gently added to the wells. After 6 h, western... PIPkinA is necessary for AprA-induced inhibition of Ras activation To inhibit pseudopod formation at the side of a cell closest to a source of AprA and induce chemorepulsion from AprA, AprA redistributes Ras cortical activation to the region of the cell away from a source of AprA. GrlH, Gβ, Gα8, PakD, RasG, Erk1 and PKB are necessary for, or are part of, the pathway from the AprA receptor to inhibit Ras cortical activation. To determine whether PIPkinA is necessary for AprA effects on Ras, WT and pipkinA −, cells were incubated in the presence or absence of rAprA, and then lysed and incubated with beads coated with a GST-tagged Ras-binding domain from Raf1, which preferentially binds GTP-bound Ras. Coomassie-stained gels of the lysates indicated that there were equal amounts of protein in the lysates. Western blots of the lysates stained with anti-Ras antibodies indicated no significant difference in levels of the Ras antigen between WT and pipkinA − cells. The Raf1-RBD beads were collected by centrifugation and washed, and western blots of the resulting pulldowns of GTP-bound Ras were stained with an antibody that detects Ras. These assays were performed alongside the assays for WT cells shown in Kirolos and Gomer. As previously described, rAprA treatment decreased levels of GTP-bound Ras after 30 min in WT Ax2 cells. Unlike WT cells, in cells lacking PIPkinA, rAprA treatment increased levels of GTP-bound Ras. Taken together, these results suggest that PIPkinA is necessary for the AprA-induced inhibition of Ras activation. Fig. 5. PIPkinA is necessary for AprA inhibition of Ras activation. WT and pipkinA − cells were incubated with or without 300 ng/ml rAprA for the indicated times, and an aliquot of the samples was used for a Coomassie Blue-stained gel to show... PIPkinA potentiates phagocytosis The conversion of PIP 2 to PIP 3 is fundamental for vesicular trafficking. The localization of PIP 2 in different compartments of the cell surface is directly correlated to intracellular trafficking, such as endocytosis and exocytosis. PIP 2 interacts with proteins to control the formation and spatiotemporal organization of complexes involved in intracellular trafficking and plays a role in clathrin-mediated endocytosis. To determine whether PIPkinA is required for phagocytosis, WT, pipkinA − and pipkinA − / pipkinA-GFP cells were allowed to ingest zymosan A bioparticles. The loss of PIPkinA had no significant effect on the percentage of cells with ingested bioparticles but decreased the average number of ingested bioparticles per cell. We have previously found that after 48 h, some E. coli bacteria ingested by D. discoideum cells remain viable. To determine whether PIPkinA plays a role in bacterial survival, cells were incubated with E. coli K-12 for 2 h to allow ingestion of bacteria. After 2 h, the wells were washed, and gentamicin was added. Gentamicin is an antibiotic that cannot be ingested by eukaryotes and only kills uningested bacteria. The loss of PIPkinA had no significant effect on the number of viable ingested E. coli at 4 h and 48 h. These data indicate that PIPkinA slightly potentiates phagocytosis but has no discernible effect on the killing of ingested bacteria. Fig. 6. PIPkinA potentiates phagocytosis. WT, pipkinA − and pipkinA − / pipkinA-GFP cells were allowed to ingest zymosan A bioparticles for 1 h before being fixed. Graph shows the percentage of cells with ingested bioparticles.... PIPkinA does not significantly affect AprA binding to cells rAprA binds to GrlH, and cells lacking GrlH show very little binding of rAprA. To determine whether the loss of PIPkinA affects AprA binding to cells, cells were incubated with Myc-tagged rAprA, washed and stained for the Myc tag using a rabbit anti-Myc antibody. The tagged AprA bound to aprA −, pipkinA − and pipkinA − / pipkinA-GFP cells but showed reduced binding to grlH − cells. Western blots of cells similarly treated, and then mechanically lysed and separated by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 60 min into pellet and supernatant fractions, were stained for Myc and for actin as a loading control. rAprA was observed in the pellet fraction, which contains plasma membranes, of WT, aprA −, pipkinA − and pipkinA − / pipkinA-GFP cells. grlH − cells had little to no rAprA bound to the pellet. These data suggest that PIPkinA does not affect AprA binding to cells and plays a role downstream of the AprA receptor. Fig. 7. Myc-tagged rAprA binding to cells. Cells were incubated in the absence or presence of 300 ng/ml Myc-tagged rAprA for 10 min and then fixed and stained with a rabbit anti-Myc tag antibody to detect Myc–AprA and with phalloidin-iFluor... DISCUSSION A previous genetic screen using REMI suggested that PIPkinA is involved in D. discoideum chemorepulsion from AprA, and here we showed that PIPkinA is indeed necessary for AprA-induced chemorepulsion, further supporting the usefulness of the REMI mutagenesis approach. PIPkinA is also necessary for AprA-induced inhibition of cell proliferation. Possibly due to a high proliferation rate, pipkinA − cells are abnormally small. PIPkinA mediates the AprA effects on chemorepulsion and proliferation without significantly affecting the extracellular accumulation of AprA or binding of AprA to cells, suggesting that PIPkinA acts downstream from the AprA receptor. Fig. 8. Proposed mechanism for PIPkinA involvement in chemorepulsion. Top: in an AprA gradient, the AprA receptor GrlH is activated by high concentrations of AprA, and through the involvement of PIPkinA, inhibits Ras activation... AprA induces chemorepulsion by inhibiting Ras activation at the side of the cell closest to the source of AprA, and this in turn inhibits formation of pseudopods at the side of the cell closest to the source of AprA to bias random pseudopod formation. In both mammalian and D. discoideum cells, activation of Ras can also potentiate cell proliferation. PIPkinA is necessary for AprA inhibition of Ras activation. This suggests that AprA activation of the AprA receptor uses a pathway involving PIPkinA to inhibit Ras activation to both induce chemorepulsion and inhibit proliferation. PIPkinA converts PIP to PIP 2. Although the mechanism is unclear, PIP 2 can affect Ras subcellular localization and Ras activity. Conversely, Ras can activate phospholipase C-β and -γ to break down PIP 2. Active Ras mediates the recruitment and activation of PI3K to phosphorylate PIP 2 to PIP 3, and PIP 3 can enhance the activity of Ras. By regulating the levels of phosphatidylinositol phosphates, it is thus conceivable that PIPkinA could mediate AprA inhibition of Ras activation. In cells lacking PIPkinA, we would expect a high basal level of PIP, low basal level of PIP 2 and low basal level of PIP 3. As we expected, we observed that cells lacking PIPkinA had a high basal level of PIP. However, pipkinA − cells showed no change in the basal level of PIP 2 and a high basal level of PIP 3. This suggests that additional pathways not involving PIPkinA regulate basal PIP 2 and PIP 3 levels. In mammalian cells, phosphorylation of PIP 2 to generate PIP 3, and activation of Ras, can induce phagocytosis. In D. discoideum, localized activation of Ras and the accumulation of PIP 3 also generate a phagocytic cup, and RasS-null cells show impaired phagocytosis. In mammalian cells, PIP5K-mediated generation of PIP 2 potentiates phagocytosis. Since PIPkinA appears to inhibit Ras activation but potentiates phagocytosis, some inhibition of Ras activation, possibly at regions outside the phagocytic cup, might be needed for efficient phagocytosis. Alternatively, PIPkinA might potentiate phagocytosis directly by generating PIP 2 similar to PIP5K, or indirectly by decreasing basal levels of PIP 3. In WT cells, AprA caused no significant change in PIP levels, whereas in pipkinA − cells, AprA increased PIP levels. This suggests that PIPkinA counteracts some AprA-induced activity that increases PIP levels. In both WT and pipkinA − cells, AprA increased PIP 2 levels, albeit with different time courses. This suggests that AprA might increase CnrN and PTEN activity to convert PIP 3 to PIP 2, and that PIPkinA might also be generating PIP 2 to affect the time course of the AprA-induced increase in PIP 2. The regulation of PIP 2 and PIP 3 levels involve complex pathways. Since the basal levels of PIP 3 are lower than both the basal and AprA-increased levels of PIP 2, other pathways are likely to be involved in the AprA-induced increase in PIP 2 levels. In WT cells, AprA decreased PIP 3 levels, whereas in pipkinA − cells, AprA increased PIP 3 levels. PIPkinA inhibits Ras activation, and Ras activates PI3K. The resulting AprA-induced inhibition of PI3K, combined with the known AprA-induced increase in PTEN activity, could explain the AprA-induced decrease in PIP 3 levels in WT cells. The observed increase in PIP 3 levels in pipkinA − cells suggests that AprA activates an additional pathway that, in the absence of PIPkinA, increases PIP 3 levels. Taken together, these observations suggest that PIPkinA is part of a complex network that regulates levels of phosphatidylinositol phosphates, and that PIPkinA mediates chemorepulsion and inhibits proliferation by inhibiting Ras. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell strains and the generation of pipkinA − cells D. discoideum strains were purchased from the Dictyostelium stock center. The strains included Ax2, grlH − and aprA −. pipkinA − cells were generated by homologous recombination in the Ax2 background using the vector pLPBLP, which has two loxP sites flanking both sides of the Bsr expression cassette act15/Bsr. The 5′ flanking region and the 3′ flanking region of pipkinA were amplified by PCR from genomic DNA extracted from Ax2 vegetative cells and directionally cloned into pLPBLP. Primers used to amplify these regions for the PIPkinA gene are listed in Table S2. The resulting construct, with 4767 bp of the 4767 bp pipkinA coding region replaced with a blasticidin resistance construct, was linearized with KpnI and then electroporated into WT Ax2 cells. After 10 days, there were a few visible colonies in the pipkinA − transformed plate, but none in the control. Cells from the entire plate were collected and seeded on lawns of E. coli K-12 on an SM/5 plate for single clone isolation. After 4 days, cells in plaques on the lawns were picked and cultured in HL5 with 10 µg/ml blasticidin. The genomic DNA from each clone was extracted and purified using a Quick DNA Miniprep kit, then underwent PCR to verify the correct orientation of the insert using the primers listed in Table S3. Generation of pipkinA − /pipkinA-GFP cells pipkinA − cells were transformed with the D. discoideum plasmid PKG3016 by electroporation. This plasmid contains an actin15 promoter driving the expression of the pipkinA cDNA open reading frame fused in frame to a C-terminal GFP tag. The plasmid was sequenced to confirm the construct and that the GFP was in frame. Cells were cultured as previously described with 10 µg/ml G418 in HL5. Images in Fig. 1B,C were taken with differential interference contrast and fluorescence optics on a Nikon Ti2 microscope with a 40× objective. Images of aggregates Images of fruiting bodies and aggregates were performed as described previously with the exception that a 3.1MP Aptina color CMOS camera was mounted on a Microphot-FX microscope. A 2× objective was used, and the end of the lens was covered with aluminum foil with a 2 mm diameter pinhole to increase depth of field. PIP, PIP 2 and PIP 3 extraction and ELISAs For the phosphatidylinositol extractions, 1.25×10 7 cells per test sample were resuspended in fresh HL5 medium and then stimulated with 300 ng/ml rAprA for the indicated times, with the control at 5 seconds of rAprA exposure. The reaction was stopped with an equal volume of ice cold 1 M trichloroacetic acid and incubated on ice for 5 min. Phosphatidylinositol extractions and ELISAs were performed using phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate Mass ELISA kits, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate Mass ELISA kits and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate Mass ELISA kits. Vacuum-dried samples were stored at −20°C and analyzed by ELISA within 6 months of collection. Test samples were reconstituted with PBS-Tween-20/0.25% Protein Stabilizer solution, included with the kit, and assayed in duplicate. Chemorepulsion, proliferation and phagocytosis assays Recombinant AprA was expressed and purified as previously described, then concentrated and stored as described in Kirolos and Gomer. Chemorepulsion assays using an Insall chamber, which allows visualization of cell migration in the presence of a stimulus gradient, were performed as previously described. Each batch of rAprA was tested for chemorepulsion activity on WT cells before further experiments were performed. For each individual experiment, at least 40 cells were tracked. Proliferation in HL5 shaken suspension culture and AprA cell proliferation inhibition assays were performed as previously described. Colony expansion assays were performed as previously described. E. coli K-12 survival in D. discoideum and phagocytosis of Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated zymosan A bioparticles by D. discoideum cells were assayed as described previously. AprA binding assay D. discoideum cells were grown to 1.0×10 6 cells/ml in HL5 in shaken suspension culture and collected by centrifugation at 500 g for 3 min. Cells were resuspended in HL5 and washed twice more by centrifugation and resuspension. The cells were then resuspended in HL5 to 1.0×10 5 cells/ml, and 300 µl of the cell suspension was placed in a chamber of a type 354118 8-chamber tissue culture treated glass slide. Cells were then allowed to adhere for 30 min at room temperature. From a 250–300 ng/µl Myc-tagged rAprA stock in 20 mM NaPO 4 pH 7.4, ∼0.5–0.8 µl was added gently to each well to produce a uniform concentration as described previously. Control wells had an equal volume of 20 mM NaPO 4 pH 7.4 uniformly added to each well. The slides were incubated for 10 min in a humid chamber, then fixed and stained as described previously, using a 1:500 dilution of rabbit anti-Myc tag antibody and1 µg/ml Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody. Fluorescence labeling of F-actin was done with Phalloidin–iFluor 555 following the manufacturer's directions. Images were taken on a Nikon Ti2 Eclipse microscope with a 40× objective. FIJI ImageJ software was used to analyze and quantify the staining. For each individual experiment, AprA binding to the cell membrane was assessed in at least 35 randomly chosen cells in each well. To measure rAprA protein levels in cell fractions, cells were grown, collected and washed as described above. The cells were then resuspended to 1.0×10 6 cells/ml in HL5 with 1 ml/well in a 24 well plate and allowed to adhere for 30 min. rAprA was added to a final concentration of 300 ng/ml, or an equal volume of sodium phosphate buffer was added. Cells were lysed and fractionated by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 1 h at 4°C into supernatant and pellet as described previously. Samples were electrophoresed and blotted as described in Kirolos and Gomer and stained as previously described with 1:250 rabbit anti-Myc tag antibody, and the secondary antibody was 250 ng/ml peroxidase-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG. Staining was detected with SuperSignal West Pico PLUS Chemiluminescent Substrate for 10 min. Images of the membrane were taken using a ChemiDoc XRS system and quantified using Image Lab software. Extracellular AprA concentrations and Ras pulldown assays Extracellular AprA concentrations were measured as described previously, using the rabbit anti-AprA antibody, dilutions and methods described in that publication. Ras pulldown assays were performed as described in Kirolos and Gomer, using a Ras Pull-down Activation Assay kit. Statistics Prism 8.4.1 was used for t- tests and one-way or two-way ANOVA with appropriate post-tests. Significance was defined as P <0.05. Supplementary Material Supplementary information Click here for additional data file. Acknowledgements We thank the Dictyostelium stock center for strains and plasmids, Dr Ramesh Rijal for helpful discussions and Dr Catherine Pears for the PKG3016 plasmid. Footnotes Author contributions Conceptualization: S.A.K., R.J.R., K.M.C., R.H.G.; Methodology: S.A.K., C.E.H.; Software: S.A.K.; Validation: S.A.K., R.J.R., K.M.C., N.K.D.; Formal analysis: S.A.K., C.E.H., R.J.R., K.M.C., N.K.D.; Investigation: S.A.K., R.H.G.; Resources: R.H.G.; Data curation: S.A.K., C.E.H., R.J.R., K.M.C., N.K.D.; Writing - original draft: S.A.K., R.H.G.; Writing - review & editing: S.A.K., C.E.H., R.J.R., K.M.C., N.K.D., R.H.G.; Visualization: S.A.K., C.E.H., R.J.R., K.M.C., N.K.D., R.H.G.; Supervision: R.H.G.; Project administration: R.H.G.; Funding acquisition: R.H.G. Funding This work was funded by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences. Open Access funding provided by Texas A and M University. Deposited in PMC for immediate release. Data availability All relevant data can be found within the article and its supplementary information. Raw data are available upon request. Article information J Cell Sci. 2023 Jul 15; 136: jcs260541. Published online 2023 Jul 27. doi: 10.1242/jcs.260541 PMCID: PMC10399982 PMID: 37259831 Sara A. Kirolos, Chance E. Hatfield, Ryan J. Rahman, Kristen M. Consalvo, Nolan K. Dittenhauser, and Richard H. Gomer * Sara A. Kirolos Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, 301 Old Main Drive, College Station, TX 77843-3474, USA Find articles by Sara A. Kirolos Chance E. Hatfield Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, 301 Old Main Drive, College Station, TX 77843-3474, USA Find articles by Chance E. Hatfield Ryan J. Rahman Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, 301 Old Main Drive, College Station, TX 77843-3474, USA Find articles by Ryan J. Rahman Kristen M. Consalvo Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, 301 Old Main Drive, College Station, TX 77843-3474, USA Find articles by Kristen M. Consalvo Nolan K. Dittenhauser Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, 301 Old Main Drive, College Station, TX 77843-3474, USA Find articles by Nolan K. Dittenhauser Richard H. Gomer Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, 301 Old Main Drive, College Station, TX 77843-3474, USA Find articles by Richard H. Gomer Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, 301 Old Main Drive, College Station, TX 77843-3474, USA Corresponding author. Richard H. Gomer: ude.umat@remogr * Author for correspondence Handling Editor: Daniel Billadeau Competing interests The authors declare no competing or financial interests. Received 2022 Aug 18; Accepted 2023 May 9. Copyright © 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed. See the referenced article on page e136_e1402. Articles from Journal of Cell Science are provided here courtesy of Company of Biologists 