 Like most eukaryotes, the pre-metazoan social amoeba Dictyostelium depends on the SCF family of E3 ubiquitin ligases to regulate its proteome. In Dictyostelium, starvation induces a transition from unicellular feeding to a multicellular slug that responds to external signals to culminate into a fruiting body containing terminally differentiated stalk and spore cells. These transitions are subject to regulation by F-box proteins and O 2 -dependent posttranslational modifications of Skp1. Here we examine in greater depth the essential role of FbxwD and Vwa1, an intracellular vault protein inter-alpha-trypsin and von Willebrand factor-A domain containing protein that was found in the FbxwD interactome by co-immunoprecipitation. Reciprocal co-IPs using gene-tagged strains confirmed the interaction and similar changes in protein levels during multicellular development suggested co-functioning. FbxwD overexpression and proteasome inhibitors did not affect Vwa1 levels suggesting a non-substrate relationship. Forced FbxwD overexpression in slug tip cells where it is normally enriched interfered with terminal cell differentiation by a mechanism that depended on its F-box and RING domains, and on Vwa1 expression itself. Whereas vwa1 -disruption alone did not affect development, overexpression of either of its three conserved domains arrested development but the effect depended on Vwa1 expression. Based on structure predictions, we propose that the Vwa1 domains exert their negative effect by artificially activating Vwa1 from an autoinhibited state, which in turn imbalances its synergistic function with FbxwD. Autoinhibition or homodimerization might be relevant to the poorly understood tumor suppressor role of the evolutionarily related VWA5A/BCSC-1 in humans. Keywords: cellular slime mold, E3ubiquitin-ligase, F-box protein, glycosylation, VIT, von willebrand domain A, RING Introduction As cells grow, replicate, and differentiate, their proteomes must be remodeled to meet their needs. The ubiquitin proteasome system helps address these needs using highly regulated assemblies of poly-ubiquitin ligases to target proteins for degradation by the 26S proteasome. Cullin-1 Ring Ub ligases, also known as Skp1/Cullin-1/F-box protein complexes, comprise a major and highly evolutionarily conserved family. They utilize a cullin scaffold and Rbx1 to bind Ub-charged E2 subunits in proximity to the Skp1 adaptor and a substrate presenting F-box protein ). Canonical FBPs have a substrate binding domain located C-terminal to a ∼40 amino acid F-box domain that interfaces with Skp1. These substrate receptor domains, which include WD40 repeat propellers, Leucine-rich repeats, Armadillo-repeats, and others, confer specificity to the SCF. While many FBPs and their substrates have been characterized in humans, yeast, and Arabidopsis, the majority of FBP substrates are yet to be elucidated. Furthermore, the evolutionary diversity of FBPs complicates their characterization in unrelated organisms. Thus the roles of the SCFs in the vast kingdom of protists, which includes many pathogens that seriously impact human and animal health, as well as agriculture, remain unknown. The amoebozoa are a group of protists that lie near the base of the amorphea branch of eukaryotic evolution that gave rise to fungi, yeast, and animals. Dictyostelium discoideum is well-studied representative and prior work establishes that the SCF complex actively regulates its development. D. discoideum amoebae live freely in the soil as unicellular organisms when nutrients are plentiful. Upon nutrient depletion, the cells aggregate into motile slugs that differentiate into prespore cells and various subtypes of prestalk cells. These slugs will follow environmental cues and ultimately culminate at the soil surface into fruiting bodies consisting of terminally differentiated spore and stalk cells with cellulose-rich cell walls. This process is dependent on concerted transcriptional and proteomic changes. The significance of proteomic changes is emphasized by the effects on development of mutations in FBPs and inhibitors of the ubiquitin-proteasome system. SCF assembly and activity is increasingly understood to be regulated by a number of factors including Cand1, chaperones, localization factors, post-translational modifications, etc.. A novel form of regulation of the SCF has been discovered in Dictyostelium. Its Skp1 subunit is post-translationally modified by hydroxylation of a proline in an oxygen dependent manner and subsequent glycosylation with a pentasaccharide. Loss of the prolyl hydroxylase responsible for generating the anchor point for the Skp1-glycan modifies the O 2 -setpoint for permitting its transition from the motile slug stage of development to mature fruiting bodies, by a mechanism that involves the proteasome. The addition of the glycan is required for mediating the O 2 -dependence, and has been shown to increase Skp1’s level of interaction with several F-box proteins, including the WD40 domain containing FBP FbxwD. Building from findings in Dictyostelium, the Skp1 modification has been described in the human parasite Toxoplasma gondii and the plant pathogen Pythium ultimum, and the modification genes are evident in many other unicellular organisms including pathogenic fungi. FbxwD is of interest because its ectopic overexpression delays development and, like many other FBPs, its level of interaction with Skp1 is promoted by the Skp1 modification. FbxwD appears to be a canonical WD40-repeat substrate receptor FBP, except for its unusual N-terminal RING domain-like sequence. RING domains are a subset of Zn-finger domains, and occur in other classes of Ub-ligases where they mediate direct interaction with Ub-charged E2 subunits and activate Ub transfer. While not unprecedented, RING domains are unusual in F-box proteins and a role in SCF activity is unknown. Here we find that the fbxwD gene resists deletion, and its overexpression in prestalk cells has inhibitory effects on terminal differentiation by a mechanism that depends on its RING and F-box domains. Examination of the interactome of endogenously tagged FbxwD using co-immunoprecipitation combined with mass spectrometry yielded 2 uncharacterized proteins, Vwa1 and Vwa2, that are evolutionarily related to the nucleocytoplasmic VWA5A/BCSC-1 clade of VIT and vWFA domain containing proteins. The VIT-vWFA domain arrangement of Vwa1 is characteristic of a broad protein family that includes extracellular ITIH heavy chains, a specific intracellular poly ADP-ribose polymerase, and the intracellular tumor suppressing VWA5A/BCSC-1. As reviewed here, examples of intracellular VIT-vWFA proteins are found throughout eukaryotic phylogeny and some prokaryotes. The functions of their domains are generally unknown but they have been implicated in mediating protein-protein interactions. Dictyostelium Vwa1 has highest homology to the intracellular nucleocytoplasmic protein VWA5A/BCSC-1, which is also downregulated in a schizophrenia model. Our domain overexpression and gene disruption studies of Vwa1 reported here indicate a role for Vwa1 in development that is synergistic with FbxwD, and we propose a structure-based model to explain the genetic interaction. Materials and Methods Cell culture and development Dictyostelium discoideum strains were typically grown by shaking in HL-5 axenic media at 22°C. Vegetative stage cells were collected by centrifugation at 1,000× g for 1 min during logarithmic growth. Development was typically induced by collecting cells at the same growth phase density and depositing in phosphate buffer on nitrocellulose filters or non-nutrient agar as previously described. Aggregation stage and slug cells were normally collected at 10 or 14 h, respectively, or at a time of equivalent morphology if indicated. As described, development was also induced by washing and resuspending cells at 10 7 /ml in Agg buffer and shaking for the indicated times. Strains were cloned by spreading on nutrient agar plates at low density in association with Klebsiella aerogenes and isolation from cleared plaques, and development was also monitored under these conditions. To assay spore differentiation, cells were recovered by rinsing filters after 36–40 h of development with 0.2% Triton X-100, dispersed by vortexing and mild probe sonication, and spores were counted on a hemocytometer. TABLE 1 Strains used in this study. Endogenous gene tagging The C-termini of Vwa1 and Vwa2 were modified to include a FLAG 3 -tag as previously described for CulE. Targeting DNA fragments ranging from 620–1,032 bp were generated by PCR using oligonucleotide primers described in Supplementary Table S1, gDNA as a template, and proofreading polymerase. The targeting sequences were used to replace the culE targeting sequences in the pVS_CulE-FLAG 3 plasmid based on matching restriction sites in the PCR primers and pVSculE-5′3′, as described in Supplementary Figure S6. The modified plasmids, containing a sequence expected to encode FLAG 3 /EcoRI/BirA/NcoI/TEV protease site/BamHI/TAA at the C-terminus, were linearized with BssHII, gel purified, and electroporated into strain Ax3 cells essentially as described. After selection in the presence of 10 μg/ml Blasticidin S, clones were screened for expected modifications by western blotting using mouse mAb M2 anti-FLAG antibody, and confirmed by PCR. A strain in which the C-terminus of FbxwD is similarly FLAG 3 -tagged was described previously. A related strain in which the C-terminus is tagged with FLAG 3 and two ubiquitin-binding domains in tandem was produced as follows. A double stranded nucleotide sequence, which encodes a GS-rich linker, a FLAG 3 epitope, a BirA biotinylation site, a linker, and 2 copies of a UBA domain, was synthesized by DNA2.0. The FLAG 3 epitope and BirA biotinylation site sequence were previously described in pVS3, and the Uba 2 sequence was derived from DDB_G0286357, which encodes RcbA, the predicted ortholog of Rad23 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. For tagging the C-terminus of FbxwD, this insert was excised by digestions with BglII and BamH1, and cloned into the previously described FLAG 3 -tagging construct for FbxwD after similar digestion. The resulting plasmid was cleaved with BssHII and PvuII, and the insert, which included the above FLAG 3 UBA 2 coding sequence in tandem with bsr -resistance cassette, was used to edit the fbxwD locus of strain Ax3, based on double cross-over homologous recombination. Gene editing was confirmed by PCR and Western blotting, and detection of FbxwD, FbxwA, and RcbA peptide sequences in the anti-FLAG co-IPs. Strains are listed in Table 1. The strategy for C-terminal tagging of FbxwA with FLAG 3 was similar. The previously described pVSCulE5′3′-BsR was modified to replace culE targeting sequences with fbxwA targeting sequences. The 5′-targeting sequence was amplified from strain Ax3 genomic DNA using primers FbxA5′-S and FbxA5′-AS. After cloning into pCR4-TOPO, the insert was excised with BssHII and BglII and cloned into similarly digested pVSCulE5′3′-BsR. Similarly, the 3′-targeting sequence was amplified using FbxA3′-S and FbxA5′-AS, and cloned into the PstI and PvuII sites of the plasmid. After excision with BssHII and PvuII as above, the tagging construct was electroporated into strain Ax3 cells and Blasticidin-S resistant cells cloned and analyzed by PCR to confirm the expected insertion, and by Western blotting to confirm expression of the tagged protein. Protein overexpression Overexpression of epitope-tagged versions of Vwa1, Vwa2, and FbxwD was accomplished essentially as described. Strains are listed in Table 1. The entire ORF of Vwa1 was amplified from genomic DNA of strain Ax3 via PCR and inserted into the pMiniT vector, named pCR4vwa1, using oligonucleotides described in Supplementary Table S1 and Supplementary Figure S1. The amplified DNA fragments were trimmed by digestion with NcoI and BamHI, gel purified, and cloned into similarly digested and gel-purified pV3D, pV3C, or pV3E. Circular plasmids were electroporated into cells and transformants were selected for by growth in the presence of 20 μg/ml G418 as above. The sequence of the N-terminally tagged FLAG 3 Vwa1 is shown in Supplementary Figure S1B. Expression was validated via western blotting with murine mAb M2 anti-FLAG antibody. Overexpression of discrete regions of Vwa1 was accomplished by PCR amplification of genomic DNA using oligonucleotides described in Supplementary Figure S1 and Supplementary Table S1, cloning of the amplicons into pV3D, and transformation of strain Ax3 or HW603a. To achieve overexpression of FLAG 3 FbxwD in prestalk cells, its full-length coding region was cloned into pV3E exactly as described for its cloning into pV3C. Point mutations were introduced by site-directed mutagenesis using the oligonucleotide pairs described in Supplementary Table S1. Sequences are described in Figure 3B, and protein expression shown in Figure 3D. FIGURE 3 Influence of FbxwD on Vwa1 protein expression levels. FbxwD domains and location of point mutations examined. Alignment of the putative RING sequence with a homolog from a distantly related social amoeba and from the... Vwa1 gene editing The intermediate plasmid pMiniT-Vwa1 was linearized with NsiI, located at the codon amino acid 195 of Vwa1. The previously mentioned FLAG 3 and associated blasticidin resistance cassette fragment was amplified from pVS_CulE-FLAG 3 with the primers VWA1_KO_FGBSR and VWA1_KO_BSR_R, which included homology arms flanking the NsiI digestion site. Ligation independent cloning using NEBuilder ® HiFi DNA Assembly Cloning Kit assembled the fragments as illustrated. The disruption DNA was excised with PvuI, and used to edit the vwa1 locus as described above. Blasticidin-resistant clones were screened using PCR and Western blotting with pAb UOK162 on vegetative cells grown in HL5. Preparation of cytosolic extracts Before lysis, vegetative cells were rinsed twice in 17 mM potassium phosphate by centrifugation in the cold at 3,000 × g for 1 min. Slug cells were scraped from cellulose nitrate filters and dissociated in 20 mM sodium EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl by shearing through a 26-gauge syringe needle. Once dissociated, cells were centrifuged and resuspended twice in the potassium phosphate buffer, and finally rapidly re-suspended in ice cold 250 mM sucrose, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 μg/ml leupeptin, 10 μg/ml aprotinin, 1 μM PMSF, and immediately forced through a 3- or 5-µm nuclepore filter to lyse the cells. Lysates were centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 1 h to produce a soluble S100 cytosolic supernatant. The S100 was used for Western blotting for soluble proteins, to minimize interference from particulate materials. Generation of Vwa1 anti-sera 7×10 10 vegetative cells expressing FLAG 3 His 6 Vwa1 under control of the discoidin promotor were filter lysed to generate a cytosolic S100 fraction after ultracentrifugation. The supernatant was loaded onto and eluted from 200-ml DEAE column using gradient of NaCl. Fractions containing intact Vwa1 based on Western blot analysis using anti-FLAG mAb M2 were subsequently purified on a 1-ml His-trap with stepwise imidazole elution. The purified Vwa1 was concentrated using spin columns and 1.2–1.5 mg of purified protein was run on a gradient slab gel. After Coomassie staining, the Vwa1 band was excised and detained. The destained gel slice was submitted to Cocalico Biologicals, Inc. where it was processed to immunize two rabbits with one initial dose and two boosters. Pre-bleeds, post-boost, and exsanguination bleeds were screened against lysates of Ax3, Vwa1-N1, Vwa1 oe, Vwa2 oe cells by Western blotting to characterize their specificity. Antisera pAb UOK161 and UOK162 were used to visualize Vwa1 in slug and vegetative cells respectively due to the presence of interfering cross-reactive bands in the other cell type. Western blotting Cell lysates or fractions were solubilized in Laemmli Sample Buffer containing 50 mM dithiothreitol and boiled for 5 min. Approximately 4×10 5 vegetative cells and 8×10 5 slug cells or cell equivalents were loaded in wells of a 1-mm 4%–12% Bis/Tris NuPage polyacrylamide SDS gel, using MES or MOPS running buffer depending on the M r range of target proteins. Gels were transferred to nitrocellulose using an iBlot 2 dry blotting system, and blots were blocked in 5% nonfat dry milk in Tris-buffered saline, followed by overnight incubation with primary Abs diluted in the blocking solution, washed in TBS, and probed with Alexa Flour-680-conjugated secondary Abs. Primary Abs included anti-Vwa1 pAb UOK161, anti-Vwa1 pAb UOK162, anti-FLAG mAb M2, anti-FLAG mAb 12C6c, 1:1,000 anti-fucose mAb 83.5 against Dictyostelium spore coat proteins. Fluorescence intensities were recorded on a LiCor Odyssey scanner and quantitated by densitometry using NIH ImageJ. Uncalibrated OD was used for the densitometry scale on gray-scale images of blots. Values were corrected by systematic subtraction of an adjacent blank area, and normalized to similar densitometric analysis of the same lane of the Coomassie blue stained gel after blotting. Co-immunoprecipitations Protein interactomes were investigated using a co-IP approach as described. Briefly, cells were lysed for 15 min on ice in Lysis buffer, 0.2% NP-40, 10 μg/ml leupeptin, 10 μg/ml aprotinin) at a final concentration of 1.2–1.5×10 5 cells/µl for vegetative cells and 2.4×10 5 cells/µl for slugs. Lysates were spun at 21,000× g for 15 min to remove the insoluble material. 10 7 cell equivalents of the supernatant were used to resuspend 5 µl packed volume of anti-FLAG mAb M2 magnetic Sepharose beads. After rotation for 1 h at 4°C, the beads were collected magnetically, rinsed ×3 in 20 bead vol of Lysis buffer, 3× in detergent-free Lysis buffer, and once more in 20 vol of the unbuffered salt solution. For Western blot analysis, beads were boiled in 10 vol 2% SDS for 5 min. For mass spectrometric analysis, beads were eluted with 10 bead vol of 133 mM triethanolamine for 15 min and neutralized with acetic acid. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resolubilized in 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl. The efficiency of IP capture, which was routinely evaluated by Western blot analysis of the S21, IP supernatant, and eluted fractions, was used to optimize the bead:extract ratio to achieve >80% capture. Mass spectrometric analysis The proteomics work-flow was as previously described for the Skp1 interactome. Briefly, samples were solubilized in 8 M urea, reduced and alkylated with chloroacetamide, digested with endo Lys-C and trypsin, and recovered on a C18 Zip-Tip. The peptide solution was loaded onto a C18 trap column in a Thermo Fisher UltiMate 3,000 nano-HPLC, and eluted from the trap column onto a C18 nano-column in a 5%–90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 3 h. The eluent was directly introduced via a nano-electrospray source into a Thermo-Fischer Q-Exactive Plus and analyzed by MS and MS/MS. Full MS scans were acquired from m / z 350 to 2000 at 70,000 resolution. Peptides were selected for fragmentation in the C-trap via higher energy collision-induced dissociation for MS/MS analysis using a Top 10 method and a 30 s fragmentation exclusion window. Sequest HT search parameters were 10 ppm parent ion mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance, and up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications: oxidation of Met, formylation or acetylation of the protein N terminus; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of Cys. False Discovery Rate was determined via Target/Decoy in Proteome Discoverer 2.5. Peptide were assigned at a false discovery rate of <1% and protein identifications were classified by protein false discovery rate. Proteins were quantified from reconstructed ion chromatograms of all peptides assigned to a protein at the MS1 level. Proteins whose abundances were >4-fold higher in experimental vs. control samples with a Wilcoxon test p -value <0.01 and a t-test p -value <0.01 were classified as significant interactors. The mass spectrometry proteomics data are deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository. Dataset identifiers for FbxwD-FLAG 3 co-IP’s are PXD035633 and Project DOI: 10.6019/PXD035633, and for FLAG 3 Vwa1 co-IP’s are PXD035634 and Project DOI: 10.6019/PXD035634. Alignment and tree building Domain boundaries for Vwa1 and Vwa2 were based on sequence conservation and correlation with folded domains of ITIH1 based on its crystal structure. BLASTp was used to search for related Vwa1-vWFA and Vwa1-VIT domains in the non-redundant NCBI database. Preliminary alignments were performed using Geneious Prime 2019.1.3 with a PAM250 cost matrix, Gap open penalty of 20, and Gap extension penalty of 10. The alignment was manually refined with priority given to hydrophobic regions and minimizing gaps. The evolutionary relationship of the sequences was explored using a UPGMA tree building method with 1,000 bootstrapping iterations and no %bootstrap cutoff. Tree files were exported as newick files and visualized in iTOL. Structure and domain interface analysis AlphaFold 2.2.1 was accessed using NMRbox server and used to calculate and predict the structure of DdVwa1. The protein sequence was written as.FASTA file and used as input for AlphaFold using the following command:. A similar prediction is also found at. The previously calculated structure of HsVwa5a used for comparison was retrieved from AlphaFold database webpage. The top scoring modes were used for analysis and were visualized and imaged using PyMOL. HsITIH1 crystal structure coordinates used for comparison were retrieved via PDB database using the accession code 6FPY. The interface elements including hydrogen bonds and packing interactions between the vWFA and CTD domains of DdVwa1 were analyzed using PISA server. The input coordinate file was curated by designating residues 1–615 as peptide chain A and residues 815–918 as peptide chain B. Results FbxwD interacts with VIT-vWFA domain containing proteins Previous studies identified several dozen FBP candidates in Dictyostelium, and many of these have predicted substrate receptor domains. However, their SR sequences are so unrelated to those of known FBPs that identifying their substrates is likely to require experimental approaches. FbxwD was chosen for further analysis because it is an abundant validated WD40 repeat FBP that interacts directly with Skp1 in a way that is enhanced when Skp1 is prolyl hydroxylated and glycosylated. A previously described strain in which the endogenous fbxwD locus was edited to modify the C-terminus of FbxwD with a FLAG 3 tag and a new strain tagged with FLAG 3 in tandem with a pair of predicted Ub-binding domains from the Dictyostelium ortholog of yeast Rad23, were used to probe the FbxwD interactome where FbxwD was presumably expressed at its native level and in its normal cell type specific pattern of expression. FbxwD-FLAG 3 was IP’d from the non-ionic detergent solubilized cell lysates using bead-bound anti-FLAG mAb M2, eluted at high pH, and analyzed using nLC MS/MS. Proteins that satisfied the following criteria were examined further: present at a peptide FDR <1%, detected with ≥2 peptides, present at ≥4-fold higher levels in tagged strains vs. untagged strains, and predicted nucleocytoplasmic localization. Data from FbxwD-FLAG 3 and FbxwD-FLAG 3 UBA 2 strains were treated as biological replicates as their interactomes were indiscernible. Proteins detected in vegetative stage extracts included the SCF components Skp1 and CulE, suggesting that a fraction of the FbxwD-FLAG 3 was engaged in SCF complexes, as well as six additional proteins. Two have been named Vwa1 and Vwa2 due to the presence of PFAM sequences predicting the presence of an N-terminal VIT domain followed by a vWFA domain. These VIT/vWFA interactors are specific to FbxwD as they were not found in pilot studies of a similar analysis of the interactomes of FbxwA-FLAG 3 and FbxwA-FLAG 3 UBA 2, a previously characterized WD40-type FBP that regulates development. A homolog of Vwa1, Vwa6, and Rbx1, a small protein associated with CulE, were also confidently detected but their enrichment was not consistent among trials and thus not statistically significant. During development, Vwa1 and Skp1 remained prominent in the FbxD-FLAG 3 interactome of slug cells. Vwa2, CulE, and Vwa3 were confidently detected and also enriched, but Vwa2 identification did not meet the 1%FDR test, and the others did not meet the 4-fold threshold. The remaining interactors seen in vegetative cells were detected near background levels. Thus Vwa1 and Vwa2 were chosen for further analysis. FIGURE 1 Interactomes of FbxwD-FLAG 3 and FLAG 3 Vwa1. Immunoprecipitations of FLAG tagged targets using anti-FLAG mAb M2 from cells solubilized in non-ionic detergent were subjected to a proteomics work-flow that included generation of peptides with... Vwa1 was also previously identified as an interactor of FbxwD in a strain that overexpressed FLAG 3 FbxwD under control of the cotB promoter, which drives FLAG 3 FbxwD expression in prespore cells, a cell type in which it is normally not well expressed. Similarly, the interaction also occurred using a mutant form of FLAG 3 FbxwD that does not interact with Skp1, suggesting that the interaction does not involve the SCF complex per se. Vwa1, Vwa2 and Vwa3 were also previously detected in co-IPs from strains in which endogenous CulE was C-terminally FLAG-tagged, indicating that the interaction persists in SCF complexes. Furthermore, the 3 interactions were enhanced in wild-type vs. phyA -KO cells, as also observed with FbxwD, reinforcing the conclusion that the interactions are via FbxwD. To explore these interactions further, the gene loci for Vwa1 and Vwa2 were separately endogenously tagged with a C-terminal FLAG 3 tag, or Vwa1’s coding sequence was over-expressed with an N-terminal FLAG 3 tag under control of the semi-constitutive discoidin promotor. Co-IPs of vegetative cells overexpressing FLAG 3 Vwa1 confirmed its interaction with not only FbxwD but also CulE, Rbx1, and an unknown protein annotated as a Zn-dependent alcohol dehydrogenase. Skp1 was also enriched but not above the 4-fold threshold. After development to the slug stage, FbxwD and the alcohol dehydrogenase-like protein were still found, but CulE and Skp1, which were detected, did not meet threshold requirements, possibly because FbxwD is naturally expressed at lower levels in slugs. In co-IPs with FLAG 3 Vwa2, FbxwD and CulE were confident interactors, with Skp1 again being less significant. In contrast, these interactions were not detected in anti-FLAG co-IPs from strains expressing native levels of Vwa1-FLAG 3 or Vwa2-FLAG 3, possibly due to reduced sensitivity at native expression levels. Figure 1D summarizes these observed interactions, and extend previous findings by showing that the FbxwD/Vwa1 and FbxwD/Vwa2 interactions are robust enough to be detected in co-IPs of FbxwD-FLAG 3 expressed at its native levels, and in the reciprocal direction by pulling down FLAG 3 Vwa1 or FLAG 3 Vwa2. During development, these interactions presumably occur primarily in prestalk cells, the natural cell type of their expression in slugs. The four other Vwa homologues predicted in the Dictyostelium genome were not detected, but their presence, or other unknown proteins, might have been below the level of sensitivity of the method. Developmental regulation of FbxwD, Vwa1 and Vwa2 expression In response to starvation and when plated on a moist surface exposed to atmosphere, Dictyostelium cells together execute a developmental program over the course of 20–24 h that results in the formation of fruiting bodies consisting of tens of thousands of aerial spores at the top of stalks. The significance of the interactions was first examined by assessing whether the proteins are coexpressed during development. An examination of previous transcriptomic data suggested that, for bacterially grown cells, FbxwD, Vwa1, Vwa2, and Vwa3 were expressed in two waves : one during growth and the other after starvation induced aggregation on filters as the cells organize into slugs. Analysis of development of axenically grown cells on HL-5 medium also showed two waves, but the first wave seemed to reach maximal levels only shortly after starvation. A separate trial confirmed that the first wave for axenically grown cells occurred only just after starvation, either when cells were developed on filters or shaken in suspension and pulsed with cAMP. In contrast, analysis of protein expression, based on Western blot analysis of strains whose endogenous protein loci were FLAG 3 -tagged, confirmed that highest expression levels of the proteins occurred during axenic growth. During starvation-induced development on filters, the levels of FbxwD, Vwa1 and Vwa2 decreased monotonically. Vwa1 and Vwa2 declined rapidly over the first 6 h, plateaued for a few hr, possibly the result of the second wave of transcription, before declining further. In comparison, FbxwD protein levels declined more linearly. Significantly, the transcriptome analysis of separated prestalk and prespore cells indicated that FbxwD is approximately 16-fold enriched in prestalk compared to prespore cells, whereas Vwa1 and Vwa2 appear to be expressed at similar levels between the two cell types. The general correlation in expression levels are consistent with the evidence for the physical interactions, and the differences in cell type expression suggest a possible role for FbxwD in developmental regulation in prestalk cells. Thus the lower expression level is nevertheless expected to be substantial considering that prestalk cells represent <20% of the total cell population. FIGURE 2 Developmental regulation of FbxwD, Vwa1, Vwa2 and Vwa3 expression. Schematic illustration of the starvation-induced developmental cycle of D. discoideum at an air-water interface. Pre-stalk cells and anterior-like cells are colored... Vwa1 stability To address the possibility that Vwa1 is a substrate of FbxwD, its level was examined in strains expressing increased levels of native or mutant FbxwD. Since fbxwD has resisted disruption and therefore may be essential, a previously described strain in which FLAG 3 FbxD was overexpressed in prespore cells under the control of the cotB promoter, and a variant in which the F-box sequence was mutated to reduce interaction with Skp1 and therefore the SCF complex, were examined. In addition, 2 new corresponding strains in which FLAG 3 FbxwD was expressed under control of the ecmA promotor, which directs expression in prestalk cells, were created. Levels of Vwa1 were monitored using two antisera generated against recombinant full-length Vwa1, pAb UOK161 and pAb UOK162. In a Western blot of an SDS-PAGE gel of vegetative cells, UOK162 labeled a band at the expected M r position of 112,000 but several other bands as well. To verify the identity of this band, the vwa1 locus was modified by an in-frame insertion of a cassette encoding a FLAG 3 epitope tag, a stop codon, and a blasticidin resistance gene, in a NsiI site near the middle of the VIT domain. The crystal structure of the VIT domain of a human homolog suggested that the VIT remnant would be incapable of folding and, indeed, the FLAG 3 -tag inserted at the C-terminus of the remnant was not detected. The M r 112,000 band was absent in two clones, named Vwa1-N1, confirming its identity as Vwa1. Similar results were obtained with pAb UOK161 except that interference by non-specific binding was greater; however whereas UOK162 was not suitable for slug cells owing to cross-reacting bands, sufficient resolution was available with UOK161 to allow use in quantitating Vwa1 expression in slug cells. Slugs over-expressing either FbxwD or FbxwD under control of the ecmA promotor showed similar levels of Vwa1 as in parental cells, which did not support the idea that Vwa1 is a substrate. In additional experiments, vegetative cells in nutrient-free aggregation buffer were incubated in the presence of concentrations of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib or the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide that were previously shown to be effective, but no reproducible differences in accumulation of Vwa1 or Vwa2 were observed. However, the possibility that FbxwD mediates Vwa1 turnover in concert with another signal not present under these conditions cannot be excluded. FbxwD overexpression inhibits development in a RING and F-box dependent manner FbwxD overexpression was previously reported to inhibit developmental timing and prevent successful sporulation when induced under control of the prespore cell-specific cotB promotor. Inhibition was dependent on an intact F-box domain as the F-box-mutant expressors sporulated similarly to the parental strain. Since FbxwD expression is highly prestalk cell enriched based on transcript analysis, cells were instead programmed to over-express FLAG 3 FbxwD or FLAG 3 FbxwD under the control of the ecmA promoter to direct expression in this cell type. Expression was confirmed in slugs. The FLAG 3 FbxwD oe strain produced fruiting bodies, but its sori contained immature pre-spore cells that lacked the elongated shape and cellulose staining of mature spores. Furthermore, the stalks were enlarged and lacked the regular cylindrical structure. In comparison, cotB :: FLAG 3 FbxwD oe cells exhibited a disruption of terminal morphogenesis, as well as a block of terminal spore differentiation as previously reported. These results suggest that FbxwD activity level in prestalk cells is critical for orderly terminal differentiation of both stalk and spore cells, and that ectopic expression in prespore cells was even more disruptive. FIGURE 4 Effects of native and mutant FbxwD on development. Cells overexpressing native FLAG 3 FbxwD or its F-box-mutant isoform under the cotB or ecmA promotors were developed on filters and imaged at their terminal state of development. Representative... In contrast, the ecmA ::FLAG 3 FbxwD mutant expressing cells, which expressed the protein at a similar or higher level than observed for native ecmA ::FLAG 3 FbxwD, showed no observable effect on morphogenesis, and evidence for mild inhibition of terminal spore differentiation was statistically insignificant. Also, the cotB ::FLAG 3 FbxwD expressing cells differentiated normally with only a minor sporulation deficit that was also not statistically significant, as previously reported. To probe the role of the RING-like domain, its sequence was aligned with a list of the most similar sequences available in GenBank. Three sets of point mutations were chosen based on positions that are conserved with related sequences. The V9A and PF41/42AA substitutions were designed to abrogate the protein-protein contact function of the RING, based on an X-ray crystal structure of a complex of the RING domain of the murine Cbl E3 Ub ligase with an E2 protein, and the CH22/24AA mutation was expected to be more disruptive by eliminating Zn +2 -binding. Cells expressing these FbxwD-RING mutants under control of the ecmA promoter were confirmed to express the mutant protein in slugs by Western blotting. In preliminary studies, the interactome of all three overexpressed mutants still included Skp1 and Vwa1. As for native FbxwD, overexpression did not affect Vwa1 expression levels. Overexpression of either of the three RING mutants in prestalk cells failed to obviously affect morphogenesis, despite their equal or higher expression levels compared to overexpressed native FLAG 3 FbxwD. Spore production was not statistically significantly inhibited. Given the likely roles of the F-box, RING and WD40-repeat domains in Ub-mediated protein degradation, these findings implicate FbxwD in selective regulation of protein turnover critical for morphogenesis. Vwa1 contributes to development To examine the role of Vwa1 in development, a strain from a genome-wide screen that was reported to have an insertion at codon-15 of its vwa1 ORF, was analyzed. This strain, referred to as Vwa1-N2, was sporulation-negative. However, this defect was not rescued by complementation of the gene under either the ecmA or cotB promoter, despite confirmation of expression by Western blotting with pAb UOK161. In comparison, the aforementioned Vwa1-N1 strain, which contains an interruption within the VIT domain of its Vwa1 and is a potential null, appeared to develop normally. Since it is unlikely that a residual N-terminal fragment, which was not detected by Western blotting with anti-FLAG mAb M2, would fold into an active domain, we speculate that the GWDI clone possesses additional genetic changes. FIGURE 5 Dominant negative effects of constitutive expression of Vwa1 domains. Domain diagram of Vwa1 and its FLAG 3 -tagged constructs, expressed under control of the semi-constitutive discoidin 1γ promoter. Vwa1 and Vwa1 fragment expression... The Vwa1 sequence includes a central region predicted to fold into a PFAM vWFA-like Rossman fold, which is found in a wide variety of proteins. The region N-terminal to the predicted vWFA-like domain includes the PFAM VIT region, and C-terminal to the vWFA region lies a less conserved stretch that includes a well conserved CTD sequence. The schematic diagrams of Figure 5A include subregions that are more fully analyzed below. We reasoned that these N-, middle- and C-terminal domains might fold into separate domains that might have separate functions that could be probed by their independent overexpression. Based on information available at the time, the VIT, vWFA, and C-terminal sequences were separately over-expressed with N-terminal FLAG 3 -tags under control of the semi-constitutive discoidin 1γ promoter. The VIT and C-T regions expressed robustly but the vWFA domain expressed at a lower level similar to that of the full-length construct. The truncated constructs were immunoprecipitated as for full length Vwa1. No statistically significant interactors were detected for the VIT or vWFA fragments in vegetative and aggregation stage cells. The C-terminal Vwa1 fragment co-IPed several heat-shock proteins suggesting partial misfolding. These data indicate that the full-length of Vwa1 is necessary to bind to FbxwD and other SCF proteins. Full-length Vwa1 over-expression under control of the discoidin 1γ promoter had no significant effect on the timing or morphology of development on filters. VIT overexpression also did not obviously affect morphogenesis, but did result in an 80% reduction in spore differentiation. Closer inspection of fruiting bodies formed in plaques after consumption of bacteria on nutrient agar surfaces revealed a range of fruiting body morphologies with bloated stalks, predominantly immature prespore cells, and spherical rather than oblong spores. More dramatically, the vWFA- and C-T overexpressors were not only initially delayed relative to parental cells during development, but they failed to develop beyond the tight aggregate stage. A similar block occurred in cleared areas of bacterial plates. To address whether gene expression was similarly blocked, extracts were probed by Western blotting with mAb 83.5, which recognizes a fucose-dependent epitope on several spore coat protein precursors, including SP96 and SP75, that are biomarkers for prespore cell differentiation. All strains expressed similar levels of these prespore markers at 10–12 h, indicating molecular progression of this aspect of the prespore development program. In contrast, these overexpression constructs had no apparent effect on growth rate of cells in axenic media. To determine if these trans-dominant negative phenotypes were dependent on full-length Vwa1, the 3 domain constructs were expressed in the Vwa1-N1 strain. Strikingly, development was normal in these strains, despite the higher or similar levels of expression of the vWFA and C-T fragments. However, the VIT domain was expressed at a much lower level, which could explain why it did not inhibit sporulation. To further explore a functional interaction between FbxwD and Vwa1, the ecmA ::FbxwD construct was transfected into Vwa1-N1 cells. Unlike its effect in normal cells, overexpression of FbxwD, as documented by Western blotting, failed to inhibit terminal spore differentiation. Thus, the detrimental effects of both FbxwD overexpression and overexpression of Vwa1 fragments depend on the presence of endogenous full-length Vwa1, even though Vwa1 itself is dispensable for development. In an effort to detect a possible direct interaction between FbxwD and Vwa1 or Vwa2, expression of FbxwD cDNA sequences optimized for expression in E. coli was attempted. However, FbxwD was found only in inclusion bodies, as frequently occurs for FBPs. Similar results when co-expressed with Skp1, or for constructs N-terminally deleted of the RING domain or of the C-terminal WD40-repeat domain. Evolution of VIT/vWFA containing proteins Homologs of Vwa1 are present throughout eukaryotic phylogeny. The recent crystal structure of an N- and C-terminally truncated recombinant version of the heavy chain of human ITIH1, a secretory protein that is associated with chondroitin sulfate and hyaluronate during inflammation of mammalian tissues, describes how the sequence is organized into a series of interacting domains, as illustrated in Figure 7A. In HsITIH1, the region that includes the PFAM-defined VIT domain belongs to a larger β-sheet sandwich, and also includes a β-strand from a C-terminal region of the protein referred to as VITpt2, The previously annotated PFAM-vWFA domain is inserted within an integrin-associated domain referred to as hybrid-1, with its N-terminal and C-terminal parts referred to as Hyb-1a and Hyb-1b. Downstream of the Hyb-1b is a triple α-helix bundle that connects to VITpt2. Despite only 16% sequence identity and 35% sequence similarity between these regions of DdVwa1 and HsITIH1, AlphaFold-2 predicts a homologous structural organization of DdVwa1 with some local differences. A greater sequence similarity is observed with HsVWA5a, which like DdVwa1 is an intracellular protein that is therefore more likely to have related functions: 26% sequence identity and 43% similarity. Furthermore, HsVWA5a has a C-terminal region of 101 amino acids that is homologous with a corresponding sequence at the C-terminus of DdVwa1 that is absent from HsITIH1 based both on sequence and AlphaFold predictions. Inclusion of this region together with that of DdVwa1 yields an almost identical sequence identity of 24% and similarity of 42%, indicating similar conservation of this region. FIGURE 7 Models for DdVwa1 structure, autoinhibition, and functional interaction with FbxwD. Crystal structure of amino acids 35–672 of HsITIH1, and AlphaFold structure of DdVwa1 are shown as cartoons. The disordered loop connecting... The D. discoideum genome harbors 6 additional genes with this sequence organization, each predicted to be intracellular. To assess the evolutionary conservation of the 7 Dictyostelium predicted proteins, the vWFA sequence of Vwa1 was used to seed a BLASTp search for similar sequences with Expect values < 0.05. The most similar sequences also contained an upstream VIT region, and the vWFA domain was flanked by Hyb-1a- and Hyb-1b-like sequences. The C-terminal region was more heterogeneous, but a stretch corresponding to the 3xαhelix and VITpt2 regions could be recognized. Many but not all also possessed a CTD-like sequence at the very C-terminus. A preliminary analysis of the evolution of vWFA-like sequences that included a broad range of representatives from throughout eukaryotes, including protist, fungi, plants and animals, using a maximum likelihood method, indicated that VIT-like domains are associated with a monophyletic subset of vWFA domains, as previously suggested using the narrower set of sequences available in 2002. In addition, an independent BLASTp-based search of VIT-like sequences did not reveal any that lacked an associated vWFA-like sequence. Though separate evolutionary analyses of the VIT- and vWFA-like sequences resolved subgroups of proteins, their evolutionary relationships were ambiguous owing to weak bootstrap values. Thus an alignment of the overall VIT-Hyb1a-vWFA-Hyb1b region, absent the less conserved 3xαhelix and VITpt2 regions which were difficult to align, was subjected to evolutionary analysis as shown in the unrooted tree in Figure 6. FIGURE 6 Evolution of Vwa1-like proteins. An alignment of the VIT, Hyb-1a, vWFA and Hyb-1b region amino acid sequences of representative Vwa1-like proteins from throughout phylogeny was subjected to an evolutionary analysis... The sequences grouped into 4 major clades. Clades A1 and A2 are most similar to one another and thus referred to as ITIH like owing to HsITIH1 in clade A2. Interestingly, plant and moss sequences reside in Clade A1 and are likely intracellular proteins, whereas animal sequences reside in Clade A2 and are extracellular. The combination of Clades B1 and B2 approximates a phylogenetic continuum of related, all intracellular proteins, with bacteria and select protists represented in Clade B1 and other protists, amoebozoa, fungi and animals represented in Clade B2. Emanating from this continuum is Clade C, which comprise a group of animal extracellular proteins, and Clade D, the family of intracellular poly-ADP ribosyl transferases found in amorpheae. The D. discoideum Vwa1-5 homologs are more similar to one another than to the separate homologs in other organisms, suggesting lineage specific amplification. A possible scenario that is consistent with this tree is that a homolog was present in the last eukaryotic ancestor, and a gene duplication allowed for diversification of the ITIH- and Vwa-like sequences. The ITIH sequences were perhaps primordial because, in a separate evolutionary analysis, their vWFA sequences were more similar to vWFA sequences from proteins lacking a VIT domain that probably existed before the group analyzed here acquired the VIT and other domains. However, this interpretation would require a loss of ITIH sequences in protists. Continuing this scenario, a gene duplication in the B-lineage prior to separation of amorpheae allowed for the addition of a PARP domain, and a second later gene duplication allowed for the independent appearance of Vwa5B-like proteins in the extracellular space of animals. However, the relatively weak bootstrap values at critical nodes allow for other histories as well. In any case, proteins of the primary intracellular lineage persist to this day in many protist groups, algae, plants, fungi, and animals, and can be predicted to share functions. According to our analysis, DdVwa1 is arguably orthologous to HsVWA5A, and all 5 D. discoideum paralogs resulted from lineage specific gene amplifications. Discussion Vwa1 is a highly conserved intracellular multi-domain protein that is broadly expressed across eukaryotes, but whose cellular functions are poorly understood. The findings here implicate a role for Vwa1 in regulating the function of FbxwD, a canonical F-box protein that presumably serves as a substrate receptor in an SCF Ub ligase but also, as suggested by its RING domain, may have a second function possibly in another Ub ligase. The initial clue for this role was the consistent presence of Vwa1 in the interactome of FbxwD, even for mutants of FbxwD that do not bind Skp1, and FbxwD in the interactome of Vwa1 as detected by proteomics analyses of Vwa1 co-IPs. In addition, Vwa1 was an abundant interactor in co-IPs of CulE, and CulE was found in Vwa1 co-IPs, indicating that Vwa1 was associated with SCF complexes themselves and implicating a role in protein polyubiquitination and degradation. Similar findings are shown here for the paralog Vwa2, and evidence exists for involvement of Vwa3 with FbxwD as well. Although we do not exclude the possibility that Vwa1 and paralogs are FbxwD substrates, this does not appear to be a primary relationship owing to no observed effects on Vwa1 abundance when FbxwD was overexpressed, or when cells were treated with proteasome inhibitors. Dictyostelium amoebae undergo a complex developmental program when deprived of nutrients, ultimately forming a multicellular fruiting body consisting of thousands of spores perched on top of a cellular stalk. The sophisticated morphogenetic movements and multiple cell differentiation pathways provide many useful readouts that can help detect and understand the roles of proteins. Although Vwa1 was found to be dispensable for development, assuming that the Vwa1-N1 strain is a Vwa1 null, expression of its component domains revealed critical involvement in the transition from tight aggregate to the slug stage on through terminal morphogenesis and spore differentiation. When the middle vWFA domain, or the complete C-terminal region downstream from the vWFA domain, were constitutively expressed, development was blocked at the tight aggregate stage which correlates with an uptick in Vwa1 expression. However, the prespore cell differentiation program was not blocked based on the expression of SP75 and SP96. Similar overexpression of the VIT domain allowed progression to form fruiting bodies, but the stalks cells were disorganized, and prespore cells were markedly reduced in their ability to differentiate into mature spores based on morphology and failure to deposit cellulose into their walls. Remarkably, the vWFA and C-terminal fragment expression constructs were inactive when expressed in Vwa1-N1 cells, and so was the VIT domain with the caveat that it did not express well in our analysis. Evidence from other proteins implicates specialized roles for discrete Vwa1 domains. Variants of the vWFA domain in other proteins are thought to mediate protein-protein interactions, such as targeting a kinase to its protein substrate. The serine and aspartate residues of the Mg 2+ coordinating metal ion-dependent adhesion site motif in HsITIH1 are conserved in DdVwa1 and Vwa2, raising the possibility that they too function in homo- or hetero-interactions. HsCLCA1 is an example of a vWFA protein that uses its MIDAS to bind to a specific ligand. In addition, studies on HsITIH1 indicate that it homodimerizes in a metal-dependent manner involving its MIDAS. HsITIH1’s hybrid domain binds the integrin substrate vitronectin a MIDAS independent manner. Similarly, the VIT domains of other proteins mediate specific interactions. In its natural context the C-terminus of HsITIH1 and paralogs are covalently attached to extracellular matrix glycosaminoglycans, but this is itself likely irrelevant to DdVwa1. Thus if DdVwa1 is interpreted to similarly serve as a binding hub connecting multiple proteins together, then selective disruption of one of these interactions while leaving the other intact might be more disruptive than the absence of Vwa1 itself, especially if the Vwa2 or other paralogs might substitute. There is adequate precedent for trans-dominant negative effects of protein fragments for other proteins. Indeed, a recent report showed that expression of the truncated VIT domain of HsITIH5 suppressed tumor growth. Though we have not obtained evidence for a stable stoichiometric complex, the interactions may be transient or become so upon extract preparation, or Vwa1 may be transiently post-translationally modified. Though FbxwD lacks a canonical RGD motif or any of the functional derivatives expected to interface with the MIDAS ion, some MIDAS domains exhibit more promiscuous binding by coordinating with an aspartic or glutamic acid on the ligand protein. Interestingly, biophysical studies have also shown that in integrins, ligand binding allosterically affects the conformation and binding affinity of the MIDAS subregion of its vWFA/hybrid domain. Thus individual domains might also modulate with allosteric regulation. Other possible mechanisms involve perturbation of intramolecular interactions. An interesting mechanism is suggested by modeling of full-length DdVwa1 using AlphaFold2.2. The CTD sequence is linked via long disordered loop and predicted to fold as an α-helical bundle that binds to the vWFA domain, as represented by the structure prediction in Figure 7B. The interface consists of about 905 A 2 of solvent inaccessible surface area separate from the MIDAS region, and includes seven predicted hydrogen bonds or ionic interactions. This interface appears to be highly conserved, as it is also observed in HsVWA5A, despite its limited sequence homology. This finding is reminiscent of findings in other proteins where interdomain contacts mediate auto-inhibition through domain masking. Intriguingly, the non-homologous C-terminal of HsITIH1 must be cleaved prior to covalent linkage to hyaluronate. Based on these findings and precedents, we suggest that the DdVwa1 fragments expressed in this study compete with specific molecular interactions of Vwa1 and that, since their effects depend on the presence of Vwa1, they act via a binding mechanism that directly or allosterically perturbs homodimerization, or autoinhibition or autoactivation by the CTD. FbxwD is a high-ranking target for Vwa1 action. Both proteins are highly expressed at the transcriptional level in vegetative cells and decline approximately in parallel during development except for a plateau or peak around the tipped aggregate stage. FbxwD exhibits a strong preference for expression in prestalk cells of the slug, where it has the potential to control terminal differentiation owing to the organizing potential of cells in this group. Vwa1 appears to be more evenly distributed between cell types, so may have other functions in prespore cells. Since FbxwD has not been successfully deleted using several targeting approaches, overexpression was tested to probe its functions. Overexpression in either prestalk or prespore cells strongly interferes with spore differentiation, and ectopic prespore cell expression further interferes with terminal morphogenesis. These effects are reminiscent of effects of VIT-domain overexpression, and do not exclude an effect earlier in development before induction of the cell type specific prespore and prestalk cell promoters tested. Each of these effects depends on the F-box and RING domains as interpreted from effects of their inactivating point mutations. RING domains frequently directly bind Ub-charged E2 proteins in a manner that facilitates transfer of their Ub to a substrate bound to the RING-domain protein. In comparison, the F-box domain indirectly binds to the Rbx1 RING-domain via a cullin to activate its own Ub-E2. This duality suggests the possibility of two Ub ligase activities in FbxwD. There are examples of FBPs that depend on protein co-factors for substrate selection. As precedent for this case, human Emi1/Fbx05 possesses a RING-like Zn-finger domain which has been implicated in controlling the rate of polyubiquitination via the F-box domain. The dependence of inhibition by FbxwD overexpression on both its RING and F-box domains, at least within the sensitivity of our assay, suggests that they act synergistically rather than independently. Strikingly, the negative effect of overexpression in prestalk cells depends on the presence of Vwa1, providing functional evidence for the significance of a direct or indirect physical interaction as detected by co-IPs. The non-essentiality of Vwa1 contrasts with the possible necessity of FbxwD which leads to the hypothesis that Vwa1 primarily acts via modulation of FbxwD. This mechanism must allow for normal FbxwD activity in the absence of Vwa1 but abnormal activity in the presence of Vwa1 whose function is perturbed by the domain constructs. We suggest that the Vwa1 fragments generate an overactive positive activity or underactive inhibitory activity that balances an unknown opposite regulatory effect on FbxwD, as frequently occurs during developmental or physiological regulation. A model for how this might be coupled to developmental regulation is schematized in Figure 7E. In this scheme, an unknown activating Signal B and an inhibitory FbxwD/Vwa1 module are hypothesized to exert opposing influences on Signal A, which authorizes a given developmental transition. Overexpression of FbxwD forces a stronger inhibitory effect, whereas loss of Vwa1, whose role is natively autoinhibited, has a minimal effect. The minor increase of spore numbers in Vwa1-N1 is consistent with leaky autoinhibition of native Vwa1. However, release from autoinhibition as exerted by overexpression of Vwa1 fragments, which disrupt intramolecular domain interactions or possibly homodimerization that mediate autoinhibition, activates the module also inhibiting Signal A. However, the fragments have no effect in the absence of Vwa1. Reduced inhibition owing to the monotonic decline of FbxwD and Vwa1 levels during development allows for developmental progression, but remaining levels are sufficient for implied roles in protein turnover. Interestingly, FbxwD was inhibitory when overexpressed in either prestalk or prespore cells, by interfering with the terminal differentiation of both stalk and spore cells. This is not surprising given the inter-coordination of these two processes during fruiting body formation. It is expected that selective protein turnover would be required to coordinate the numerous parallel processes required for terminal differentiation. HsVWA5/BCSC-1, which sequence alignments suggest is orthologous to Vwa1, is tumor suppressing and schizophrenia-associated as summarized above. Interestingly, VWA5A has been noted to interact with the SPRY domain containing protein SPSB1, a SOCS-box containing substrate receptor that is analogous to FBPs in a related class of E3 Cullin-Ring-ligases. This and DdVwa1’s physical and functional interactions with DdFbxwD as reported here reinforce the proposed model for this class of proteins in protein degradation. 