 The Dictyostelium discoideum dye-decolorizing peroxidase is a newly discovered peroxidase, which belongs to a unique class of heme peroxidase family that lacks homology to the known members of plant peroxidase superfamily. Dd DyP catalyzes the H 2 O 2 -dependent oxidation of a wide-spectrum of substrates ranging from polycyclic dyes to lignin biomass, holding promise for potential industrial and biotechnological applications. To study the molecular mechanism of Dd DyP, highly pure and functional protein with a natively incorporated heme is required, however, obtaining a functional DyP-type peroxidase with a natively bound heme is challenging and often requires addition of expensive biosynthesis precursors. Alternatively, a heme in vitro reconstitution approach followed by a chromatographic purification step to remove the excess heme is often used. Here, we show that expressing the Dd DyP peroxidase in ×2 YT enriched medium at low temperature, without adding heme supplement or biosynthetic precursors, allows for a correct native incorporation of heme into the apo-protein, giving rise to a stable protein with a strong Soret peak at 402 nm. Further, we crystallized and determined the native structure of Dd DyP at a resolution of 1.95 Å, which verifies the correct heme binding and its geometry. The structural analysis also reveals a binding of two water molecules at the distal site of heme plane bridging the catalytic residues of the GXXDG motif to the heme-Fe via hydrogen bonds. Our results provide new insights into the geometry of native Dd DyP active site and its implication on DyP catalysis. Keywords: biocatalysis, dye-decolorizing peroxidases, heme incorporation, lignin degradation, polycyclic dyes, structural enzymology, redox catalysis 1 Introduction The Dictyostelium discoideum dye-decolorizing peroxidase is a newly discovered heme peroxidase. Dd DyP belongs to a new class of DyP-type peroxidases, which is different from any other known peroxidases. This unique peroxidase family has been shown to perform both H 2 O 2 -dependent oxidation and hydrolytic functions against a wide-spectrum of substrates, ranging from polycyclic dyes, phenolic compounds, sulfides, carotenoids and interestingly lignin biomass, making it a potential candidate for industrial and biotechnological applications including its possible application as bioenergy catalysts as well as biosurfactants in the biodegradation and biotransformation of emerging environmental contaminants. This broad substrate specificity is attributed to their unique sequence identity and structural properties. Dd DyP, as other peroxidases, has been found to function in a wide range of pH milieu displaying higher activity at acidic pH with optimal turnover at pH 4.0 and temperatures ranging from 20°C to 40°C. It shows optimal activity at pH 3.0 against the known DyP-type peroxidase substrate—the anthraquinone-based dye RB4. DyP-type peroxidases share a typical catalytic mechanism with other peroxidases, in which they depend on the H 2 O 2 in their oxidative catalytic function as illustrated in Figure 1. The resting state of the enzyme proceeds into compound I intermediate state upon interaction of the heme-Fe with hydrogen peroxide, an oxidizing substrate, forming an oxoferryl porphyrin π -cationic radical complex + —a porphyrinoid based radical. The release of an electron from compound I leads to the formation of compound II + intermediate upon reaction with a reducing substrate giving rise to a radical product, in turn compound II relaxes into the resting state when it reacts with more substrates. The radical product can then be transformed into various sub-products through a non-enzymatic radical coupling. The redox potential of the DyP-type peroxidases, ranging from −50 mV to +250 mV, and that of the substrate determines the feasibility of enzyme catalysis. Generally, a typical DyP-peroxidase catalysis involves several redox couplings, namely, Fe 3+ /Fe 2+, compound I/Fe 3+, compound II/compound I and compound II/Fe 3+. DyP peroxidases also mediate the hydrolysis of substrates such as anthraquinone dyes, implying that the DyP-type peroxidases are bifunctional enzymes. However, the exact mechanism for DyP-type peroxidases and how they perform oxidation and hydrolysis for such a wide range of substrates of different chemical properties remain unclear. FIGURE 1 A typical enzymatic cycle of DyP-type peroxidases showing the interconversion between the resting state, compound I heme oxoferryl species + ; and compound II intermediate state,... Despite the importance of the DyP-type peroxidases as mentioned above, their heterologous expression in Escherichia coli and other expression systems remain challenging as is the case for other heme proteins. It hampers, for instance, the large-scale mechanistic investigation owing to the difficulties associated with the biosynthesis and availability of heme b, thereby limiting its native incorporation into the apo-proteins. It was previously shown that in vitro reconstitution is needed for obtaining functional Dd DyP with the correct heme stoichiometry. This is an inherently time-consuming process and may result in excess heme and unspecific binding or altering the protein function, making it limited to robust proteins only. Alternatively, heme and iron supplements or heme biosynthetic precursors such as δ -aminolevulinic acid can be used during expression, however this is a highly expensive approach as large amounts of such supplements are needed. Here, we report on the use of E. coli OverExpress C43 strain for the expression and production of the Dd DyP peroxidase without heme supplement nor its precursor δ -ALA, yielding a stable monomeric enzyme with a natively incorporated heme that displays a Rheinheitszahl of ∼1.0 similar to that of the peroxidase-cyclooxygenase superfamily 6 of the D. discoideum, the secreted heme peroxidase Dd PoxA, which was prepared by adding hemin supplement during expression. Furthermore, using X-ray structural analyses, we describe the crystal structure of native Dd DyP peroxidase bound to a natively incorporated heme and demonstrate that the geometry of the heme binding pocket resembles in much detail that of a previously reported cyanide native Dd DyP structure, which was prepared following in vitro heme reconstitution approach. Our native Dd DyP also displays an interesting similarity to the recently identified secreted heme peroxidase A, which shares only ∼21% sequence identity to that of the Dd DyP. In both structures the sixth coordination of the heme molecule is provided by a water molecule with ∼3.0 Å and 2.79 Å for the Dd PoxA and the Dd DyP, respectively. The native Dd DyP also reveals some UV-visible spectral similarities to that of the Dd PoxA in the Q -band and electron transfer region, whereas the maximum Soret peak of the native Dd DyP is blue-shifted by Δλ = 14 nm displaying a peak absorbance at 402 nm in comparison with the Dd PoxA. 2 Materials and methods 2.1 Overexpression and purification of Dd DyP with natively incorporated heme The gene sequence encoding dye-decolorizing peroxidase from the slime mold D. discoideum AX4 was codon optimized for Escherichia coli, synthesized and subcloned into the Bam HI/ Xho I cloning site in a pGEX-6P1 vector harboring a Human Rhinovirus 3C excision site and a glutathione transferase tag at the N-terminal region. The pGEX-6P1- Dd DyP construct was transformed into an OverExpress E. coli C43, a chemically competent strain. For purification, a single colony from a freshly streaked plate was inoculated into a Luria-Bertani or ×2 yeast extract-tryptone enriched media containing 100 μg mL −1 final concentration of ampicillin and incubated at 37°C ± 1.0°C for overnight. A starter culture was used to inoculate 6 × 1 L of LB or ×2 YT containing 100 μg mL −1 ampicillin and incubated at 37°C ± 1.0°C or lower temperatures until the optical density reaches 1.0–1.25 before inducing the expression of Dd DyP with 1.0 mM of isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside. The culture was then incubated for additional 7 or 20 h for expression at 37 ± 1.0 and 20°C ± 1.0°C, respectively. The cells were harvested by centrifugation with ×13,881 g for 30 min on an F9-6-×1000 LEX rotor at 4°C and pellets were stored at −80°C until used. For protein purification, frozen cells were thawed using warm tab water and diluted with ×3–5 of lysis buffer containing 0.05 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and 0.15 M NaCl supplemented with 1.0 mM final concentration of phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride protease inhibitor or a tablet of EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail. The cells were lysed with 35 cycles of sonication at 4°C on ice using 50% amplitude and 25 s sonication pulse with 1.5 min interval. Lysate was clarified with centrifugation at ×52,400 g at 4°C for 45 min and the supernatant was filtered with a 0.45 µm syringe filter and mixed with 5–10 mL glutathione sepharose high-performance resin pre-equilibrated with lysis buffer, followed by incubation at 4°C with gentle rotation for 3 h. The mixture was loaded into an empty gravity column and the GST-tagged Dd DyP was eluted with ×5 column volume of an elution buffer containing 0.05 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.15 M NaCl and 15–20 mM L-Glutathione. The GST tag was then removed using HRV 3C protease with 1:20 enzyme to protein ratio at 4°C for overnight followed by passing the mixture through a glutathione sepharose column pre-equilibrated with lysis buffer. Purified protein was characterized with SDS-PAGE and UV-visible spectrophotometry. For crystallization the protein was further purified with gel-filtration using Superdex 75 10/300 Increase column. Purified protein was concentrated to 20–30 mg mL −1 in lysis buffer and stored at −80°C until further use. Overexpression, purification and crystallization were carried out at the XBI BioLab of the European XFEL facility. 2.2 Heme reconstitution A control heme reconstitution experiment was conducted as described previously. In brief, purified apo- Dd DyP from LB expression was mixed with hemin chloride with ∼1:2 M ratio in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.0 and 150 mM NaCl, followed by incubation on ice for 30 min. The heme reconstituted holo- Dd DyP protein was then passed through a PD-10 desalting column to remove the excess hemin chloride. 2.3 UV-visible spectrophotometry All spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu UV-2700 PC spectrophotometer using a cuvette with 1.0 cm pathlength in a range of 200–700 nm at room temperature. For measurements purified Dd DyP was diluted with lysis buffer to a concentration of 0.4 mg mL −1 and the lysis buffer was used as a reference. All spectra were processed using the Origin software 2022b. 2.4 Crystallization screening and crystal optimization of Dd DyP Crystallization screening was performed using a NT8 Formulatrix robot. Hit was obtained from the C12 condition of the PACT++ crystallization screen with 10 mg mL −1 of purified Dd DyP. This condition was further optimized to 15% PEG 6000, 0.1 M HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.0, and 0.01 M ZnCl 2 crystallized with 15 mg mL −1 final concentration of purified Dd DyP, which gave rise to a maximum crystal size of 200 μm × 100 μm × 25 μm at 20°C ± 1.0°C in 4–6 weeks. Crystals were harvested directly from the drops using nylon loops and flash-cooled in liquid nitrogen. 2.5 X-ray diffraction data collection, processing and structure determination X-ray diffraction datasets were collected at the P11/PETRA III beamline at DESY using a flat focus with 20 × 20 μm 2 beam area at the sample position, 12.0 keV photon energy, and a photon flux of ∼2 × 10 10 photon sec −1 and an exposure time of 100 ms for a total wedge of 360° with 0.1° oscillation recording step on EIGER 16M detector. Data collection was performed at cryogenic temperature, 100 K. Diffraction datasets were processed using the program XDS, and scaled with XSCALE in the XDS graphic user interface. The initial phase was obtained by molecular replacement using the Dd DyP peroxidase active structure as a reference model with the program Phaser in the phenix software. The model was then refined in phenix and manually corrected in coot. Radiation dose was estimated using the program RADDOSE-3D as described previously using the abovementioned parameters. For channel and cavity calculations MOLEontile tool was used with the coordinate obtained from the final cycle of refinement as a template. The interfaces of heme b and the oligomeric states analysis of Dd DyP were calculated using PISA server. 3 Results and discussion 3.1 Heterologous expression and characterization of Dd DyP For heterologous expression, a Dd DyP peroxidase gene was cloned into a pGEX-6P1 vector which has an HVR 3C excision site and a GST-tag in its N-terminal region as reported previously, however, we used the OverExpress E. coli C43 strain instead of BL21-derived Rosetta strain for overexpression and purification of Dd DyP. Note that both strains were derived from BL21. Dd DyP was expressed at high and low temperature in LB and ×2 YT medium with different yields, ranging from 2.1 to 14.1 mg of protein in average per 25 g of cells, respectively. Figures 2A, B shows the SDS-PAGE analyses of the typical expression and purification of Dd DyP in E. coli C43 strain. Protein expressed at 37°C ± 1.0°C, however, has transparent to pale brownish colour, whereas those of 20°C ± 1.0°C exhibited a darker brownish colour. The proteins purified from high and low temperature have a reasonable purity with less aggregation with ∼35 kDa molecular weight as confirmed by the SDS-PAGE analysis. However, no crystallization hit was obtained from these conditions despite several attempts with various crystallization screens. Since that our purified Dd DyP has sufficient purity for crystallization, yet we did not successfully crystallize it, we concluded that the instability of the protein during expression at 37°C ± 1.0°C may be the cause for the unsuccessful crystallization. This is likely due to the improper protein folding, and thus lowering the temperature of the expression may be one method for achieving a stable and correctly folded protein. Indeed, when we expressed Dd DyP at 20°C ± 1.0°C, it gave rise to a darker brownish protein, a typical heme peroxidase colour of a native protein, especially when expressed in a ×2 YT enriched medium, which is richer than LB. Intriguingly, Dd DyP expressed in ×2 YT at lower temperature was the only condition that resulted in a successful crystallization yielding dark brownish crystals, an indication that heme b is preserved during purification and crystallization. The ×2 YT also yielded several times higher amount of protein than that obtained in LB. TABLE 1 Characterization of the native heme incorporation into Dd DyP expressed in E. coli C43 at different conditions, the protein yield and crystallization trials. FIGURE 2 Purification, characterization, and crystallization of Dd DyP. An SDS-PAGE showing the glutathione sepharose affinity purification. Lane M, protein marker; FT lane, flow-through of the unbound proteins from the lysate; W-1 lane, step 1 washing of the... To examine the quality of the electronic absorbance of purified Dd DyP we used a UV-visible spectrophotometer. Figures 3A–D shows the spectral analysis of the purified Dd DyP protein from different conditions. Dd DyP shows weak absorbance Soret peak at λ = 405 nm and a Reinheitszahl value of ∼0.27 when expressed in LB at 37°C ± 1.0°C. This R Z value is about 2 times higher than that obtained previously on peroxidases that were expressed using BL21 strain. As shown in Table 1, we observed that the R Z value increases ×2–3 times to reach ∼0.93 with λ = 402 nm of the Soret peak when expressing Dd DyP in enriched ×2 YT medium at low temperature, indicating a heme occupancy of 90%–95% which is comparable to that of the secreted heme peroxidase. This value is comparable to our heme reconstitution reference and significantly higher than those previously reported, when DyP-peroxidases were expressed without adding heme supplements or δ -ALA during expression. Heme biosynthesis in E. coli relies on an L-glutamate, glycine, succinyl-CoA and other nitrogenous biochemicals which are abundant in both tryptone and yeast extracts—major components in ×2 YT and LB medium. The ×2 YT medium has a double amount of tryptone and yeast extracts comparing to LB medium. The L-glutamate, which is a key substrate in the heme biosynthesis substrate δ -ALA in E. coli, is ∼3.5 times higher than in LB. Importantly, the ×2 YT medium has higher concentrations of accessible Fe 2+ and Mg 2+ which are required for the ferrochelatase and δ-aminolevulinic dehydratase synthase), respectively. Both enzymes are key to the biosynthesis of heme from L-glutamate in E. coli. This might indicate a higher level of heme biosynthesis, and thus its native incorporation into Dd DyP, in ×2 YT than that in LB. The heme reconstituted Dd DyP from LB expression shows a Soret absorbance at 406 nm and an electron transfer at λ = 497 nm plus two additional ET bands at 536 nm and 576 nm as well as a charge transfer component at 636 nm, preserving some bacterial peroxidase features. This region differs significantly from that previously reported in Dd DyP, which showed an ET and CT band at 506 nm and 636 nm, respectively. Interestingly, our purified Dd DyP displays similar features in the Q -band and ET regions to those of the secreted Dd PoxA heme peroxidase. We also observed that the Dd DyP with a natively incorporated heme has a broad ET peak with λ max = 508 nm, which is slightly red shifted with Δ λ = 9 nm and Δ λ = 2 nm, comparing to that of the ET bands of the reference and a previous work, respectively. The Q -band region also reveals a unique shoulder at the ET band with 567 nm absorbance. FIGURE 3 UV-visible electronic absorbance of Dd DyP of different overexpression conditions. a typical spectrum of a purified Dd DyP when expressed in LB medium at 37°C, Dy DyP electronic spectra when expressed at 20°C in LB and ×2... 3.2 Native structure of Dd DyP peroxidase and its comparison with the cyanide native structure Several Dd DyP structures have been resolved so far including a single native structure that is in complex with cyanide, however there is no available structure that describes the native resting state. Here, to get insight into the heme binding pocket in its native form, we crystallized the native Dd DyP peroxidase bound to a natively incorporated heme and compared it with that resolved in complex with cyanide. A single crystal with a size of 150 × 80 × 30 μm 3 size was used for diffraction data collection. The crystal data collection and refinement statistics are shown in Table 2. Native Dd DyP peroxidase is crystallized in a tetragonal space group P 4 1 2 1 2 similar to previously reported structures, with exception that the X-ray data of the current crystal condition can be equally processed and resolved in an additional space group. Moreover, the crystal unit cell exhibited significantly shorter axes, giving rise to about 35% smaller cell volume with 52.8% solvent content and 2.62 Å 3 Da −1 of Matthew’s coefficient, indicating the presence of a single molecule per asymmetric unit. The solvent content is decreased by ∼20% comparing to that previously reported. This is more likely due to a relatively high concentration of the dehydrating precipitant, as previously reported in other systems. Such high PEG concentration causes a shrinking in the protein crystals by mechanism of dehydration which shortens the axes and leads to a tightly packed unit cell. The average radiation dose on a single crystal was estimated with RADDOSE-3D to be ∼0.58 MGy which lies well below the 20 MGy dose limit suggested by Henderson or the 30 MGy suggested by Owen and Garman, indicating that the structure is less affected by radiation damage. TABLE 2 X-ray diffraction data collection and crystallography refinement statistics. The overall architecture of Dd DyP is similar to that of the typical DyP-type peroxidase superfamily. Dd DyP contains a duplicated ferredoxin-like fold domain arranged as a β -barrel at the N- and C-terminals of the protein. It contains 12 β -sheets and 13 α -helices formed by 185 residues of the full chain, and the remaining 121 residues involved in the formation of loop structures that link these secondary structures. Similar to all other known DyP-type peroxidases, Dd DyP contains α -helices with a unique β-sheet structure at the distal region of the heme plane. We determined the root mean square deviation between the C α of the present structure with that resolved in complex with cyanide to be 0.18 Å, indicating the striking similarity between the two structures. Our PISA analysis predicted a stable dimer of Dd DyP in solution with 33 residues contributing to the dimer interface, similar to previously reported Dd DyP structures. These interfacial residues are distributed along the dimer interface from the N- to the C-terminal region. The dimeric structure reveals a solvent accessible area of 24,290 Å 2 and buried surface areas of 5,330 Å 2, corresponding to about 22% of the total surface area of the protein. On the other hand, the BSA of the monomeric structure is 1,341 Å 2, corresponding to 9.6% of the total surface area of monomeric Dd DyP. It should be noted that our PISA analysis favoured a tetramer oligomeric state for the native cyanide Dd DyP structure, displaying higher binding energy than that of the dimeric state. This indicates that Dd DyP protein may exist physiologically in various oligomeric states. Indeed, several DyP-type peroxidases have been reported to exist in different functional oligomeric states ranging from monomeric to tetrameric state. The catalytic arginine residue, Arg239 in Dd DyP, has been suggested to play a role in the protein oligomerization owing to its location and hydrogen bonding network with surface residues. In Dd DyP, Arg239 is buried in the hydrophobic cavity of the heme binding pocket, excluding its contribution in Dd DyP oligomerization. Moreover, our molecular replacement attempts aiming for a dimeric solution was not successful, thus we can reasonably conclude that our purified Dd DyP favours a monomeric state in crystal. It has been previously reported, based on sedimentation velocity analysis with analytical ultracentrifugation, that dimeric Dd DyP predominates in solution, which yielded a dimeric crystal structure. The crystal packing behaviour of the present structure is significantly different from that described previously, likely due to a significantly low unit cell volume which exerts tight interactions between molecules in the unit cell. Note that the molecular contact within the unit cell is contributed by similar regions in both forms that is primarily the loop and β-sheet of the ferredoxin-fold like domain II at the C-terminal region. FIGURE 4 Overall structure of native Dd DyP and its superposition with native cyanide Dd DyP structure. Topology representation of the Dd DyP-type peroxidase. Overall structure of monomeric Dd DyP showing the ferredoxin-like folds at the N-... 3.3 Geometry of a natively incorporated heme, its binding pocket and the implication in catalysis. Heme b in the DyP-type peroxidases, a protoheme IX, is either penta- or hexacoordinated. The native structure of Dd DyP accommodates heme b in a hydrophobic binding pocket flanked by the unique β-sheet at the distal side of the heme plane, the α-helices of the ferredoxin-like fold domain II and a distinct long loop at its proximal side similar to previously reported DyP structures. Our structural analysis shows that the native Dd DyP heme is hexacoordinated, of which the pyrrole rings of porphyrin contributed to tetradentate chelation via their nitrogen atoms and via the conserved His222 at the proximal side with a distance of 2.11 Å. The sixth coordination is provided by a water molecule with a distance of 2.79 Å, which is shorter by ∼0.1 Å than that of the reported Fe─CN distance, indicating a stronger coordination to Fe. This distance is typical for Fe of the resting state, implying that the model is unaltered by radiation damage. Wat-184 forms a strong hydrogen bond with wat-182 and a weaker hydrogen bond with the catalytic residue Arg239. Intriguingly, the environment of our native Dd DyP heme binding pocket is similar to that of the bacterial DypB and DtpAa peroxidases and that of the peroxidase-cyclooxygenase Dd PoxA. The room-temperature serial femtosecond crystallography structure of the DtpAa revealed two water molecules in the catalytic vicinity with w1 ligated to the heme-Fe with a distance of 2.32 Å. We observed that wat-184 has slightly higher B- factor than wat-182, which may indicate its mobility and higher reactivity. On the other hand, wat-182 interacts via strong hydrogen bonds with the second catalytic residue Asp149 as well as Ser241, suggesting that these residues may act as proton acceptors to the H 2 O 2 during the formation of compound I oxyferryl thereby contributing to its stabilization along with Arg239 as revealed in other A-type DyP peroxidases. The binding pocket is extensively occupied with water molecules which are in hydrogen bonding interaction with nearby residues that contribute to the heme stability. Note that two of the water molecules, which are in hydrogen bonding interaction with Asp149 and Arg137 near the heme access channel, substituted the 1,2-ethanediol molecule in the cyanide native structure that shifted Asp149 carboxylate group towards the cyanide, giving rise to increased B -factor of Asp149 comparing to its surrounding. This may indicate that this position is natively occupied by water molecules as demonstrated by our native structure. FIGURE 5 Monomeric structure of the native Dd DyP highlighting the heme binding pocket at a resolution of 1.95 Å and the channel characteristics of system. The overall monomeric structure of Dd DyP highlighting its heme binding... The heme ligand is well resolved at a resolution of 1.95 Å as revealed by its 2 m Fo– D Fc electron density map, indicating unambiguous incorporation and binding of the heme in the apo-protein. This is an important finding as crystallization with purified Dd DyP proteins that have lower R Z values were not successful, which might indicate that the heme on these purified proteins is not well accommodated in the binding pocket, affecting possibly their stability and hence the crystallization. The heme occupies 798 Å 2 surface area, corresponding to 5.7% of the total surface area of the native structure, similar to that of the cyanide native Dd DyP structure and other Dd DyP structures. PISA analysis indicates that the solvation free energy gain of the natively incorporated heme is −22.5 kcal mol −1 with 622 Å 2 interface area comparing to an average of −22.3 kcal mol −1 for the reconstituted heme of the cyanide native structure which has an interface interaction area of 609 Å 2, indicating similar heme binding affinity with slightly better properties for the natively incorporated heme. The van der Waals interactions as well as the hydrogen-bonding network provided by nearby residues and water molecules may contribute to the stabilization of heme binding. Our analysis shows that the heme is stabilized, along the plane, via its carboxylate oxygens by hydrogen bonding with several water molecules, and three residues, Glu152, Arg204 and Arg239. The Arg239 interacts weakly with the heme carboxylates oxygens via two hydrogen bonds with a distance of 3.3–3.4 Å, whereas Glu152 and Arg204 form hydrogen bonding with the heme via wat-120 and wat-166, respectively. These interactions indicate that the heme is well stabilized in our model, which confirms the correct geometry of its native incorporation, yielding comparable binding pocket geometry to that prepared with in vitro reconstitution. Furthermore, the superimposition with the cyanide native structure indicates a striking similarity around the heme binding pocket including the flanking loop at the proximal side of the heme plane. A side-specific mutagenesis study in DypB found that this proximal loop may have significant role in the heme stability. This loop has also been implicated in the stabilization of the substrate owing to its flexibility thereby facilitating the substrate/product turnover by flipping in and out around the heme binding site. Further, we used the MOLEonline tool to analyse the cavities and tunnels nearby the heme binding pocket and those in long-range distances. Overall, 14 tunnels were identified, three of which are located next to the heme and perpendicular to each other with characteristics that might have an implication in the Dd DyP catalysis—entry of substrates and exit of reaction products. These channels may serve as entry gates for H 2 O 2 thereby facilitating the enzyme activation required for the oxidative catalysis. Two tunnels have average diameter of ∼3.0 Å, which is sufficient to facilitate the entry of H 2 O 2 and perhaps the exit of reaction products of similar size. This diameter is about twice the diameter of the substrate channels in the Dd PoxA, which is located roughly in a similar position at the distal side. This may imply variation on the nature and substrate sizes between the two classes of heme peroxidases, the DyP-type and the peroxidase-cyclooxygenase. All tunnels are lined with hydrophobic residues in the middle of the channel as well as several key catalytic residues in the distal and proximal sides of the heme plane. In particular, Arg239, Asp149, His222, Glu152, Ser241, and Thr226 in addition to several hydrophobic residues where found in two proximal channels, which are converged to form a main channel with a length of 42 Å and a diameter of ∼4.0 Å. The access gate of this channel is lined with charged residues as shown in Figures 5D, E, indicating its implication in the substrate entry. Further, we identified two major cavities at the distal side of the heme plane, of which one cavity has a volume of 2,881 Å 3, corresponding to 9.6% of the total surface of Dd DyP and 4.7 times of the heme molecule. It is located at the heme binding pocket, accommodating the main channel at the binding pocket and extends to the proximal side of the heme plane, indicating a role for this cavity in the catalysis of DyP-peroxidases. The second cavity with approximately half a volume of that of cavity 1 is located at the N-terminal region distant from the heme binding pocket and in contact with cavity 2 near the molecular centre of Dd DyP. The presence of such cavities is important for accommodating wide-range of substrates thereby fulfilling the substrate broad specificity of DyP-type peroxidases. 4 Conclusion In conclusion, we demonstrated the use of E. coli C43 strain for heterologous expression of Dd DyP peroxidase, without the use of a heme precursor δ -ALA, hemin chloride or iron supplement, to produce Dd DyP holoprotein with a natively incorporated heme, relying primarily on the E. coli heme biosynthesis by benefiting from the use of enriched medium and low temperature during expression, which yielded an R Z value of ∼1.0 and a holoprotein with sufficient stability. We further showed, by mean of X-ray crystallography, that the native Dd DyP expressed in this condition has comparable heme geometry and binding properties. Our study also demonstrates that the natively incorporated heme is well stabilized via hydrogen bonds provided by nearby Arg239, Glu152 and water molecules in addition to van der Waals interactions between the porphyrin rings and surrounding residues within van der Waals distances. Two cavities occupying a total volume of 4,292 Å 3, corresponding to 14.3% of the total monomeric volume, were identified. Of which the main cavity around the heme binding pocket was found to accommodate a large access channel that spans the heme binding pocket. The high-quality crystals optimized in this work would be suitable for use as a model for metalloenzymes to study the dynamics and substrate binding kinetics during catalysis. This can be achieved by, for instance, the mixing-and-inject time-resolved serial femtosecond crystallography approach, which enables tracking the formation of the reaction intermediates as well as the mechanism of substrate breakdown into products as demonstrated in other metalloproteins. Our work provides a firm basis for future co-crystallization and ligand binding experiments with a range-range of substrates of different classes to investigate the molecular mechanism of the broad substrate-specificity in DyP-type peroxidases using spectroscopic, X-ray diffraction and theoretical methods. Furthermore, the present work may contribute to the ongoing efforts in exploiting the catalytic activity of DyP-type peroxidases in combination with other enzymes such as laccase to enhance the catalytic properties, for examples, for the production of efficient gas/water permeable barrier materials or in the food packaging sectors by improving the mechanical and antioxidant properties of lignocellulosic composite films, or for biomedical and pharmaceutical applications, e.g., melanin decolorization, biosynthesis of bioactive natural products and pharmaceuticals degradation. 