 Asn-linked glycans play important roles in the quality control of glycoprotein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum lumen and in ER-associated degradation of proteins by cytosolic proteasomes. A UDP-Glc:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase glucosylates N-glycans of misfolded proteins, which are then bound and refolded by calreticulin and/or calnexin in association with a protein disulfide isomerase. Alternatively, an α-1,2-mannosidase and mannosidase-like proteins are part of a process that results in the dislocation of misfolded glycoproteins into the cytosol, where proteins are degraded in the proteasome. Recently we found that numerous protists and fungi contain 0–11 sugars in their N-glycan precursors versus 14 sugars in those of animals, plants, fungi, and Dictyostelium. Our goal here was to determine what effect N-glycan precursor diversity has on N-glycan-dependent QC systems of glycoprotein folding and ERAD. N-glycan-dependent QC of folding was present and active in some but not all protists containing at least five mannose residues in their N-glycans and was absent in protists lacking Man. In contrast, N-glycan-dependent ERAD appeared to be absent from the majority of protists. However, Trypanosoma and Trichomonas genomes predicted ER degradation-enhancing α-mannosidase-like protein and Mns1 orthologs, respectively, each of which had α-mannosidase activity in vitro. Phylogenetic analyses suggested that the diversity of N-glycan-dependent QC of glycoprotein folding was best explained by secondary loss. We conclude that N-glycan precursor length has profound effects on N-glycan-dependent QC of glycoprotein folding and ERAD. Keywords: protein folding, protists, Trichomonas, Entamoeba Animals, plants, most fungi, and social amoebae make a dolichol-PP-linked Asn-linked glycan precursor composed of Glc 3 Man 9 GlcNAc 2, which is transferred to Asn residues on the nascent polypeptide. Recently we took advantage of whole-genome sequencing of numerous protists and fungi to show that there is extensive secondary loss of sets of Asn-linked glycan genes encoding enzymes that make dolichol-PP-linked precursors. For example, some protists and fungi make no N-glycans or truncated N-glycans that are missing some mannose residues, lack glucose, or lack Man and Glc. Table 1. N-glycan-dependent QC of glycoprotein folding and ERAD in representative eukaryotes N-glycans play an important role in the quality control of glycoprotein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum lumen. Calreticulin and calnexin are homologous lectins, which bind glucosylated N-glycans in the lumen of the ER. Both CRT and CNX have a Pro-rich arm that binds a protein disulfide isomerase, which participates in the refolding of glucosylated protein. N-glycans may derive their terminal Glc from a glucosylated dolichol-PP-linked precursor or from the action of a UDP-Glc:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase that is specific for misfolded proteins. UGGT is functional in Trypanosoma, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and humans but is not functional in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. After the terminal Glc is removed by glucosidases, Man residues on N-glycans of some well folded proteins are bound by homologous lectins, and these glycoproteins are transported to the Golgi. Fig. 1. Whole gene sequences of numerous eukaryotes reveal great variations in the predicted N-glycan-dependent QC systems of glycoprotein folding and ERAD. Animals, plants, most fungi, and Dictyostelium, which have an N-glycan precursor composed... N-glycans may also play an important role in ER-associated degradation of proteins. Experiments in yeast and mammalian cells suggest that an α-mannosidase and a second set of proteins called MnlI, Htm1, or ER degradation-enhancing α-mannosidase-like protein are involved in selection of misfolded glycoproteins for dislocation into the cytosol for degradation by proteasomes. One model is that Mns1 removes a single Man residue from the middle arm of Man 9 GlcNAc 2 to make Man 8B GlcNAc 2, which in turn interacts with EDEM that has chaperone and/or lectin activity. This model is complicated by evidence that Mns1 has weak mannosidase activity in S. pombe ; more than one Man residue may be removed from N-glycans of misfolded proteins in mammalian cells ; N-glycan-dependent ERAD occurs in mutant cell lines that are missing the middle and upper Man arms on their N-glycans ; and there are multiple EDEM paralogs, at least two of which have mannosidase activity in vivo. Yos9, which resembles the Man-6-P receptor, has also been implicated in N-glycan-dependent ERAD, likely as a lectin. In some organisms, a cytosolic peptide- N -glycanase removes N-glycans from misfolded proteins, which are ubiquitinated and degraded in the proteasome. Here we used bioinformatic and experimental approaches to determine what effects N-glycan precursor diversity has on N-glycan-dependent QC of glycoprotein folding and ERAD in selected protists and fungi. These results tested three predictions. First, N-glycan-dependent QC factors for glycoprotein folding and degradation are likely absent from organisms that lack Man in their N-glycan precursors because there are no N-glycan substrates upon which the QC proteins might act. 2 ). Second, N-glycan-dependent folding is likely present and functional in organisms with at least Man 5 GlcNAc 2 in their N-glycan precursors because the substrate for the UGGT is present. 2 ). Third, both N-glycan-dependent folding and degradation are likely present and functional in organisms with at least Man 9 GlcNAc 2 in their precursors because substrates for both UGGT and Mns1 are present. Fig. 2. N-glycan precursors do not accurately predict the presence or absence of N-glycan-dependent QC systems for glycoprotein folding and ERAD. In this tree, organisms are grouped according to their N-glycan precursors. Encephalitozoon, Theileria... Results and Discussion For clarity, the bioinformatic results will be presented first, the experimental results second, and the phylogenetic inferences third. N-Glycan-Dependent QC of Folding Is Present in Some Protists Containing Man 5 GlcNAc 2 in Their N-Glycan Precursor. The set of proteins involved in N-glycan-dependent QC of glycoprotein folding in animals, fungi, and plants includes the UGGT, which glucosylates misfolded protein, CRT and/or CNX, which bind and refold glucosylated proteins, glucosidase 2, which removes Glc, and ERGIC-53, which moves well folded glycoproteins to the Golgi. As predicted, this set of proteins is present in Entamoeba, Dictyostelium, Trypanosoma, Leishmania, and Trichomonas, all of which have at least five Man in their N-glycan precursors and so synthesize a substrate for the UGGT. Also as predicted, this set of proteins is absent from Giardia and Plasmodium, which lack Man residues in their N-glycans, and from Theileria and Encephalitozoon, which lack N-glycans altogether. Fig. 3. Phylogenetic methods distinguish CRT and CNX and Mns1 and EDEM. Phylogenetic reconstruction using the maximum likelihood method of representative CRT and CNX from organisms labeled as in Table 1 with the addition of Euglena gracilis.... The absence of N-glycan-dependent QC of glycoprotein folding in Toxoplasma, Cryptosporidium, and Tetrahymena was not expected, because these organisms have N-glycan precursors with Glc 1–3 Man 5 GlcNAc 2. Finally, all eukaryotes studied appear to have N-glycan-independent QC of glycoprotein folding, as suggested by the presence of chaperones, protein disulfide isomerases, and peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerases. Testing the function of N-glycan-independent QC of glycoprotein folding and ERAD is beyond the scope of the present study. N-Glycan-Dependent ERAD Appears to Be Absent from the Majority of Protists. Mns1, EDEMs, Yos9, and PNGase, which are associated with N-glycan-dependent ERAD, are present in Dictyostelium, animals, plants, and most fungi, which have a Glc 3 Man 9 GlcNAc 2 N-glycan precursor. As predicted, these three proteins were absent from Entamoeba, Giardia, Tetrahymena, Plasmodium, Cryptosporidium, Toxoplasma, Encephalitozoon, and Theileria, which have truncated or no N-glycan precursors. Trypanosoma brucei and Trypanosoma cruzi, which make a Man 9 GlcNAc 2 N-glycan precursor and so are predicted to have N-glycan-dependent ERAD, each contained a single EDEM-like protein and a Yos9 homolog. To our surprise, Trichomonas, which makes a Man 5 GlcNAc 2 N-glycan precursor and so was not expected to have N-glycan-dependent ERAD, contains putative Mns1-like mannosidases, Yos9, and cytosolic PNGases. Finally, all eukaryotes examined appeared to have N-glycan-independent ERAD, as suggested by the presence of homologs of Der1, Cdc48, Np14, and Ufd1. N-Glycan-Dependent QC of Glycoprotein Folding Is Functional in Trichomonas, Entamoeba, and Cryptococcus. Because Trichomonas has a predicted N-glycan precursor that lacks Glc, the UGGT activity of Trichomonas was demonstrated in vivo by identification of a small amount of glucosylated N-glycan. The glucosylated N-glycan of Trichomonas was dramatically increased when the protists were treated in vivo with castanospermine, which blocks the glucosidase II activity. The putative peaks containing GlcMan 5 GlcNAc 2, the product of UGGT, was characterized by its digestion to GlcNAc 2 Man 4 and ManGlc disaccharide using the Golgi endomannosidase and its failure to digest with Jackbean mannosidase. Identical results were obtained with Entamoeba, and similar results were obtained with Cryptococcus. Fig. 4. Trichomonas, Entamoeba, and Cryptococcus have functional UGGTs. N-glycans of Trichomonas were radiolabeled with Man in vivo for 10 min, released with PNGase, and separated on Biogel P4. The major product of untreated Trichomonas was Man 5 GlcNAc 2.. In contrast, native thyroglobulin was not glucosylated by the UGGT of Trichomonas, Entamoeba, and Cryptococcus. As a control, Saccharomyces did not glucosylate denatured thyroglobulin. When Entamoeba membranes were incubated with a radiolabeled acceptor peptide in the presence of glucosidase and mannosidase inhibitors, the glycopeptide synthesized using the endogenous donor substrate was Man 5 GlcNAc 2 –NYT. A Hex 6 –NYT product was formed when the reaction was supplemented with UDP-Glc as a donor sugar. Glycosidase digestions showed that this product was GlcMan 5 GlcNAc 2 –NYT, and so was the product of the Entamoeba UGGT. In contrast, membranes from Alg6 mutants of CHO cells, which are lacking Glc on their N-glycan precursor, produced only a trace of GlcMan 5 GlcNAc 2 –NYT in parallel assays. These results show that the UGGTs of mammals and Entamoeba have different properties with regard to some artificial targets of UGGT, even though the UGGTs of mammals and Entamoeba behaved the same way with thyroglobulin. A recombinant rat liver UGGT selectively glucosylates N-glycans on longer, more hydrophobic peptides. Fig. 5. Entamoeba membranes glucosylate Man 5 GlcNAc 2 attached to an NYT peptide in a UDP-Glc-dependent manner. Glycopeptides produced by incubating Entamoeba membranes with a radiolabeled tripeptide acceptor were captured on... The Trypanosoma EDEM Ortholog and the Trichomonas Mns1 Ortholog Each Have Mannosidase Activity. A T. cruzi EDEM-like protein, expressed in Pichia pastoris, cleaved four α-1,2-linked Man residues from Man 9 GlcNAc 2 to make processed Man 5 GlcNAc 2. 6 ). The mannosidase activity of the Trypanosoma EDEM-like protein, which resembles that of mammalian Golgi mannosidase 1, is consistent with the recent finding that human EDEM3 has mannosidase activity and the previous demonstration that Trypanosoma membranes have mannosidase activity. Fig. 6. A recombinant EDEM-like enzyme of T. cruzi has α-1,2-mannosidase activity. Man 9 GlcNAc 2 from Saccharomyces Δ alg5 was processed to Man 5 GlcNAc 2 and Man by the EDEM-like protein of T. cruzi, which was expressed as a recombinant... The Trichomonas Mns1, expressed in Saccharomyces, digested biosynthetic Man 5 GlcNAc 2 to biantennary Man 3 GlcNAc 2 with the release of free Man. The α-1,2 mannosidase activity of Trichomonas Mns1 was also shown by its ability to trim Man 9 GlcNAc 2 to processed Man 5 GlcNAc 2 and Man. These results are consistent with our observation that some trichomonad N-glycans are trimmed in vivo to biantennary Man 3 GlcNAc 2. Fig. 7. Trichomonas cytosolic PNGase has N-glycanase activity, whereas an Mns1-like enzyme of Trichomonas has α-1,2-mannosidase activity. Recombinant Trichomonas PNGase, expressed as a GST fusion enzyme in E. coli, released Man 5 GlcNAc... The Trichomonas PNGase, which was expressed as a GST fusion enzyme in Escherichia coli, removed N-glycans from Trichomonas peptides labeled in vivo with Man and then trypsinized. These in vitro results, as well as the presence of Yos9 in their genomes, suggest the possibility that Trypanosoma and/or Trichomonas have N-glycan-dependent ERAD in vivo. Argument for the Secondary Loss of N-Glycan-Dependent QC of Glycoprotein Folding. N-glycan-dependent QC of glycoprotein folding was likely present in the common ancestor of extant eukaryotes and secondarily lost from selected eukaryotes for the following reasons. First, in phylogenetic analyses, CRT and CNX form two distinct clades, which were supported by high bootstrap values. This means that CRT and CNX are paralogs, i.e., the product of gene duplication in a common eukaryotic ancestor. Second, the deep branching eukaryote Trichomonas contains both CNX and CRT. Plants, animals, and Dictyostelium also contain both CNX and CRT. Third, Entamoeba has CRT but has lost CNX, whereas fungi have CNX but have lost CRT. Fourth, Toxoplasma has a truncated CNX that contains an intact Glc-binding domain but is missing most of the conserved arm that binds protein disulfide isomerase. Fifth and finally, the Saccharomyces UGGT ortholog is deeply divergent, so that it no longer glucosylates misfolded glycoproteins but is instead thought to be involved in β-1,6-glucan synthesis. Using similar arguments, we recently concluded that the present diversity of N-glycan precursors among extant eukaryotes also most likely resulted from secondary loss rather than primary absence. Secondary loss may also explain the absence of N-glycan-dependent ERAD in numerous protists. First, in phylogenetic analyses, Mns1 and EDEM are present in two clades, suggesting that they were paralogs in a common eukaryotic ancestor. Second, Mns1 and EDEM are each present in a deep-branching eukaryote. On the other hand, primary absence is suggested by the absence of Mns1, EDEM, Yos9, and PNGase from so many of the protists examined here and by the inability of phylogenetic methods to accurately predict function. For example, are Mns1 of Trichomonas and EDEM of Trypanosoma involved in ERAD? Or are these mannosidases involved in making a biantennary Man 3 GlcNAc 2 core for synthesis of complex N-glycans ? Significance. These results strongly support our hypothesis that the diversity of N-glycan precursors among various protists and fungi has profound effects on N-glycan-dependent QC of glycoprotein folding and degradation in the ER. 2 ). As predicted, Giardia, Plasmodium, Theileria, and Encephalitozoon, which have truncated or no N-glycans, are missing N-glycan-dependent QC proteins. In contrast, the absence of N-glycan-dependent QC of glycoprotein folding in Toxoplasma, Cryptosporodium, and Tetrahymena, which make Glc 1–3 Man 5 GlcNAc 2, and the possible presence of N-glycan-dependent ERAD in Trichomonas, which makes Man 5 GlcNAc 2, were not anticipated. It appears then that N-glycan precursor length does not always accurately predict the presence or absence of N-glycan-dependent QC systems for glycoprotein folding and ERAD. The experimental results demonstrate that the predicted set of proteins involved in N-glycan-dependent QC of glycoprotein folding in Entamoeba, Trichomonas, and Cryptococcus are indeed active. 5 ). The importance of N-glycan-dependent QC of glycoprotein folding is suggested by positive selection of sites for N-linked glycosylation in secreted proteins versus cytosolic controls in these protists, as well as in metazoa, fungi, and plants. In contrast, in protists lacking N-glycan-dependent QC of glycoprotein folding, there is no positive selection for sequons in secreted proteins. Materials and Methods Bioinformatic and Phylogenetic Methods. Predicted proteins of protists and fungi were searched with S. cerevisiae proteins involved in N-glycan-dependent QC or glycoprotein folding or ERAD. Alternatively, these same eukaryotes were searched with Saccharomyces proteins involved in N-glycan-independent QC of glycoprotein folding and degradation. N-terminal signal peptides and transmembrane helices were predicted by using software at www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP and www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM, respectively. UGGT were identified by a length of >1,000 aa, a C-terminal glucosyltransferase domain, and a C-terminal ER retention signal. CRT and CNX were distinguished by the presence of a C-terminal transmembrane helix in the latter and by phylogenetic methods. ERGIC-53s were identified by a legume lectin domain and a C-terminal transmembrane helix, whereas glucosidase IIs were identified by their glycohydrolase domain. Mns1, Golgi mannosidases, and EDEM were distinguished by phylogenetic methods. Alignments of protein sequences were made by using ClustalW, and manual adjustments and trimming of the alignments were performed with Jalview. Phylogenetic trees were constructed from the positional variation with maximum likelihood using quartet puzzling. Tests of Glucosyltransferase and Glycosidase. UGGTs that glucosylate N-glycans of misfolded proteins were demonstrated in three ways. First, genome project strains of Entamoeba and Trichomonas were grown and labeled with 3 H-Man in the presence or absence of 200 μg/ml of the glucosidase II inhibitor castanospermine. N-glycans were released with bacterial PNGase and characterized on a Biogel P-4 superfine column as described. A putative GlcMan 5 GlcNAc 2 peak was digested with a Golgi endomannosidase. Second, thyroglobulin, which contains N-glycans composed primarily of Man 9 GlcNAc 2, is an excellent target for testing the UGGT activity of membranes. Membranes of Entamoeba and Trichomonas were incubated with tritiated UDP-Glc and 20 μg of thyroglobulin, as described. Third, the ability of Entamoeba UGGT to glucosylate Man 5 GlcNAc 2 attached to a tripeptide was tested by using a modified in vitro oligosaccharyltransferase assay. Entamoeba membranes were incubated for 2–30 min at 37°C with the membrane-permeable tripeptide acceptor Nα-Ac-Asn--Tyr-Thr-NH 2 at 5 μM in the presence of deoxynojiromycin and swainsonine to ensure that the glycopeptide products were not degraded by glucosidases or mannosidases, respectively. UGGT activity was detected by analyzing glycopeptides synthesized in the presence or absence of 1 mM UDP-Glc. Glycopeptide products were collected by binding to immobilized Con A and separated on HPLC using standards from Saccharomyces. As a control, membranes from an Alg6 CHO cell mutant, which synthesizes Man 9 GlcNAc 2, were tested for their UGGT activity. Tests of Mannosidases. The T. cruzi EDEM-like protein gene was cloned in the pPICZα vector and expressed by using an EasySelect Pichia expression kit. The Trichomonas Mns1 gene was cloned in pYES2.1/V5-His-TOPO vector and expressed in the yeast strain BY4741 under a Gal1 promoter. In each case, the recombinant protein, which contained a polyhistidine tag, was purified from yeast cell extract using Probond Purification System. Recombinant Trypanosoma EDEM-like protein and Trichomonas Mns1 were tested by using Man 9 GlcNAc 2, which was obtained from Man-labeled S. cerevisiae Δ Alg5. Test of Trichomonas PNGase. A representative Trichomonas PNGase gene was cloned into the pGEX-6T vector to make a recombinant GST-TvPNGase fusion enzyme in E. coli. Target N-glycans, which were generated by labeling Trichomonas with 3 H-Man and trypsinizing delipidated glycoproteins, digested with 5 μg of recombinant GST-TvPNGase at 37°C for 72 h in 50 mM Tris·HCl containing 2 mM DTT. A negative control was GST alone. Released sugars were purified by passage through a Glycoclean R cartridge before loading on a Biogel P-4 column. Supplementary Material Supporting Information: Click here to view. 