 Differentiation-inducing factor 1 isolated from the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum can inhibit mammalian calmodulin-dependent cAMP/cGMP phosphodiesterase in vitro. DIF-1 also promotes glucose uptake, at least in part, via a mitochondria- and AMPK-dependent pathway in mouse 3T3-L1 fibroblast cells, but the mechanism underlying this effect has not been fully elucidated. In this study, we investigated the effects of DIF-1 on intracellular cAMP and cGMP levels, as well as the effects that DIF-1 and several compounds that increase cAMP and cGMP levels have on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. DIF-1 at 20 μM increased the level of intracellular cAMP by about 20% but did not affect the level of intracellular cGMP. Neither the PDE1 inhibitor 8-methoxymethyl-3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine at 10–200 μM nor the broad-range PDE inhibitor 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine at 40–400 μM had any marked effects on glucose uptake. The membrane-permeable cAMP analog 8-bromo-cAMP at 200–1000 μM significantly promoted glucose uptake, whereas the membrane-permeable cGMP analog 8-bromo-cGMP at 3–100 μM did not affect glucose uptake. The adenylate cyclase activator forskolin at 1–10 μM promoted glucose uptake by 20–30%. Thus, DIF-1 may promote glucose uptake by 3T3-L1 cells, at least in part, via an increase in intracellular cAMP level. Keywords: Dictyostelium discoideum, DIF-1, obesity, diabetes, PDE1, cAMP, forskolin 1. Introduction The cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum is an excellent model organism for the study of cell and developmental biology, including cell division, cell differentiation, cell death, chemotaxis, and morphogenesis, because of its simple lifecycle; it forms fruiting bodies, each consisting of spores and a multicellular stalk at the completion of its development. Differentiation-inducing factor 1, a chlorinated alkylphenone expressed in D. discoideum during development, induces stalk cell differentiation and modulates chemotactic cell movement. Studies conducted since the 1990s have shown that DIF-1 and its derivatives have antitumor activities in mammalian cells in vitro and in vivo, and thus DIF derivatives are expected to be lead compounds for the development of anticancer agents. DIF-1 can also promote glucose uptake in mammalian cells, such as mouse 3T3-L1 fibroblasts and 3T3-L1 adipocytes. DIF-1 promotes glucose uptake by inducing translocation of glucose transporter 1 from intracellular vesicles to the plasma membrane, in part via a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase /Akt-independent pathway, namely, a mitochondria- and 5′-AMP-activated kinase -dependent pathway. Oral administration of DIF-1 decreased blood glucose in streptozotocin-treated diabetic rats. Thus, DIF-1 and its derivatives are potential platforms for the development of novel obesity and diabetes therapies. Despite details of how these molecules exert their actions remaining unclear, it has been suggested that DIF-1 directly inhibits PDE1, a calmodulin-dependent phosphodiesterase that degrades cAMP and cGMP, which might increase intracellular cAMP and cGMP levels in various mammalian cells. In K562 human leukemia cells, DIF-1 dose-dependently raised intracellular cAMP levels, whereas PDE inhibitors dose-dependently suppressed cell growth, suggesting that DIF-1 may suppress cell growth, at least in part, via PDE inhibition and a subsequent rise in intracellular cAMP. Figure 1 Open in a separate window Chemical structure of DIF-1. Proposed scheme for the mechanisms of action of DIF-1. DIF-1–mediated uncoupling of mitochondrial activities may disrupt ATP production and activate AMP kinase, which may then induce GLUT1 translocation to the plasma membrane and glucose uptake. Glucose may be metabolized immediately via glycolysis and via the TCA cycle. DIF-1 may also inhibit PDE1 and thereby increase intracellular cAMP and/or cGMP levels, which might promote glucose uptake. Here, to further elucidate the mechanism underlying the glucose-uptake-promoting effect of DIF-1, we analyzed the relationship between intracellular cAMP and cGMP levels and DIF-1 activity in confluent 3T3-L1 fibroblasts. We found that DIF-1 may promote glucose uptake partly via an increase in intracellular cAMP level in these cells. 2. Results 2.1. Effects of DIF-1 on Glucose Uptake and Cell Growth in 3T3-L1 Cells We first examined the effects of DIF-1 on glucose uptake and cell growth in 3T3-L1 cells. DIF-1 at 10 or 20 μM dose-dependently increased the rate of glucose consumption, consistent with our previous report, in confluent 3T3-L1 cells, whereas no dose dependence was observed with 40 μM DIF-1. As far as cell morphology is concerned, no cytotoxicity of DIF-1 was observed within the dose range examined ; note that most cells remained viable after 24 h incubation with 100 μM DIF-1. DIF-1 at 10–40 μM dose-dependently suppressed cell growth in 3T3-L1 cells, as expected from previous reports. DIF-1 at 10 or 20 μM strongly promoted glucose uptake, but its anti-proliferative activity was weak, which supports our expectation that DIF-1 could be a good lead compound for the development of anti-diabetes and/or anti-obesity drugs rather than antitumor drugs. Figure 2 Effects of DIF-1 on glucose uptake and growth of 3T3-L1 cells. Confluent 3T3-L1 cells were incubated for 16–20 h in the presence of 0.2% dimethyl sulfoxide or 10–40 μM DIF-1, and the rate of glucose... 2.2. Effects of DIF-1 on Intracellular cAMP and cGMP Levels in Confluent 3T3-L1 Cells To test whether DIF-1 promotes glucose uptake via PDE1 inhibition, we examined the effects of DIF-1 on intracellular cAMP and cGMP levels in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. Since glucose uptake promoted by DIF-1 reaches its maximum at 3–4 h after the addition of 20 μM DIF-1, we monitored intracellular cAMP and cGMP levels during this period. DIF-1 at 20 μM increased the intracellular cAMP level by around 20%, and this increase was significant at 4 h, whereas it did not affect the intracellular cGMP level during incubation for 3 h. Although the present results originated from representative experiments, they are in good agreement with the effect of DIF-1 on intracellular cAMP level in K562 human leukemia cells. Figure 3 Effects of DIF-1 on intracellular cAMP and cGMP contents in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. Cells were incubated in the presence of 20 μM DIF-1, harvested at the indicated time points, and assayed for cAMP or cGMP content. The data are mean ±... 2.3. Effects of PDE Inhibitors on Glucose Uptake in Confluent 3T3-L1 Cells To further assess whether PDE1 inhibition is involved in DIF-1-promoted glucose uptake, we examined the effects of the specific PDE1 inhibitor 8-methoxymethyl-3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. At 10–200 μM, 8-MIBMX did not significantly affect the rate of glucose uptake, and DIF-1 and 8-MIBMX showed no additive effects. Figure 4 Effects of 8-MIBMX and DIF-1 on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. Cells were incubated for 16–20 h in the presence of 0.2% or 0.4% DMSO and the indicated concentrations of 8-MIBMX or DIF-1, and the rate of glucose consumption... We next examined the effects of the broad-spectrum PDE inhibitor 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. At 40–400 μM, IBMX did not significantly affect the rate of glucose uptake in the experiment shown in Figure 5 A, but, in another experiment, 100 μM IBMX significantly, albeit slightly, promoted glucose uptake. DIF-1 and IBMX showed no additive effects. Figure 5 Effects of IBMX and DIF-1 on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. Cells were incubated for 16–20 h in the presence of 0.2% DMSO and the indicated concentrations of IBMX or DIF-1, and the rate of glucose consumption was assessed.... 2.4. Effects of 8-Bromo-cAMP and 8-Bromo-cGMP on Glucose Uptake in Confluent 3T3-L1 Cells We then examined the effects of the cell-membrane-permeable cAMP analog Br-cAMP on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. At 0.2–1 mM, Br-cAMP significantly promoted glucose uptake, and DIF-1 and Br-cAMP showed an additive effect. We next examined the effects of the cell-membrane-permeable cGMP analog Br-cGMP on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. At 3–100 μM, Br-cGMP did not significantly affect the rate of glucose consumption. DIF-1 and Br-cGMP showed no additive effects. These results suggest that an increase in intracellular cAMP, but not intracellular cGMP, promotes glucose uptake in 3T3-L1 cells. Figure 6 Effects of Br-cAMP and DIF-1 on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. Cells were incubated for 16–20 h in the presence of 0.1% DMSO and the indicated concentrations of Br-cAMP or DIF-1, and the rate of glucose consumption was... Figure 7 Effects of Br-cGMP and DIF-1 on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. Cells were incubated for 16–20 h in the presence of 0.1% DMSO and the indicated concentrations of Br-cGMP or DIF-1, and the rate of glucose consumption was... 2.5. Effects of Forskolin on Glucose Uptake in Confluent 3T3-L1 Cells To prove that an increase of intracellular cAMP can promote glucose uptake, we examined the effects of the adenylate cyclase activator forskolin on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. At 1–10 μM, forskolin significantly promoted glucose uptake, and DIF-1 and forskolin showed an additive effect. At 20 μM, forskolin appeared to be slightly toxic to the cells as it changed cell morphology and made the boundaries between cells clearer after 20 h incubation. Since forskolin is expected to increase intracellular cAMP levels, our results suggest that an increase in intracellular cAMP levels can promote glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. Figure 8 Effects of forskolin and DIF-1 on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. Cells were incubated for 16–20 h in the presence of 0.2% DMSO and the indicated concentrations of forskolin or DIF-1, and the rate of glucose consumption... 2.6. Effects of Mitochondrial Uncoupler on Glucose Uptake in Confluent 3T3-L1 Cells To address the possibility that DIF-1 promotes glucose uptake via both mitochondrial uncoupling and intracellular cAMP elevation, we examined the combinatorial effects of the mitochondrial uncoupler dinitrophenol and Br-cAMP on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. DNP increased the rate of glucose consumption, as described previously. Br-cAMP and DNP showed an additive effect. These results suggest that DIF-1 may promote glucose uptake via both mitochondria-dependent and cAMP-dependent pathways in 3T3-L1 cells. Figure 9 Effects of DNP and DIF-1 on glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. Cells were incubated for 16–20 h in the presence of 0.1% DMSO and the indicated concentrations of DNP or DIF-1, and the rate of glucose consumption was assessed.... 2.7. Effects of PDE Inhibitors and Cellular cAMP and cGMP Levels on Cell Growth of 3T3-L1 and HeLa Cells We compared the effects of 8-MIBMX, IBMX, forskolin, Br-cAMP, and Br-cGMP on cell growth in 3T3-L1 cells, using human cervical cancer HeLa cells as a reference. In 3T3-L1 cells, forskolin at 10 μM, Br-cAMP at 0.2 or 0.5 mM, and Br-cGMP at 20 μM had no significant effect, whereas DIF-1 at 20 or 40 μM, 8-MIBMX at 0.2 mM, and IBMX at 0.4 mM significantly suppressed cell growth. These results suggest that the effect of increases in intracellular cAMP or cGMP on 3T3-L1 cell growth is small, if there is any at all. Figure 10 Effects of the compounds affecting cAMP/cGMP levels on the growth of 3T3-L1 and HeLa cells. Growing cells were incubated for 3 days in the presence of the indicated compounds, and relative cell number was determined. All media contained 0.2%. These results agree well with previous observations that Br-cAMP and another membrane-permeable cAMP analog, dibutyryl cAMP, suppress growth of HeLa cells and some other tumor cells. The reason for the lack of effect of forskolin is presently unknown. As intracellular cAMP levels are determined by the balance of the activities of adenylate cyclases and PDEs, this forskolin concentration might be insufficient to suppress the growth of HeLa cells but sufficient to suppress growth of some other mammalian cells such as mouse neuroblastoma/rat glioma hybrid cells, NG108-15, or non-small-cell lung cancer cells, H1299 and A549. 3. Discussion 3.1. DIF-1 as a Lead Compound for Anticancer and Anti-Diabetic Drug Development DIF-1 was originally isolated as a stalk cell differentiation-inducing factor in D. discoideum. Later, it was shown that DIF-1 and its derivatives possess antitumor activities in mammalian cells in vitro and in vivo. Studies conducted since 2007 have shown that DIF-1 also has strong glucose-uptake-promoting activities in mammalian cells in vitro and possibly in vivo and is thus a promising lead for the development of anti-obesity and anti-diabetes drugs. In 3T3-L1 cells, DIF-1 had a strong glucose-uptake-promoting activity and a low anti-proliferative activity. These data agree well with DIF-1 being a good lead for the development of anti-obesity and anti-diabetic drugs. 3.2. Mechanism of Action of DIF-1: Involvement of PDE1 AMPK is a heterotrimeric protein composed of α, β, and γ subunits; when the cellular AMP-to-ATP ratio is increased by metabolic stress, the α subunit is phosphorylated, leading to AMPK activation. We have revealed so far that DIF-1 functions as a mitochondrial uncoupler and can promote glucose uptake, at least in part via a mitochondria- and AMPK-dependent pathway, in 3T3-L1 cells. Some unknown pathway may also mediate DIF-1 function because neither the AMPK inhibitor compound C nor RNAi for AMPK completely blocks the DIF-1-induced glucose uptake in 3T3-L1 cells, and the known uncoupler DNP is not as effective as DIF-1 at similar concentrations. Here, we focused on DIF-1 as a direct inhibitor of PDE1, which can degrade cAMP or cGMP; we assumed that DIF-1 may function, at least in part, via PDE1 inhibition and subsequent increases in intracellular cAMP and/or cGMP levels. In this study, we showed that the intracellular cAMP content was increased by about 20% on average in confluent 3T3-L1 cells cultured with 20 μM DIF-1 for 4 h, whereas no significant change in cGMP content was detected during 3 h incubation with 20 μM DIF-1. Although our results were obtained from representative experiments, the results agree well with a previous observation that 20 μM DIF-1 increases intracellular cAMP content by about 20% in K562 human leukemia cells. Of interest here is that progesterone is thought to induce germinal vesicle breakdown by inhibiting membrane-bound adenylate cyclase and thereby decreasing intracellular cAMP concentration by about 20% in Xenopus oocytes, and the progesterone-induced cAMP decrease and germinal vesicle breakdown can be blocked with 30 μM DIF-1. Therefore, the DIF-1-induced slight increase in intracellular cAMP observed in the current study may have functional effects. Contrary to our expectation, the specific PDE1 inhibitor 8-MIBMX at up to 0.2 mM did not markedly affect glucose uptake in confluent 3T3-L1 cells, and the glucose-uptake-promoting effect of the broad-range PDE inhibitor IBMX at up to 0.4 mM was very weak or absent. Although the membrane permeability of 8-MIBMX and IBMX in confluent 3T3-L1 cells is not known, both inhibitors are effective at 0.1–0.2 mM in other in vitro cell culture systems. Thus, our results suggest that PDEs, including PDE1, may not be involved in DIF-1-induced glucose uptake. On the other hand, since 8-MIBMX in the same concentration range significantly suppressed growth of 3T3-L1, HeLa, and human K562 leukemia cells, DIF-1 may suppress cell growth, at least in part, by inhibiting PDE1 in mammalian cells. Note that some inhibitors for PDEs, including PDE1, are expected to have therapeutic potential in cancer treatment. 3.3. Involvement of Intracellular cAMP in the Actions of DIF-1 The membrane-permeable cAMP analog Br-cAMP at 0.2–1 mM significantly promoted glucose uptake by 15–25%, and 0.2–0.5 mM Br-cAMP and 10 μM DIF-1 showed additive effects. These results agree with previous observations that 0.5–1 mM Br-cAMP promotes glucose uptake in 3T3-L1 adipocytes and mouse brown adipose tissue, suggesting that intracellular cAMP is involved in DIF-1-induced glucose uptake. Although the membrane-permeable cGMP analog Br-cGMP is functional at 1–100 μM because it induces relaxation of isolated rat thoracic arteries, 3–100 μM Br-cGMP did not promote glucose uptake, and 3–10 μM Br-cGMP and 10 μM DIF-1 showed no additive effects in confluent 3T3-L1 cells, suggesting that intracellular cGMP may not be involved in DIF-1-induced glucose uptake. Figure 11 Proposed scheme for the action of DIF-1 in 3T3-L1 cells. DIF-1 promotes glucose uptake, in part via a mitochondria- and AMPK-dependent pathway and possibly also via an increase in intracellular cAMP level. The mitochondrial uncoupler... The adenylate cyclase activator forskolin at 1–10 μM promoted glucose uptake, and 5 μM forskolin and 10 μM DIF-1 showed additive effects in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. The mitochondrial uncoupler DNP at 50 or 100 μM promoted glucose uptake, and DNP and Br-cAMP showed an additive effect in confluent 3T3-L1 cells. Overall, our results suggest that DIF-1 may promote glucose uptake, at least in part, via an increase in intracellular cAMP levels. We intend to further elucidate how DIF-1 increases the intracellular cAMP level and how elevated cAMP promotes glucose uptake in 3T3-L1 cells, which we expect will contribute to the development of novel anti-obesity and anti-diabetes agents. 4. Materials and Methods 4.1. Cells and Reagents Mouse 3T3-L1 fibroblasts and human cervical cancer HeLa cells were used. Cells were maintained at 37 °C in DMEM-HG of glucose supplemented with 75 μg/mL penicillin, 50 μg/mL streptomycin, and 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum ). DIF-1 was synthesized as previously described, dissolved in DMSO at 5–20 mM, and stored at −20 °C. IBMX, 8-MIBMX, Br-cAMP, and Br-cGMP were obtained from Sigma. Forskolin and DNP were from Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical Corporation. DMSO solutions of IBMX, 8-MIBMX, forskolin, and DNP and aqueous solutions of Br-cAMP and Br-cGMP were prepared and stored at −20 °C. 4.2. Assessment of Glucose Consumption in 3T3-L1 Cells The rate of glucose consumption was assessed primarily as described by Omata et al.. 3T3-L1 cells were incubated in DMEM-HG for 3–4 days in a 12-well plate until the cells reached confluency. The cells were then incubated for 16–20 h with the additives in 1 mL of fresh DMEM-MG of glucose supplemented with the antibiotics, 10% FBS, and 10 mM HEPES-NaOH ). The glucose concentration in DMEM-MG aliquots was measured with a hand-held glucose monitor, GlucCell TM, and its sensor chips, Glucose Test Strips, and was used to calculate the rate of glucose consumption. 4.3. Cell Growth Assay Cells were incubated in 12-well plates in DMEM-HG overnight until they adhered to the bottom. The medium was replaced with 1 mL of fresh DMEM-HG containing additives, and the cells were grown for 3 days. The medium was removed, and the cells were washed with 0.5 mL of 10 mM phosphate-buffered saline and incubated in 0.5 mL of DMEM-HG without phenol red containing 5% Alamar blue until the color of the medium changed from blue to reddish purple. Cell number relative to control was determined by measuring absorbance at 570 nm. 4.4. Measurement of Intracellular cAMP Levels Confluent 3T3-L1 cells were incubated with 1 mL of DMEM-MG containing 20 μM DIF-1 in 12-well plates. At the beginning of the incubation, cells were collected from one well, and cell number was determined by counting the cells. At the time points indicated in the figures, 0.8 mL of each incubation medium was removed from the remaining wells, and 0.2 mL of 3.5% HClO 4 solution was added to each well. Each cell suspension was collected into a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube and stored at −20 °C until cAMP assay. The lysate was neutralized by adding 100 μL of 50% saturated KHCO 3, and the cAMP concentration was determined with a Cyclic AMP Select ELISA Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 4.5. Measurement of Intracellular cGMP Levels Confluent 3T3-L1 cells were incubated with 5 mL of DMEM-MG containing 20 μM DIF-1 in 3.5 cm dishes. At the beginning of the incubation, cells were collected from one dish, and cell number was determined by counting the cells. At the time points indicated in the figures, the media were removed from the remaining dishes, and each dish was washed with 2 mL of 10 mM phosphate-buffered saline, after which 0.2 mL of 1.75% HClO 4 solution was added to each dish. A 0.2 mL aliquot of each cell suspension was collected into a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube and stored at −20 °C until cGMP assay. The lysate was neutralized by adding 100 μL of 50% saturated KHCO 3, and the cGMP concentration was determined with a Cyclic GMP Select ELISA Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 4.6. Statistical Analyses Statistical analyses were performed by Student’s t -test or one-way analysis of variance followed by Tukey’s multiple-comparison test. Values were considered to be significantly different when the p value was less than 0.05. 5. Conclusions To elucidate the mechanism underlying the glucose-uptake-promoting effect of DIF-1, we analyzed the relationship between intracellular cAMP and cGMP levels and DIF-1 activity in confluent mouse 3T3-L1 fibroblasts. It was shown here that DIF-1 increased the level of intracellular cAMP but did not affect the level of intracellular cGMP, whereas an increase in intracellular cAMP mimicked by Br-cAMP or induced by forskolin promoted glucose uptake. Our results suggest that DIF-1 may play a role in promoting glucose uptake via an increase in intracellular cAMP level in these cells. 