 The Gα protein Gpa1 governs the cAMP-PKA signaling pathway and plays a central role in virulence and differentiation in the human fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans, but the signals and receptors that trigger this pathway were unknown. We identified seven putative proteins that share identity with known G protein-coupled receptors. One protein, Gpr4, shares limited sequence identity with the Dictyostelium discoideum cAMP receptor cAR1 and the Aspergillus nidulans GPCR protein GprH and also shares structural similarity with the Saccharomyces cerevisiae receptor Gpr1. gpr4 mutants exhibited reduced capsule production and mating defects, similar to gpa1 mutants, and exogenous cAMP suppressed both gpr4 mutant phenotypes. Epistasis analysis provides further evidence that Gpr4 functions upstream of the Gα subunit Gpa1. Gpr4-Gpr4 homomeric interactions were observed in the yeast two-hybrid assay, and Gpr4 was shown to physically interact with Gpa1 in the split-ubiquitin system. A Gpr4::DsRED fusion protein was localized to the plasma membrane and methionine was found to trigger receptor internalization. The analysis of intracellular cAMP levels showed that gpr4 mutants still respond to glucose but not to certain amino acids, such as methionine. Amino acids might serve as ligands for Gpr4 and could contribute to engage the cAMP-PKA pathway. Activation of the cAMP-PKA pathway by glucose and amino acids represents a nutrient coincidence detection system shared in other pathogenic fungi. INTRODUCTION Cryptococcus neoformans is a basidiomycete human fungal pathogen that infects the CNS to cause meningoencephalitis. The medical importance of C. neoformans has increased dramatically as a consequence of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome pandemic. Recent studies in C. neoformans have begun to delineate the signal transduction cascades that regulate morphological differentiation and virulence factor development. Many of these signaling cascades are conserved in other human and plant fungal pathogens. Among them, heterotrimeric G protein signaling has attracted considerable attention because of its conservation among organisms and its importance in fungal development and virulence. Three G protein α subunits and one Gβ subunit have been identified in C. neoformans. Gpa1 governs the cAMP-protein kinase A signaling together with the adenylyl cyclase associated protein Aca1 and plays a central role in the development of two major virulence factors, melanin and capsule, which are crucial for the pathogenicity of this organism. Gpa1 also contributes to mating of C. neoformans. In contrast, the functions of Gpa2 and Gpa3 are less well established. The single Gβ subunit Gpb1 is required to mediate pheromone sensing during mating via the Cpk1 MAP kinase pathway that shares features conserved with the pheromone response pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. G protein-coupled receptors represent the largest family of transmembrane receptors responsible for transducing extracellular signals into intracellular responses and signal in response to stimuli as diverse as light, protons, Ca 2+, odorants, amino acids, nucleotides, proteins, polypeptides, steroids, and fatty acids. GPCRs mediate myriad intracellular responses and thereby regulate cellular function via activation of G protein-dependent and -independent pathways. In mammalian cells, ∼720 GPCRs have been identified. Despite their importance in signaling regulation, only a few GPCRs other than pheromone receptors have been studied in any detail in most fungal systems. Reported fungal GPCRs can be grouped into four groups including GPCRs similar to the following: group i: the pheromone sensing Ste2 and Ste3 receptors of S. cerevisiae ; group ii, the glucose sensing Gpr1 receptor of S. cerevisiae ; group iii, the proposed nutrient sensor Stm1 of Schizosaccharomyces pombe ; and group iv, the cAMP receptors of Dictyostelium discoideum. In S. cerevisiae, both the Gpa2-activated cAMP pathway and the Ste4/Ste18-activated pheromone response pathway use GPCRs as ligand sensors. In the mating pathway, two GPCRs, Ste2 and Ste3, sense pheromones produced by cells of the opposite mating type and activate the MAP kinase pathway. The S. cerevisiae pheromone receptors are well conserved in other fungi, including Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Aspergillus nidulans, and Neurospora crassa. Ste3 homologues have also been reported in basidiomycetes, such as Pra-1 in Ustilago maydis. In C. neoformans, pheromone receptors expressed by α and a cells have been identified; both are encoded by the mating type locus and are important for mating, and Cpr a also may play a role in virulence. An additional pheromone receptor-like GPCR is present in C. neoformans but its gene is not mating type specific and its functions are unknown. In addition to the pheromone GPCRs, an unusual sugar sensing receptor has also been identified in S. cerevisiae. Gpr1 senses glucose and sucrose and activates cAMP signaling through Gpa2. Glucose-sensing receptor homologues have also been identified from several other yeasts. In Candida albicans, a homolog of the S. cerevisiae Gpr1 receptor also senses low concentrations of glucose and amino acids such as methionine to activate cAMP signaling. In S. pombe, a related glucose sensing receptor, Git3, has been identified. Several GPCRs have also been reported that are important for morphological development in filamentous fungi. In A. nidulans, two pheromone receptors, GprA and GprB, and seven other putative GPCRs have been identified. One of these GPCRs, GprD, was found to function as a negative regulator of sexual development. Based on genome sequence analysis, nine potential GPCR genes have been identified in N. crassa. In the slime mold D. discoideum, four cAMP signal receptors and three cAMP receptor-like GPCRs have been identified. But it remains a mystery which proteins sense environmental signals to activate the cAMP signaling pathway in other fungal systems. We hypothesized that related GPCRs could function to activate cAMP signaling in C. neoformans. In this study, we identified seven GPCR proteins and generated gene-deletion mutants for all of these GPCRs. Both phenotypic assays and biochemical analysis revealed that one GPCR, Gpr4, is important for capsule production and mating. This GPCR has a gene structure similar to S. cerevisiae Gpr1 and A. nidulans GprH. Gpr4 is physically and functionally associated with the G-protein α subunit Gpa1 and functions in sensing the amino acid methionine to activate cAMP-PKA signaling, in accord with recent studies on Gpr1 in C. albicans. MATERIALS AND METHODS Strains, Media, and Growth Conditions C. neoformans strains used in this study are listed in Table 1. gpr4 gpa1, gpr4 pkr1, gpr4 pka1, and gpr4 crg1 double deletion mutants were all generated by screening the progeny basidiospores from mating crosses of two individual mutants. ura5 auxotrophic mutants were generated by screening 5-FOA resistant yeast cells. Strains were grown at 30°C on yeast extract-peptone-dextrose agar medium and synthetic medium. V8 medium was used for mating assays. Niger-seed medium was used to test for melanin production. Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium for capsule production was prepared as previously described. All other media preparations were followed as described previously. Table 1. Strains used in this study Disruption of the GPR4 Gene and Construction of a gpr4 + GPR4 Complemented Strain The gpr4 null mutant was generated in the congenic C. neoformans serotype A MAT α and MAT a strains by overlap PCR as previously described. The 5′ and 3′ regions of the GPR4 gene were amplified with primers JH12678/JH12679 and JH12680/JH12681 from H99 or KN99 genomic DNA, whereas the dominant selectable markers were amplified with the M13 primers from plasmid pNATSTM#209 or pJAF1, respectively. The GPR4 gene replacement cassette was generated by overlap PCR with primers JH12678/JH12681, precipitated onto 600-μg gold microcarrier beads and biolistically transformed into strains H99 or KN99 a as described previously. Stable transformants were selected on YPD medium containing nourseothricin or G418. To screen for gpr4 mutants, diagnostic PCR was performed by analyzing the 5′ junction of the disrupted gpr4 alleles with primers JH12683/JH8994. Positive transformants identified by PCR screening were further confirmed by Southern blot. To construct the gpr4 complemented strains, H99 genomic DNA containing the entire GPR4 gene was isolated from a C. neoformans BAC library using a GPR4 -specific probe amplified with primers JH13137/JH13138. The 5.2-kb Xho I- Kpn I fragment containing the GPR4 gene was cloned into plasmid pJAF7 containing the NAT selectable marker. The construct was linearized by Kpn I digestion and transformed into a gpr4 mutant using biolistic transformation. The Gpr4 complemented strain was selected from transformants containing the full-length GPR4 gene. Assays for Melanin and Capsule Production Melanin production was assayed by inoculating C. neoformans strains into 2 ml YPD liquid medium and incubating overnight at 30°C. Five microliters of each overnight culture was placed on Niger-seed agar medium. The agar plates were incubated at 30 or 37°C for 2 d, and pigmentation of fungal colonies was assessed. To examine capsule production, 5 μl of overnight cultures was inoculated onto DME agar medium and incubated at 30 or 37°C for 3 d. The capsule was visualized with India ink staining and observed with a 100× Zeiss Axioskop 2 equipped with an AxioCam MRM digital camera. Quantitative measurement of capsule size was performed as described previously by measuring the diameters of the capsule and the cell using Axio Vision 3.1 software. The relative capsule diameter /Dw, where Dw indicates the diameter of the cell plus capsule and Dc indicates the diameter of the cell only) was statistically compared between each mutant and wild-type strains by the Student's t test. p < 0.05 was considered significant. Assays for Mating and Cell Fusion C. neoformans cells of opposite mating type were homogenized and cocultured on V8 agar medium at 25°C in the dark for several days, and filamentation was examined under light microscopy. Cell fusion efficiency was measured by mixing 2 × 10 6 cells of two strains. Culture suspension, 5 μl, was inoculated onto V8 agar medium and incubated for 24 h at room temperature in the dark. Four replicate plates were prepared for each of the three cell mixtures. Cells were then harvested and resuspended in 1 ml dH 2 O and 200 μl of the suspension was plated onto YPD medium containing NAT and G418. The number of colonies on each plate was determined after incubation at 37°C for 3 d. Generation of GPA1 Dominant Active Allele The GPA1 dominant active allele, corresponding to the GPA2 Q300L mutant in S. cerevisiae, was amplified by overlap PCR using primers JH12497/JH12500 and JH12499/JH12498. The overlap PCR product was amplified with primers JH12497/JH12498, cloned into the integrating vector pRCD83, generating pDX10. This expression construct was transformed into wild-type and the gpa1, gpr4, gpr4 gpa1, and pka1 mutants to generate dominant active strains. Construction of GFP::Gpr4 and Gpr4::DsRED Fluorescent Strains The GPR4 cDNA was amplified from H99 first-strand cDNA with primers JH12961/JH12759 and cloned into plasmid pTH74 between the Sma I and Pst I sites, fused to the C-terminus of the GFP gene in the vector, under the control of the S. cerevisiae ADH1 promoter. The GFP::GPR4 fusion construct was transformed into the S. cerevisiae gpr1 mutant strain MLY232. GPR4 genomic DNA was also amplified from H99 genomic DNA with primers JH15264/JH15307. The DsRED open reading frame was amplified from plasmid pDsRED2 with primers JH15305/JH15306. The GPR4::DsRED overlap PCR product was amplified with primers JH15264/JH15306 and cloned into plasmid pXL1 between the Fse I and Pac I sites, under the control of the C. neoformans GPD1 promoter. The GPR4::DsRED fusion construct was transformed into the gpr4 mutant strain. Yeast cells were stained with the yeast vacuole membrane marker dye MDY-64. Fluorescence was observed using a Zeiss Axioskop 2 fluorescent microscopy. Assays for cAMP Production cAMP assays were conducted as described previously. Briefly, a single colony of each C. neoformans strain was inoculated into 10 ml of YPD liquid medium and incubated for 24 h at 30°C with shaking. Cells were collected and washed twice with dH 2 O, once with MES buffer, and resuspended in 20 ml MES buffer. Diluted cells were incubated for 2 h at 30°C for glucose starvation. One milliliter of cells was filtered through a wet Millipore filter on a vacuum manifold for the 0 time point. Twenty percent glucose, 1.5 ml, was added to the remaining 14 ml of cell suspension. One milliliter was removed and filtered at 30 s, 1 min, and 3 min. At each time point, filters were immediately removed, placed into Petri-dishes containing 1 ml of formic acid, and agitated for 1 h to lyse cells on a table-top orbital shaker. Cell suspensions were spun down and the supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes and lyophilized. Pellets were resuspended in 400 μl of assay buffer and 100 μl was used for each sample. cAMP concentrations were determined using the cAMP Biotrak Enzyme immunoassay system and normalized to the wet weight of the cells. Protein-Protein Interaction Assays Using the Yeast Two-hybrid and Split-ubiquitin Systems Yeast two-hybrid interaction assays were performed as described. cDNAs of the GPR4 3rd cytoplasmic loop and C-terminal cytoplasmic tail were cloned into the bait vector pGAD424 and the prey vector pGBT9, respectively. The full-length GPA1 cDNA was cloned into plasmid pGBT9. All inserted cDNA sequences were confirmed by sequencing. Both bait constructs and prey constructs were cotransformed into yeast strain PJ69-4A. Transformants growing on medium lacking histidine were considered positive interactions. Positive interactions were further confirmed and quantified by β-galactosidase enzyme activity assays using chlorophenolred-β- d -galactopyranoside as substrate as described previously. The split-ubiquitin system was also utilized to investigate the interaction between Gpr4 and Gpa1. Vectors and yeast strains were included in the DUALmembrane Kit 2. GPR4 and GPR4 81-840 were cloned into pNCW, or pCCW, respectively. GPA1, GPA2, and GPA3 full-length cDNAs were cloned into the pDL2XN vector. All cDNA sequences were confirmed by DNA sequencing. Cub and NubG fusion constructs were cotransformed into host yeast strain NMY32. Interaction was determined by the growth of yeast transformants on medium lacking histidine or adenine and also by measuring β-galactosidase activity. Virulence Study Yeast strains were grown at 30°C overnight and cultures were washed twice with 1× phosphate-buffered saline and resuspended at a final concentration of 2 × 10 6 CFU/ml. Groups of 10 female A/Jcr mice were intranasally infected with 10 5 yeast cells of each strain as previously described. Animals that appeared moribund or in pain were killed by CO 2 inhalation. Survival data from the murine experiments were statistically analyzed between paired groups using the long-rank test using the PRISM program 4.0, we identified over 60 putative proteins that have 7 transmembrane domains, a structural feature of GPCRs, based on a hidden Markov model program. Among these proteins, seven proteins share homology with GPCR proteins identified in other organisms. Compared with the reported classification of fungal GPCRs, Ste3α/Cprα, Ste3 a /Cpr a, and Cpr2 can be grouped into the pheromone receptor group i; Gpr1 shares some sequence identity to GprC in A. nidulans, but is grouped in the third group in the phylogenetic tree based on Clustal X, indicating that it is more closely related to proteins in this group; Gpr2 and Gpr3 have sequence identity to Stm1 in S. pombe and belong to the third group iii; and Gpr4 and Gpr5 are more similar to the cAMP receptors in group iv. Gene deletion mutants for these 7 GPCRs were generated. gpr4 and ste3 α/ cpr α mutations produce phenotypes involved in virulence factor production or mating, whereas the other 5 GPCR deletion mutants have no obvious phenotype. Twenty-nine hypothetical proteins with 7 TMs have homology with proteins other than GPCRs; the other twenty-four hypothetical proteins with 7 TMs have no homology to any known protein sequence in GenBank, and these could represent additional GPCR candidates. Gene deletion mutants for two such genes have also been generated; however, no obvious phenotype was apparent. Figure 1. Overall similarity between Gpr4 and other reported GPCRs and the predicted protein structure of Gpr4. Phylogenetic tree of the fungal GPCR family. Classification of fungal GPCRs was carried out by analysis of GPCRs from C. neoformans and the D. dicoideum cARl cAMP receptor and thus can be grouped into receptor group iv. Gpr4 contains 840 amino acids and has a large third cytoplasmic loop and C-terminal cytoplasmic tail, similar to Gpr1 of S. cerevisiae. Therefore, we hypothesized that Gpr4 might function as a receptor for cAMP signaling and proceeded to compare the phenotypes of gpr4 and gpa1 mutants. When incubated on DME medium, C. neoformans produces a polysaccharide capsule that surrounds and protects the cell. gpr4 mutants exhibit reduced capsule size, a phenotype similar to that of gpa1 mutants. The average relative size of the capsule produced by gpr4 mutant cells was reduced by 30% compared with the wild-type isogenic strain H99. This reduction is statistically significant based on a Student's t -test. In contrast to gpa1 mutants, melanin production was not altered in gpr4 mutants. Thus, Gpr4 could be one of several receptors coupled to Gpa1 that activate the cAMP signaling pathway, or the loss of Gpr4 could result in partial constitutive active of Gpa1 sufficient to drive melanin but not capsule production. Figure 2. Gpr4 is important for capsule formation but not melanin production. Capsule production was visualized by India ink staining of wild-type strain H99, gpa1, gpr4, gpr4 gpa1, and pka1 mutant strains, and the gpr4 + GPR4... In addition to a defect in capsule production, gpr4 mutants also exhibit a mating defect. During unilateral mating between gpr4 mutants and a wild-type strain of opposite mating type, no obvious mating defect was observed. But in a bilateral gpr4 × gpr4 cross, a significant mating defect with reduced filamentation was apparent. To further define whether the mating defect observed in gpr4 mutants results from defects in cell fusion, mating filamentation, or both, cell fusion assays were performed. gpr4 mutants were less efficient in cell fusion, similar to gpa1 mutants, indicating that the gpr4 deletion results in a modest defect in cell fusion. When the wild-type GPR4 gene was reintroduced, both mutant phenotypes were complemented and wild-type levels of capsule production and mating were restored. The addition of 1 mM cAMP to DME medium restored capsule production in the gpa1 and gpr4 mutant strains, providing further evidence that both Gpr4 and Gpa1 act via the cAMP-PKA pathway. The mating defects of both gpa1 and gpr4 mutants were also suppressed by 1 mM cAMP in V8 agar medium, further implicating Gpr4 in a functional role in the cAMP-PKA pathway. Figure 3. gpr4 mutants exhibit a bilateral mating defect. The following strains were cocultured on V8 agar medium for 6 d in the dark at room temperature: Top row: H99 × KN99 a, α gpa1 × KN99 a, α gpa1... Gpr4 Functions Upstream of the Gα Protein Gpa1 To further corroborate a functional relationship between Gpr4 and Gpa1, gpr4 gpa1 double mutants were generated. A MAT a gpr4 mutant was crossed with a MAT α gpa1 mutant. Single basidiospores were isolated and gpr4 gpa1 double mutants were identified by double dominant marker selection. Analysis of capsule formation, melanin production, and mating of gpr4 gpa1 double mutants supports the hypothesis that Gpr4 functions upstream of Gpa1. gpr4 gpa1 mutants exhibited identical phenotypes with gpa1 mutants, consistent with models in which Gpr4 functions upstream of Gpa1. However, because gpa1 mutant phenotypes are more severe than those of gpr4 mutants, the possibility that Gpr4 and Gpa1 signal in different pathways could not be excluded. To address this caveat, additional epistasis tests were performed. In S. cerevisiae, the GPA2 Q300L mutation produces a dominant active form of Gpa2. The corresponding Q284L point mutation was introduced into C. neoformans Gpa1 using overlap PCR. Wild type, gpa1, and gpr4 mutant ura5 auxotrophic strains were transformed with this dominant active GPA1 allele. Expression of the GPA1 Q284L allele in the wild-type strain produced enlarged capsules in capsule induction conditions, indicating that this dominant active form of Gpa1 is functional. Expression of the GPA1 Q284L dominant active allele suppressed both the gpa1 and the gpr4 mutant defects, restoring both capsule production and mating to a level similar to the wild-type strain H99 expressing GPA1 Q284L and supporting models in which the Gpr4 receptor functions upstream of the Gα subunit Gpa1. Gpr4 Forms Homodimers and Interacts with Gpa1 To assess the potential for physical interactions between Gpr4 and Gpa1, conventional yeast two-hybrid interaction assays were performed with Gpa1 and Gpr4. Because Gpr4 is a membrane-bound protein, we made several truncated Gpr4 constructs by using gene fragments encoding portions of the receptor located in the cytosol, including the third cytoplasmic loop and the C-terminal cytoplasmic tail. No interaction was observed between any of these fragments and Gpa1. However, we did find that the 3rd cytoplasmic loop of Gpr4 could interact with itself or with the C-terminal tail, indicating that the Gpr4 receptor may form an oligomeric structure, similar to reports with other GPCRs. Figure 4. The GPCR Gpr4 interacts with itself and the Gα protein Gpa1. Dimerization of Gpr4. Yeast two-hybrid interaction assays were performed using portions of the Gpr4 protein, including the 3rd cytoplasmic loop, and... To further explore the potential for interactions between Gpr4 and Gpa1, the split-ubiquitin system was used. The split-ubiquitin system has been developed to assess interactions between membrane proteins. In this system, interactions between membrane-bound proteins can be detected by the release of an artificial transcription factor consisting of protein A, LexA, and VP16, which then activates nuclear reporter genes resulting in expression of His3, Ade2, and β-galactosidase. Three versions of Gpr4 were tested in the split-ubiquitin system. A Cub::GPR4 fusion plasmid was generated by fusing the C-terminal half of ubiquitin to the N-terminus of full-length GPR4 cDNA, which resulted in an 8TM structural fusion protein based on topology prediction programs TMpred and HMMTOP. A GPR4::Cub plasmid was constructed by fusing Cub to the C-terminus of full-length GPR4 cDNA. A Cub::GPR4 73-840 plasmid was generated by fusing Cub to the N-terminus of Gpr4 lacking the first TM domain sequence to ensure the N-terminus of the fusion protein is in the cytosol. All these fusion alleles were able to interact with protein expressed from the control construct pAI-Alg5 and grew on selective medium, indicating that the Cub fusion proteins were localized inside the cell and ubiquitin was successfully reconstituted. None of these fusion alleles showed interaction with the negative control pDL2-Alg5, indicating that they were not self-activated. G protein constructs were generated by fusing full-length Gpa1, Gpa2, and Gpa3 with the mutated N-terminal half of ubiquitin, respectively. Transformants coexpressing Gpr4::Cub and Gpa1::NubG grew on medium lacking histidine or adenine and produced robust β-galactosidase enzyme activity, indicating that Gpr4 interacts with Gpa1 directly. Gpr4 did not interact with Gpa2 or Gpa3 in this assay. Gpr4 Is Membrane Localized and Rapidly Internalized in Rich Medium A GFP::GPR4 fusion allele was expressed in S. cerevisiae and found to target GFP to the plasma membrane. The GFP::GPR4 expression plasmid was transformed into the S. cerevisiae gpr1 deletion strain MLY232. By direct fluorescence microscopy, cells containing the GFP::GPR4 expression plasmid exhibited a robust GFP signal localized exclusively on the cell membrane, whereas cells containing the control GFP vector had fluorescence throughout the cell, indicating that the GFP::GPR4 fusion construct is expressed and that Gpr4 localizes to the plasma membrane. Figure 5. Gpr4 is membrane localized and rapidly internalized in response to rich medium or methionine. A GFP::GPR4 fusion construct was expressed in the S. cerevisiae gpr1 mutant strain MLY232. Control transformants expressed GFP alone. A... A GPR4::DsRED construct was also generated and expressed in C. neoformans. When this expression allele was transformed into a gpr4 mutant strain, robust red fluorescence was observed on the plasma membrane of cells grown in minimal medium without amino acids. When cells were shifted to grow in YPD or YPgly medium, within 30 min the majority of cells exhibited fluorescence in the cytosol, especially concentrated in the vacuole, which was visualized with the vacuole membrane marker dye MDY-64. These results suggest that the Gpr4::DsRed receptor fusion is properly expressed and localized to the cell membrane and that YP medium contains components that can serve as ligands for Gpr4 and trigger its internalization, which is one key step in GPCR trafficking and recycling. We also tested the possibility of the involvement of glucose in Gpr4 internalization by adding 2% glucose to cells grown in YNgly medium, and no clear fluorescence localization change was observed. Together with the result that Gpr4 is localized to the plasma membrane when grown in YNB medium containing 2% glucose, we conclude that glucose is not an important factor for Gpr4 trafficking. Amino Acids But Not Glucose May Function as Ligands for the Gpr4 Receptor In S. cerevisiae, Gpr1 senses glucose and sucrose and activates cAMP signaling. To identify potential Gpr4 ligands, we first measured cAMP production in response to glucose added to starved cells. As expected, neither gpa1 nor adenylyl cyclase mutants responded to glucose re-addition. But surprisingly, these cAMP assays consistently showed that gpr4 mutants still respond to glucose, although there may be a very modest reduction compared with wild type. This result indicates that Gpr4 is not a major glucose sensor, and other receptors may be involved in glucose sensing and Gpa1 activation. The possibility that other carbon sources may function as potential agonists for Gpr4 and activate downstream G protein signaling was also examined. cAMP assays showed that neither H99 nor gpr4 mutants responded to sucrose, indicating sucrose cannot activate cAMP signaling in C. neoformans, and thus different mechanisms may be involved in cAMP pathway activation in S. cerevisiae and C. neoformans. Taking advantage of the interaction between Gpr4 and Gpa1 in the split-ubiquitin system, we cultured this yeast strain on media with different carbon sources and measured β-galactosidase activity to quantify the interaction. If any of these carbon sources were to activate Gpr4, the degree of the interaction between Gpr4 and Gpa1 might be reduced. We failed to detect significant differences in the interactions between Gpr4 and Gpa1 in response to glucose, galactose, mannose, fructose, or maltose. We concluded that Gpr4 is not a major receptor for carbon sources. Figure 6. Gpa1 but not Gpr4 is required for cAMP production in response to glucose. The wild-type strain H99, and gpa1, gpr4, and cac1 mutants were starved for glucose for 2 h. One milliliter of cell suspension for each strain was extracted... Recently, several reports indicated that in C. albicans, Ras proteins but not Gpr1 are critical for glucose sensing. However, Gpr1 signaling can be activated by amino acids such as methionine and alanine. To address the hypothesis that Gpr4 may also function as an amino acid sensor, cAMP assays were performed by adding different amino acids and measuring the production of cAMP. Fifteen amino acids were divided into three groups and amino acid mixtures for these three groups of amino acids were generated. Group A contained isoleucine, valine, histidine, and leucine; group B contained lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, alanine, and tyrosine; and group C contained serine, glutamic acid, arginine, threonine, and aspartate. Only group B resulted in an altered cAMP level between the isogenic GPR4 wild-type strain H99 and a gpr4 mutant. Several amino acids in this group were tested individually for affects on cAMP production, and methionine was found to induce cAMP accumulation in H99 but not the gpr4 mutant in our study. cAMP production was induced in both strains by tryptophan. However, neither wild-type nor the gpr4 mutant responded to alanine, which differs from Gpr1 activation in C. albicans. Taking advantage of the interaction between Gpr4 and Gpa1 in the split-ubiquitin system, we also cultured this yeast strain on media with or without methionine and measured β-galactosidase activity to quantify the interaction. We observed an approximately twofold reduction of β-galactosidase activity for the samples grown on medium with methionine compared with that grown on medium without methionine, furthering support our hypothesis that Gpr4 is involved in methionine sensing. Figure 7. Gpr4 is required for cAMP induction in response to methionine. Fifteen amino acids were divided into three groups and each mixture was added to amino acid starved cells of H99, the gpr4 mutant strain CDX6, or the... Because the cAMP accumulation pattern showed some modest differences in responses to glucose induction between the gpr4 mutant and wild type, we hypothesized that cAMP pathway activation might be affected by both glucose and amino acids through Gpr4. cAMP assays were performed using a glucose and methionine mixture as the inducer, and cAMP accumulation in the wild-type strain H99 attained a higher level than either glucose or methionine alone, which is statistically significant in a Student's t test, indicating that C. neoformans can sense both glucose and methionine to activate the cAMP-PKA pathway. Gpr4 Is Rapidly Internalized in Response to Amino Acids GPCR internalization is one key step in GPCR trafficking, which is a fundamental biological process and a conserved mechanism leading to GPCR signaling desensitization. Briefly, when ligands bind to a GPCR receptor, the GPCR changes conformation and can be phosphorylated by GPCR kinases, releasing its interactions with G proteins and allowing internalization. We can visualize this internalization process by fusing a GPCR to a fluorescent tag such as GFP or DsRed and verify the ligand of a specific GPCR by testing the ability of the compound to trigger the internalization of the corresponding GPCR. To further elucidate the potential biological role of amino acids on Gpr4 activation, we tested whether Gpr4 trafficking would respond to different amino acids. Red fluorescence can be observed on the plasma membrane when a strain expressing the Gpr4::DsRED fusion protein is grown in minimal medium lacking amino acids. Within 30 min after addition of 10 mM methionine, red fluorescence was observed in endocytic vesicles or vacuoles, indicating that the Gpr4 protein has been internalized. We also tested several other amino acids, including alanine, but no clear fluorescence internalization was observed. These results further confirm that methionine could function as a ligand for the Gpr4 receptor. Methionine Stimulates Filamentation during Mating through Gpr4 We used defined filamentation agar medium to further investigate the biological role of methionine on mating. Without any amino acid, mating crosses between wild-type strains produced robust filament growth after 6-d incubation. gpr4 mutants produced less and shorter filaments, indicating a mating defect. By adding 20 μM methionine, a significant stimulation of filamentous growth could be observed from the mixture of wild-type strains, but not from the mixture of gpr4 or gpa1 mutants, indicating that neither gpr4 nor gpa1 mutants respond to methionine. We also test additional concentrations and observed an inhibition effect on filamentation during mating when the methionine concentration was higher than 1 mM. This result further confirms that methionine plays a role in mating via the Gpr4, Gpa1-activated cAMP pathway in C. neoformans in a dose-dependent manner. Figure 8. Gpr4 is required for methionine-induced mating stimulation. The following strains were cocultured on filamentation agar medium for 7 d in the dark at room temperature without or with 20 μM methionine : H99 × KN99... Gpr4 Is Not Essential for Virulence The involvement of Gpr4 in capsule production and cAMP signaling prompted us to investigate its possible role in virulence using a murine inhalation model of systemic C. neoformans infection. Female A/Jcr mice were intranasally inoculated with 10 5 yeast cells, and animals were monitored twice daily. As previously demonstrated, all mice infected with the wild-type strain H99 survived between 18 and 26 d after infection, whereas mice infected with the attenuated gpa1 mutant survived for more than 60 d. Surprisingly, mice infected with the gpr4 mutant exhibited mortality similar to those infected with the wild-type H99 strain, indicating that Gpr4 is not critical for virulence of C. neoformans. Because the GPCR Gpr5 shares sequence identity with Gpr4, we generated a gpr4 gpr5 double mutant strain and its virulence was also evaluated. No significant mortality difference was observed compared with H99 and the gpr4 mutant, indicating that Gpr4 and Gpr5 are not functionally redundant. Figure 9. The GPCR Gpr4 is not essential for virulence. Female A/Jcr mice were intranasally inoculated with 10 5 cells of the following strains: H99, gpa1 mutant, gpr4 mutant, gpr4 gpr5 mutant, and gpr4 + GPR4 complemented strain.... DISCUSSION The cAMP pathway is well conserved from mammalian cells to microbes such as fungi. In C. neoformans, the cAMP pathway plays a central role in pathogenicity. In this pathway, the Gα protein Gpa1 and the cyclase associated protein Aca1 activate adenylyl cyclase and stimulate the production of cAMP, which binds to the regulatory subunit of PKA, and releases the PKA catalytic subunits. Although many components in this pathway have been characterized in several model fungal systems, little is known as to how most fungi sense extracellular signals to activate cAMP signaling. The Gpr1 receptor in S. cerevisiae is the best characterized nutrient-sensing GPCR system. Gpr1 senses glucose and sucrose and functions as the receptor for the cAMP pathway. In this study, we investigated the GPCR Gpr4 as a potential receptor for cAMP signaling in C. neoformans. This protein drew our attention because it has structural similarity with Gpr1 in S. cerevisiae, and it also shares sequence identity with the cAMP receptor in D. discoideum. Gpr4 has a very long cytoplasmic loop between TM-V and TM-VI, but unlike the large 3rd cytoplasmic loop in the S. cerevisiae Gpr1 receptor, which contains a long asparagine residue repeat, no conserved sequence was identified. The gpr4 null mutant phenotypes are related to cAMP signaling and involve both capsule production and mating. But Gpr4 does not play a role in regulating melanin production, which is another important virulence factor controlled by the Gpa1-cAMP pathway. Epistasis analysis supports a model in which Gpr4 functions upstream of Gpa1, but Gpr4 may not be the only receptor coupled to Gpa1. cAMP assays after glucose induction revealed Gpr4 is not a major glucose sensor, which is functionally distinct from S. cerevisiae Gpr1, but similar to the Gpr1 receptor of C. albicans. That Gpr4 is not required for glucose sensing may further explain why gpr4 mutants produce wild-type levels of melanin because melanin induction is known to be triggered by low glucose levels. Other receptors may function to control melanization and act as glucose sensors because Gpa1 responds to glucose induction in a cAMP signaling-dependent manner. In addition to Gpr4, we also identified additional proteins having seven TMs, a feature of GPCRs. Gene deletion mutants were generated for seven of these putative GPCRs, but none appears to be involved in melanin or capsule production. Among them, Gpr5 has both sequence identity and structural similarity with Gpr4. However, gpr4 gpr5 double mutants produced phenotypes similar to that of gpr4 single mutations, indicating that Gpr4 and Gpr5 are not functionally redundant. Figure 10. Proposed model for the Gpr4, Gpa1-activated cAMP signaling pathway in C. neoformans. Two signal inputs to the cAMP signaling pathway are proposed in this model and involve nutrient transport and sensing. Fermentable carbon sources, such as glucose, are... Direct interactions between Gpr4 and Gpa1 provide further evidence that Gpr4 is a receptor upstream of Gpa1 and acts through cAMP signaling. The interactions between Gpr4 fragments indicate that Gpr4 may form dimeric or oligomeric structures, a property shared with other GPCR receptors. The importance of receptor oligomerization has only recently become apparent and is now a focus of study for GPCR activation. One reason we did not detect an interaction between Gpr4 and Gpa1 using the conventional yeast two-hybrid assay could be that we did not use the proper fragment for interaction or those portions isolated from Gpr4 are not sufficient to mediate physical interactions with Gpa1. In contrast, the split-ubiquitin system is designed to monitor interactions between membrane proteins. With the split-ubiquitin system, we observed a physical interaction between Gpa1 and the Gpr4::Cub fusion construct, in which the Cub domain was fused to the C-terminus of Gpr4. This result supports our model that Gpr4 is a receptor of Gpa1-activated cAMP signaling. It also suggests that this interaction does not require the free carboxyl terminal tail, which is different to GCR1-Gpa1 interaction studies in Arabidopsis, which required the free C-tail of GCR1. The failure to observe any interaction between Cub::Gpr4 or Cub::Gpr4 73-840 and Gpa1 could indicate that the N-terminus is important for Gpr4 activation and other functions. Alternatively, the two halves of ubiquitin might not be suitably oriented to activate the ubiquitin protease, which would result in a failure to release the artificial transcription factor. Our study demonstrates that Gpr4 and Gpa1 play different roles in glucose sensing. Gpr4 is not essential for glucose sensing because a cAMP increase in response to glucose induction is still observed in the gpr4 mutant, even though its cAMP induction pattern is modestly different from that of H99. But Gpa1 is essential for glucose-mediated cAMP induction. There are several possibilities for the differing roles of Gpr4 and Gpa1 in glucose sensing. One is that other receptor may exist to sense glucose and trigger cAMP signaling. There is no ScGpr1 homolog in C. neoformans, based on genomic sequence comparison. Although Gpr4 is structurally related to the S. cerevisiae Gpr1 receptor, no significant sequence identity was found between the two. Therefore, if there is a glucose receptor in C. neoformans, it may be very divergent from S. cerevisiae Gpr1, or multiple proteins might share glucose sensing functions. A second possibility is that C. neoformans and some other fungi may use a different mechanism to sense glucose, such as using glucose-6-phosphate to trigger Gpa1 activity instead of sensing extracellular glucose via receptors. In S. cerevisiae, glucose-6-phosphate is produced in the cell by phosphorylation of glucose after its import by hexose transporters and is involved in promoting the cAMP pathway through adenylyl cyclase although the precise mechanism is as yet unclear. Similar machinery may exist in C. neoformans because hexose transporters and hexose kinases homologues can also be found in the genome. To test this possibility in C. neoformans, generation of hexose transporter or hexose kinase mutants would be one approach. Caution will be required as functional redundancy may exist because both gene families have multiple members. A third model is that loss of Gpr4 may lead to partial constitutive activation of Gpa1. This may result in sufficient cAMP signaling to support melanin production but not mating or capsule production. In this model, the amplitude of pathway signaling could enable at least three distinct biological read-outs from a single GPCR-Gα module rather than a simple binary switch with only off and on states. The nature of the ligands for Gpr4 is a central question. In C. albicans, recent reports reveal that Cdc25 and Ras but not Gpr1 are responsible for glucose sensing, and instead Gpr1 may sense amino acids. In C. neoformans, Ras proteins are unlikely to play a role in glucose sensing because Ras1 has been reported to act independently from the cAMP signaling pathway. Amino acid rich media are known to induce morphological transitions in C. albicans. Van Dijck and colleagues further discovered that methionine is required for hyphal induction and both Gpr1 and Mup1 are responsible for methionine induced filamentation in C. albicans. Deletion of GPR1 causes marked defects in true hypha formation and invasive growth, whereas the defect of the mup1 mutant strain in morphological transitions is in a methionine concentration-dependent manner. Their study revealed Gpr1 may sense methionine. Methionine is also important for sexual development in the fission yeast S. pombe via a cAMP-dependent Ste11-signaling pathway. In C. neoformans, we also observed that methionine can stimulate filamentation during mating filaments in a Gpr4, Gpa1-dependent manner, indicating that methionine is also important for sexual development in C. neoformans and could be one extracellular signal involved in Gpr4, Gpa1-activated cAMP signaling. To test the possibility that Gpr4 may also function as a nutrient sensor, we tested cAMP production in response to amino acid induction and found that Gpr4 is important for sensing methionine. This conclusion is further supported by Gpr4 internalization assays, wherein Gpr4 is also rapidly internalized in response to high concentrations of methionine, indicating that amino acids can activate the Gpr4, Gpa1-activated cAMP pathway. Interestingly, we observed an additive increase in cAMP production in response to both glucose and methionine, indicating that cAMP signaling may be activated by multiple extracellular signals. We also measured the expression of two glucose regulated genes, CAS8 and LAC1, using wild-type, gpr4, and gpa1 mutant strains in the presence and absence of either glucose and methionine. Expression of CAS8 was modestly induced by glucose both in the wild-type strain and the gpr4 mutant strain, consistent with a previous report. The wild type and the gpr4 mutant shared similar expression patterns indicating that Gpr4 is not involved in glucose sensing, and methionine is not important for CAS8 gene expression. No significant difference in expression was observed in the gpa1 mutant strain under these conditions. The expression of the LAC1 gene was significantly repressed by the glucose in wild-type and the gpr4 mutant strain, similar to the previous report. Surprisingly, we also observed a significant difference in LAC1 gene expression in the gpa1 mutant strain with or without glucose, indicating glucose signaling may in part bypass the Gpa1 protein to repress downstream target genes. These results also suggest that Gpr4 is not important for glucose sensing or glucose regulated gene expression, consistent with our findings in this study. Gpr4 is not essential for virulence and H99 and the gpr4 mutant strain were indistinguishable in our virulence study. Virulence is controlled by several attributes, including melanin production, capsule formation, and growth at body temperature. The gpr4 mutant strain produces reduced capsule size but has normal melanin production compared with H99, and no growth defect at 37°C. The virulence test results indicate that reduction of capsule size may not be sufficient to affect virulence if enough capsule is present to provide protection against the host immune response and secrete normal amounts of glucuronoxylomannan. As an important virulence factor, the presence of a capsule is required for optimal pathogenicity in C. neoformans, but its size is not necessarily essential to produce clinical disease. In nonisogenic strains there is no direct correlation between the size of the capsule and the virulence of the strain, so the relative size of the capsule does not ensure pathogenicity. Overall, our study identified a novel GPCR, which is a receptor for the cAMP pathway that can sense amino acids such as methionine. Our study also indicates that C. neoformans may have a more complicated signal sensing system than S. cerevisiae and could involve multiple sensors for the cAMP signal pathway. To fully understand the extracellular signals and their sensors that activate the cAMP pathway, additional receptor proteins may need to be identified, especially those involved in glucose sensing and that may potentially affect the production of melanin. Supplementary Material Click here to view. 