 DNA methylation, the addition of a methyl group to a cytosine residue, is an evolutionarily conserved epigenetic mark involved in a number of different biological functions in eukaryotes, including transcriptional regulation, chromatin structural organization, cellular differentiation and development. In the social amoeba Dictyostelium, previous studies have shown the existence of a DNA methyltransferase belonging to the DNMT2 family, but the extent and function of 5-methylcytosine in the genome are unclear. Here, we present the whole genome DNA methylation profile of Dictyostelium discoideum using deep coverage replicate sequencing of bisulfite-converted gDNA extracted from post-starvation cells. We find an overall very low number of sites with any detectable level of DNA methylation, occurring at significant levels in only 303–3432 cytosines out of the ∼7.5 million total cytosines in the genome depending on the replicate. Furthermore, a knockout of the DNMA enzyme leads to no overall decrease in DNA methylation. Of the identified sites, significant methylation is only detected at 11 sites in all four of the methylomes analyzed. Targeted bisulfite PCR sequencing and computational analysis demonstrate that the methylation profile does not change during development and that these 11 cytosines are most likely false positives generated by protection from bisulfite conversion due to their location in hairpin-forming palindromic DNA sequences. Our data therefore provide evidence that there is no significant DNA methylation in Dictyostelium before fruiting body formation and identify a reproducible experimental artifact from bisulfite sequencing. INTRODUCTION DNA methylation is a post-synthetic modification that typically occurs on cytosine residues in eukaryotic plants and animals. Generally, DNA methylation is associated with transcriptional repression, but has been linked to more complex processes, including cell differentiation, genomic imprinting and stability, and X chromosome inactivation. The majority of DNA methylation is carried out by the DNA methyltransferases DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B. DNMT1 is responsible for maintaining a cell’s methylation profile post-replication by targeting hemi-methylated sites in the genome, while DNMT3A and DNMT3B methylate CpG dinucleotides de novo, thereby creating new epigenetic marks. Although DNA methylation appears to be evolutionarily conserved across a large number of eukaryotes, 1 ), some organisms, such as Dictyostelium discoideum and Drosophila melanogaster, lack the major DNMTs while retaining the less characterized methyltransferase DNMT2. Figure 1. Evolution of DNA methyltransferases. The presence or absence of biologically significant DNA methylation and the DNA methyltransferase enzymes across eukaryotes. Kingdom, Animalia: H. sapiens, Homo sapiens ; D. melanogaster... DNMT2 was originally identified based on sequence conservation of essential catalytic motifs and exhibits structural similarity to other DNMTs. It is found as a single-copy gene across the eukaryotic tree of life in protists, plants, fungi and animals, 1 ), suggesting an important functional role. There is active debate relating to the biological function of DNMT2 and specifically the target substrates for this enzyme. To date, DNMT2 has been shown to predominantly methylate tRNAs, with the tRNA Asp as the preferred target substrate both in vivo and in vitro in D. discoideum. There is a growing body of evidence that in species that lack DNMT1 and DNMT3 there is no biologically significant DNA methylation. 1A ). Despite this observation, there is some evidence that DNMT2 may contribute to methylation of retrotransposons in the D. melanogaster genome, demonstrating a potential dual specificity for DNA and RNA substrates. In addition, recent studies have demonstrated that DNMT2 can efficiently methylate DNA when presented in the structural context of a tRNA. Currently, characterizing the presence, relevance and efficacy of DNA methylation in organisms containing only a DNMT2 methyltransferase remains an active area of research. Dictyostelium discoideum, a eukaryotic slime mold containing a Dnmt2 homolog, is among the organisms where the presence, extent and function of DNA methylation are debated. In the initial 1991 study, D. discoideum was reported to lack DNA methylation, as determined by whole genome methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme analysis and high-performance liquid chromatography assays. Despite this early report, the confirmed existence of a DNMT2 homolog, along with D. discoideum ’s unique AT-rich genome and an under-representation of CpG dinucleotides relative to the GpC isomer, implied the possible presence of a DNA methylation system, as methylated CpGs are inherently chemically unstable and readily mutate to TpGs. Accordingly, the investigation of DNA methylation in D. discoideum was revisited in 2006 using more advanced methodologies, including antibodies to detect 5-methylcytosine in bulk genomic DNA across distinct developmental time points. These studies detected overall low levels of DNA methylation in the genome and were confirmed using methylation-sensitive restriction digests targeted to retrotransposons and several other genes. A functional role for the DNMA enzyme in silencing of retrotransposons via the asymmetric methylation of cytosine residues was confirmed using bisulfite sequencing of specific sites. Furthermore, DNA methylation was demonstrated to increase through development, with the highest levels at 24 h post-starvation, and knocking out dnmA revealed developmental defects and reduced DNA methylation. More recently, detailed studies examining the activity of the D. discoideum DNMA enzyme demonstrated that specific tRNA molecules are the preferred target substrate for this methyltransferase, but other substrates potentially remain to be characterized. These conflicting reports, coupled with the relatively few studies investigating DNA methylation in D. discoideum, reflect the uncertainty regarding the status of the DNA methylation system in this species. To determine whether a functioning DNA methylation system is present in D. discoideum, we utilized whole genome bisulfite sequencing to achieve deep coverage across multiple replicates of genomic DNA isolated from cells in an 18–24 h developmental time window. Our results show that D. discoideum harbors a minimal number of detectable significantly methylated sites that can be reproducibly identified, many of which demonstrate low levels of methylation. Targeted bisulfite PCR sequencing at two of these robust sites in a cluster on chromosome 4 indicates that the methylation profile does not change between vegetative and developing cells. Hairpin secondary structures generated by palindromic sequences around the 11 robust sites during the bisulfite reaction appear to be responsible for the identification of these cytosines as false mC positives. This reproducible artifact represents a potentially significant source of false positives in bisulfite sequencing, which, to our knowledge, has not previously been reported. Consequently, one must proceed with caution when identifying putative mC sites that rely on bisulfite conversion methods. In addition, a knockout of the dnmA gene does not result in any decrease in overall DNA methylation in the genome. Taken together, our studies provide evidence that there is no significant DNA methylation in the D. discoideum genome prior to fruiting body formation. MATERIALS AND METHODS Phylogenetic reconstruction of DNMTs The sequence of DNMTA from D. discoideum AX4 was aligned with the homologene dataset for DNMT2 from NCBI that includes 14 proteins from 10 species across the tree of life and the NCBI RefSeq ortholog dataset of DNMT1 that includes 16 sequences and 12 species. Multiple sequence alignment was performed using MAFFT v7.508. The maximum likelihood tree was reconstructed using IQ-Tree 2 using 1000 rapid bootstrap replicates. Whole genome DNA sources To investigate the potential for DNA methylation sites in D. discoideum, AX4 strain cells were selected for whole genome analysis. Dictyostelium discoideum AX4 cells have near-complete chromosome level genome assembly with genes functionally validated or predicted, making it the ideal and only current candidate for whole genome analysis. Dictyostelium discoideum AX4 cells were grown in 100 ml HL5 liquid cultures until near saturation. Once sufficient cell density was reached, 30 ml of the culture was transferred to 50 ml conical tubes. The cells were centrifuged for 5 min at 1000 rpm at room temperature, the medium was aspirated from the tube and the cells were resuspended in 1.5 ml of 1× Starvation Buffer. The resuspended cells were transferred to nitrocellulose membrane pads with 0.45 μm pores pre-wetted with Starvation Buffer, and allowed to develop over the course of 18–24 h. It should be noted that cells may have developed at different densities, which could slightly alter the timing of their development. After this time, the cells were checked to make sure there was no evidence of fruiting body formation and then scraped from the pads. gDNA was extracted with a Genesee Scientific ZR Genomic DNA Tissue MiniPrep extraction kit, utilizing the solid tissue protocol. After extraction, bisulfite sequencing was conducted to determine potential sites of methylation in the genome. As a control for bisulfite conversion, 1% lambda phage DNA purified with PureLink Quick PCR Purification Kit was added to each gDNA sample. Sequencing of bisulfite-converted whole genome DNA libraries Library construction, bisulfite conversion and sequencing were performed at the Beijing Genomics Institute. Briefly, DNA was fragmented into 100–300 bp fragments by sonication. The fragmentation parameters were as follows: duty cycle, 10%; intensity, 5; cycles/burst, 200; cycles, 16; total fragmentation time, 960 s. Fragmentation was confirmed using a 2100 Bioanalyzer. Fragments were end repaired as recommended by the manufacturer. Repaired fragments were ligated with methylated sequencing adaptors using a paired end adaptor oligo kit and oligo mix 5. Ligated fragments were selected by gel electrophoresis and fragments of size 360 bp extracted using a QIAquick gel extraction kit. Size-selected fragments were exposed to a MethylMiner methylated DNA enrichment kit and then subsequently bisulfite treated using an EZ DNA methylation kit. Libraries were amplified using T4 polymerase, and sequenced on Illumina’s HiSeq PE 150 platform. WGBS sequence analysis and mapping DNA methylation Data were filtered to remove adaptor sequences, duplicate sequences, contamination and low-quality reads using BGI software. We mapped our reads onto the D. discoideum genome assembly 1.0 using BSMAP version 2.9 with seed size 12, five maximum allowed mismatches per read and a base quality cutoff of 20. The resulting SAM files were then converted to sorted BAM files using SAMtools v1.8. These files were then run through the BSMAP v2.9 methratio.py script, which extracts the number of converted and unconverted reads at each position and corresponding methylation ratios, sequence context, strand and coordinate for each cytosine from BSMAP mapping results. Duplicate reads were not counted and only unique mappings with at least 4× coverage were considered. Reads were similarly mapped onto the lambda phage genome. From these data, we determined the number of converted and unconverted reads at each cytosine position in the Dictyostelium and lambda genome assemblies, accounting for the fact that each read comes from a bisulfite reaction on one strand or the other. The average methylation level across the genome was determined by the ratio of the number of reads supporting methylation to the number of reads covering a particular cytosine site: where N m represents the number of methyl-C reads and N nm represents the number of nonmethylated reads. To identify individual cytosines that were significantly methylated in the Dictyostelium genome, we compared the number of converted and nonconverted reads at each site. We used only sites that had coverage of four or more reads. Methylation ratios for each cytosine in the genome were calculated along with a lower and an upper bound for the 95% confidence interval of methylation ratio using the Wilson score interval for binomial proportion. Only cytosines with a lower 95% confidence interval of methylation ratio bound of at least 0.05 were considered to be methylated residues. We asked how likely these counts were under a binomial test where the probability of success is one minus the conversion rate, and corrected this probability value for multiple testing, as previously described. From this, were able to determine the statistically significant methylated sites in the genome and the level of methylation at individual 5-methylcytosines. Bisulfite conversion efficiency Bisulfite conversion efficiency was determined for each WGBS dataset from the lambda phage spike-in control, in which all cytosines should have been converted, using the following equation: where T count is the total number of thymine reads and CT count is the total number of cytosine and thymine reads at each cytosine position. Comparative methylome analysis Each of the four WGBS datasets were sorted and overlapped in MATLAB using the ‘intersect’ function to isolate only robust methylated sites present in all datasets. DNMT knockout and homologs AX4 cells harboring a knockout of the endogenous dnmA gene were kindly provided by the Shaulsky lab. To investigate the presence of genes in the simultaneously sequenced AX4 wild-type and dnmA knockout strains, SAMtools v1.8. was used to index the sorted BAM files of mapped reads and then extract the read depth from them, using the option -a to include positions at which no reads aligned. Using MATLAB, the median and mean read depths across the candidate genes were extracted and compared to the median and mean read depths across their respective chromosome to determine the presence or absence of the genes in the sequenced WT3 and KO genomes. HMMER v3.3 was used to search the D. discoideum proteome for candidate homologs of DNA methyltransferases using the raw HMM for the DNA methylase protein domain family obtained from PFAM. Bisulfite sequencing at individual robust sites Genomic DNA was extracted from vegetative cells and cells 18–24 h into development as described earlier. These cells were distinct from those used in the whole genome analyses. Bisulfite conversion was performed on 600 ng of gDNA in each reaction using Zymo Research EZ DNA Methylation-Lightning Kit according to manufacturer’s instructions. Primers were designed using MethPrimer to generate a PCR amplicon size of 406 bp around the target site at position 2524803 on chromosome 4 on the plus strand and a PCR amplicon size of 441 bp around the target site at position 2524824 on chromosome 4 on the minus strand: Chr4 plus F: 5′-TTTATAGGTTTATAGTTGGAAATATTTTAGTAATA-3′ Chr4 plus R: 5′-CTAATATTTTACCTCATTTAAATAATTTTTT-3′ Chr4 minus F: 5′-AATAAATATATTAATATTGGTGTTTTATTTTATTTG-3′ Chr4 minus R: 5′-TACATTACTCTAATAATATTCTATAAACCTACAACT-3′ PCR products were ligated into the pGEM ® -T Easy Vector and sequenced as previously described. Sequences were analyzed using the Kismeth web-based tool, with settings for minimum fraction of positive matches set to 0.6 and minimum fraction of length set to 0.5. Secondary structure analysis of identified palindromic sequences Secondary structure predictions were generated using default settings on the RNAstructure Fold web server with nucleic acid type set to DNA. The sequence input was limited to the palindromic region including the cytosine of interest. Search of palindromic sequences across AX4 genome Palindromes were screened using the R package Biostrings. The function findPalindromes was used to search palindromes across all six main chromosome sequences of D. discoideum AX4. A minimum length of 19 bp and no limit for maximum length or number of loops were used. All nested palindromes were removed, leaving only the longest palindromes. The quantiles of predicted palindrome length were calculated with R Statistical Software 4.2.2. Violin plots of predicted palindrome length distributions were created with ggplot2. Each mC identified in at least two of the methylomes analyzed was mapped to determine whether the mC is located within a palindrome. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Whole genome mapping, conversion and coverage rates Sequencing of bisulfite-converted genomic DNA from D. discoideum AX4 WT cells grown to between 18 and 24 h of post-starvation development, and spike-in control lambda bacteriophage DNA, across three replicate experiments generated a total of 239.2 million reads after quality control. This time window for the cells was chosen to ensure temporal heterogeneity of the gDNA sample. Previous studies have reported increasing levels of methylation as development progresses when samples were collected at precise time points, with the highest levels of DNA methylation reported in cells 24 h post-starvation. The results in our current study are not directly comparable to that study, as the gDNA samples were collected across an 18–24 h developmental time window, prior to the formation of the fruiting body. Of the sequencing reads, between 54.96% and 71.81% mapped to unique regions of the D. discoideum genome, which equates to an 18.13–66.15-fold average coverage across the six chromosomes in the genome, respectively, in each replicate. 1 ). All WT replicates shared a very similar sequencing profile, with >90% of the bases in the genome covered by 100 or more reads. Over 80% of cytosines are covered by 75 or more reads, resulting in coverage of >98.87% of all cytosines in the replicate genomes with near-identical profiles for CG, CHG and CHH sequence contexts. 2C ). The bisulfite conversion rate in our experiments ranged from 99.30% to 99.53%, measured by the C-to-U deamination rate in the unmethylated lambda genome, indicating that the false-negative rate was <0.7% in each case. Table 1. Mapping, coverage and conversion rates for individual methylomes Figure 2. Sequencing depth and cumulative coverage of the Dictyostelium methylome. Sequencing depth distribution across the entire genome. Cumulative coverage across the entire genome, e.g. ∼90% of sites are covered by 100 or more reads. Percentage... Overall genomic methylation profile Initial methylome analysis indicates that a very small proportion of cytosines in the Dictyostelium genome are methylated. The average overall level of detectable methylation across the entire genome, calculated from the ratio of C reads to total reads, is <0.52% in every replicate, with a similar profile across all chromosomes and mitochondrial DNA. It should be noted that this may include a number of false-positive C reads arising from a failure to convert in the bisulfite reaction and therefore is likely an overestimate of the global methylation level. Nonetheless, methylation is detected predominantly at CHH sequences, but is also found at CG and CHG sequences. 2D ). Of the ∼7.5 million cytosines in the genome, only 303, 2135 and 3432 are significantly methylated. 2 ). This methylome profile mirrors previous studies that have reported global methylation levels in the Dictyostelium genome of 0%, 0.14% and 0.20% using different methodologies, indicating that DNA methylation is very rare in this species. These results are strikingly different from the methylation profile observed in other eukaryotes. In mammals, 60–90% of CpGs can be methylated, while in Hymenoptera insects 0.51–0.67% of CpGs are methylated. The sparse 0.004–0.045% of mCs detected in the three WT Dictyostelium genome samples collected over an 18–24 h post-starvation developmental time window is therefore lower than the level found in other eukaryotic organisms with bona fide DNA methylation. Among the individual sites that demonstrate a significant level of methylation in our study, the vast majority are methylated in <10% of reads, but cytosines with up to a 100% methylation level are detected. 2D ). It should be noted that while low levels of methylation at individual sites may be biologically significant, they may also potentially be a result of the temporal heterogeneity of the gDNA sample analyzed and/or represent false positives. Table 2. Total number of statistically significant methylated sites for each WGBS dataset Methylation levels at individual mCs In order to further investigate the identified cytosine residues with statistically significant levels of DNA methylation, we analyzed their profile across the genome. All chromosomes and the mitochondrial DNA show a wide range of methylation levels for mCs, with mCHH sites carrying the broadest range. 3A ). In parallel, we plotted the total read number for each of these mCs 3B ) and compared this to methylation level. Strikingly, there is a clear inverse relationship between read depth and methylation level at the mCs, with sites showing higher levels of methylation having lower read depth and vice versa. 3C ). This pattern is particularly clear if we just consider sites with a read depth below 150 total reads. 3D ). This potentially indicates that the high level of methylation detected at some of these mCs may simply reflect the overall low number of reads at these sites and opens up the clear possibility that the residues identified as methylated may be false positives. The clear negative correlation between the number of mCs identified in each replicate and the overall fold coverage of the genome 2 ) suggests that a higher number of reads at each position potentially eliminate skewed methylation ratios that may otherwise appear artificially high. Figure 3. Methylation level and read depth at individual mCs. The methylation level at the individual cytosine residues with statistically significant levels of DNA methylation is depicted for each of the six genomic chromosomes and the mitochondrial DNA. Only... Knockout of DNMA does not alter overall methylation profile In addition to the three replicates of the WT AX4 methylome, we also performed the same WGBS experiment on an AX4 strain harboring a knockout of the sole DNA methyltransferase in Dictyostelium. Once more, the overall sequencing 1 ) and methylation profile 2 ) in the KO strain was similar to the three WT methylome replicates, with a total of 2172 significant mCs identified. One potential explanation for this observation is that the knockout of dnmA was incomplete, in which case the DNMA enzyme may still be functionally produced in these cells. To address this possibility, we analyzed the sequencing reads in the WT3 and KO WGBS datasets by extracting the mean and median read depths across the coordinates of the dnmA gene and compared them to the depth across the entire chromosome 5. 4 ). The dnmA gene appeared to be knocked out as previously described, with a median coverage of 1× across the dnmA gene in the KO strain compared to a median of 117× across the entire chromosome. In contrast, the median coverage in the WT3 genome was 83× across the dnmA gene and 97× across the entire chromosome, respectively, indicating that the gene is present in the WT as expected. As a control, we performed a similar analysis at the trmt5 gene, which is annotated as a putative tRNA methyltransferase in the Dictyostelium genome. At the trmt5 gene, no obvious difference in read depth was detected between KO and WT3 strains. Taken as whole, these results indicate that the dnmA gene is deleted in the KO strain, but this has no impact on the overall methylation profile of the genome when compared to WT. This discovery suggests that DNMA is not actively involved in the methylation of DNA in the Dictyostelium genome and is therefore consistent with earlier studies indicating that the DNMA enzyme exhibits specificity for tRNA molecules as a preferred target substrate. Figure 4. Confirmation of dnmA knockout. Read depths across the dnmA gene coordinates and the surrounding sequence in the WT3 genome and the KO genome. The read depth diminishes at the 5′ and 3′ ends of the dnmA gene in the KO, consistent... Identification of 11 robust sites resistant to bisulfite conversion The four methylome datasets were analyzed to identify only significantly methylated sites present in all of the methylomes. Despite the fact that the samples are not uniform, as they were collected across an 18–24 h developmental time widow, this analysis was conducted under the assumption that cytosines that consistently appear across the different methylomes are the most likely to represent true methylated cytosines. Only 11 such cytosines located on four different chromosomes were identified with a statistically significant methylation level in all datasets. 3 ). Excluding the KO dataset from this analysis resulted in the identification of only one additional site on chromosome 6 at position 2767592. Intriguingly, 7 of the 11 robust sites lie within three tight genomic clusters located on chromosomes 2 and 4. Table 3. Statistically significant methylated cytosine positions on each chromosome in D. discoideum determined by bioinformatic analysis of four replicate methylomes The 11 robust methylated sites were dispersed across the plus and minus strands on four different chromosomes. All sites, except the one on chromosome 5, were in 5′-CHH-3′ sequence contexts and none were in 5′-CG-3′ sequences, 4 ), which was unsurprising given the overwhelmingly AT-rich sequence distribution in D. discoideum. Methylation ratios for each site varied from 0.138 to 0.5 across datasets, with many sites identified as methylated in ∼30% of reads. 4 ). A critical question emerging from these data is whether these 11 robust sites do in fact represent true mCs in the genome or false positives generated through a reproducible experimental artifact. Table 4. Methylation ratios for the 11 robust methylated sites present in all datasets Bisulfite sequencing at individual robust sites in chromosome 4 cluster To address this question in more detail, we further investigated two of the robust sites located in close proximity to each other using targeted BSP sequencing. The two sites in question are found on opposite DNA strands, but are both located in a CHH sequence context and are only 21 bp apart on chromosome 4. Previous studies have indicated that overall DNA methylation increases through Dictyostelium development, with the highest levels in cells at 24 h post-starvation. We therefore analyzed the methylation pattern at and around these two sites using BSP sequencing in both vegetative cells and cells at 18–24 h of post-starvation development. Plus strand site For the robust target site located at position 2524803 on the plus strand, methylation was detected at only 5 out of 33 clones in vegetative cells, representing a low methylation frequency of 15.2%. 5A ). Methylation was also detected at five other cytosines, out of the 27 total within the BSP amplicon, at positions 2524847, 2524849, 2524850, 2525008 and 2525071. None of these cytosines were methylated in >2 of the 33 clones. 5A ). A similar pattern was detected in the developed cells, with methylation of the target site in only 6 out of 37 clones, equating to a 16.2% methylation frequency. 5B ). Methylation was also detected at seven other cytosines within the BSP amplicon in developed cells, at positions 2524758, 2524760, 2524813, 2524847, 2524849, 2525008 and 2525071. None of these sites were methylated in >2 out of 37 clones, with the exception of the site at 2525008, which was methylated in three clones. 5B ). The methylation frequency of the plus strand target site is not significantly different between vegetative and developed cells as determined by a chi-square goodness-of-fit test and therefore indicates there is no evidence of a change in methylation through development. However, combining the data from vegetative and developed cells indicates that the overall relatively low level 15.7% methylation frequency detectable at the plus strand target site is still higher than that at any other site in the amplicon, all of which fall in the range of 1.4–5.7%. Figure 5. BSP sequencing at robust sites in chromosome 4 cluster. Cytosine methylation patterns of individual clones derived from sequencing are shown in the 5′–3′ orientation as single horizontal lines. Sequence context of each cytosine... Minus strand site For the robust target site located at position 2524824 on the minus strand, a very similar overall profile to the plus strand site in the cluster is observed. Although only 4 out of 34 clones were methylated at the minus strand target site in vegetative cells 5C ) and 3 out of 36 in developed cells, 5D ), this cytosine was still distinguishably more methylated than any of the other 27 cytosines in the amplicon. Methylation was detectable at 10 other cytosines in total, including at positions 2524729, 2524889, 2524976, 2525007 and 2525049 in vegetative cells, 5C ), and cytosines at positions 2524741, 2524753, 2524976, 2525038 and 2525039 and the cytosine at position 2524780 in developed cells. 5D ). The overall methylation frequency of the minus strand target site is not significantly different between vegetative and developed cells as determined by a chi-square goodness-of-fit test, supporting the observation from the plus strand data that there is no change in methylation during development. However, combining the data from vegetative and developed cells indicates that the overall low-level 10.0% methylation frequency detectable at the minus strand target site is above that at any other site in the amplicon, all of which fall in the range of 1.4–2.9%. Comparison of methylation status across all datasets Given that the two robust target sites in the chromosome 4 cluster consistently demonstrated a reproducibly higher level of methylation than any other cytosines in their genomic vicinity, we employed an integrated analysis of both our BSP and WGBS results to further address the methylation status at and around these sites. The methylation ratios for each cytosine with any detectable methylation in the BSP amplicons and/or any of the four methylomes were tabulated for the plus strand 5 ) and minus strand. 6 ). The methylation ratios at each site were also averaged in a one-way ANOVA, which identified at least one statistically significant difference in the mean methylation ratios between the sites. Post hoc comparisons using the Tukey HSD test determined that the methylation ratio mean at the robust target site on both strands was significantly greater than the mean at each of the other sites on their respective strands, where P < 0.001 for each comparison. This result indicates that, with the exception of the two robust target sites on chromosome 4, every other cytosine with detectable methylation in the BSP data is likely a false positive, potentially occurring as a result of spurious low-level conversion in the bisulfite reaction. This observation is supported by the fact that all these sites were largely found to be unmethylated in the methylome datasets. The exception was the cytosine at position 2524847 in the plus strand data, which had methylation frequencies ranging from 6.7% to 28.7% in the methylome datasets. 5 ). However, the high frequency of 28.7% was found in the WT1 methylome, which had the lowest coverage with only 11 total reads at that site, making it the least reliable measure of methylation ratio in the WGBS datasets. Table 5. Chromosome 4 cluster plus strand methylation profile Table 6. Chromosome 4 cluster minus strand methylation profile For the two robust target sites, the methylation ratios were noticeably higher in the WGBS datasets than the BSP data. The plus strand cytosine at position 2524803 was identified as methylated in 30.6–48.0% of reads in the different WGBS datasets, but only in 15.2% and 16.2% of the BSP clones. 5 ). Similarly, the minus strand cytosine at position 2524824 was identified as methylated in 14.3–37.5% of reads in the different WGBS datasets, but only in 11.8% and 8.3% of the BSP clones. 6 ). These results indicate that the WGBS methylation ratios may represent an overestimate of the methylation frequency at the robust sites, potentially caused by relatively low read depth at these positions. One question we must consider is whether such low-level cytosine methylation is distinguishable from false positives. Palindromic sequences as a source of false positives In order to address this question, we investigated the hypothesis that the consistent methylation of the 11 sites, and perhaps the genomic clustering observed among some of them, is the result of a molecular characteristic they all share, which confers increased resistance to bisulfite conversion. The detection of 5mC using bisulfite conversion was first shown by Frommer et al. and Clark et al. 30 years ago. The method relies upon the complete deamination of cytosine to uracil by modification with bisulfite, followed by PCR of the modified genomic DNA and sequencing of the products. 5mC does not react with bisulfite and therefore in the final sequence analysis all of the original unmethylated cytosines appear as thymines while 5mC residues are displayed as cytosines. In contexts such as the Dictyostelium genome, where there are potentially very low levels of methylation and/or the methylation is variable in a given DNA sequence, it becomes difficult to determine whether the detected cytosines represent bona fide methylation or false-positive unconverted cytosines generated as an experimental artifact. In an attempt to identify anything unusual about the genomic regions around the methylated sequences in Dictyostelium, GC content was calculated in the 100 bp upstream and downstream of each of the 11 sites and was found to be markedly lower than the 23% average across the entire genome. 4 ). However, this was not particularly unexpected as all of the sites are located in non-protein-coding regions of the genome, where lower GC content is typical in the AT-rich D. discoideum genome. The most remarkable pattern observed across the 11 sites was their consistent location within palindromic sequences 48–80 nucleotides in length. The predicted secondary structures of the seven palindromic regions harboring all 11 sites are shown in Figure ​ Figure6. 6. Given these predictions, there is a strong possibility that, as single-stranded DNA molecules generated in the bisulfite treatment protocol, these sequences form rigorous hairpin-like secondary structures. 6 ). As bisulfite-mediated deamination of cytosine to uracil only occurs in ssDNA, it is possible that the stem–loop double-stranded secondary structures shield to some extent the cytosines within them from bisulfite conversion, leading to higher levels of nonconversion than other sites. Incomplete separation of strands or reannealing of strands during the bisulfite conversion reaction has been shown to produce false-positive artifacts. In the case of the 11 sites in our datasets, it is likely that the denaturation step of the bisulfite reaction is separating the plus and minus strands adequately, but the ssDNA may be rapidly reannealing to itself in these palindromic regions, essentially forming a stretch of double-stranded DNA that inhibits bisulfite conversion at those sites. Figure 6. Predicted stem–loop structures of palindromic sequences around the 11 significantly methylated sites. The lowest energy conformation and its minimum free energy is shown. Nucleotides identified as significantly methylated are highlighted in yellow.... One issue with this explanation is that in cases where there are other cytosines within the palindromic region, the other cytosines are not necessarily showing high rates of nonconversion across the four methylomes. Notably there were very few other ‘converted’ cytosines within the seven palindromic regions. As a result of the strongly AT-rich composition of these regions, there were only between two and eight total cytosines within any one palindromic sequence across the plus or minus strands. 6 ). An analysis of the WGBS methylation ratios of the other ‘converted’ cytosines within the palindromic sequences actually reveals some degree of nonconversion, with these residues meeting our criteria for statistically significant methylation in zero to three of the four methylomes, with a median of two. Strikingly, there is one characteristic shared among all the cytosines predicted to be within the loop of the hairpin structure : 6 ): they were all completely converted in the bisulfite reaction in every methylome and therefore identified as unmethylated. As the loop of the hairpin would essentially remain single-stranded and susceptible to bisulfite conversion at the usual rate, while cytosines within the double-stranded stem would be more resistant to conversion, this supports the idea that the secondary structure strongly impacts bisulfite conversion efficiency. We therefore conclude that the methylation detected at the 11 robust sites in the D. discoideum genome represents false-positive artifacts resulting from the high tendency of the regions around these sites to form localized dsDNA that inhibits bisulfite conversion. Majority of identified methylated cytosines are located in palindromic sequences To further investigate the potential for palindromic sequences to act as a source of false positives, we analyzed their prevalence across the entire Dictyostelium genome. We identified 1770 palindromic sequences distributed across all six chromosomes. The overall profile of the palindromic sequences in terms of size was also similar across all six chromosomes, with the vast majority ranging from 19 to 80 bp. 7A ). We then examined the frequency that a residue identified as a 5mC in at least two of the methylomes was found in one of these palindromic sequences. Strikingly, in every possible pairwise three-way and the single four-way methylome analysis, at least 45.71% of the identified common 5mCs were located in palindromic sequences. 7B ). Furthermore, as the stringency of the analysis is increased, by requiring a 5mC to be shared between more methylomes, so did the percentage of 5mCs located in palindromic sequences. If just two methylomes are considered, the range is 45.71–69.05%, for three methylomes it is 76.47–91.67% and for the 11 5mCs shared in all four methylomes 100% are in palindromic sequences. 7B ). These results strongly support the hypothesis that palindromic sequences are a potentially significant source of false-positive artifacts in bisulfite conversion experiments. Figure 7. Majority of identified methylated sites are located in palindromic sequences. A total of 1770 palindromic sequences are identified across the six Dictyostelium chromosomes, with a similar size profile on each chromosome. The number of 5mCs shared... CONCLUSIONS The paucity of studies investigating DNA methylation in D. discoideum has prohibited our detailed understanding of the evolution and function of eukaryotic DNA methylation with reference to D. discoideu m ’s unique phylogenetic position. That is, D. discoideum diverged soon after the plant–animal split and is therefore closely related to two kingdoms with largely present or absent DNA methylation systems. 1 ). Our results in this study indicate that there is no significant DNA methylation in Dictyostelium and that any experimentally detectable methylation at cytosine residues is likely a result of reproducible artifacts and/or low read depth in the whole genome analyses. Previous studies have addressed some of the potential sources of artifacts in bisulfite sequencing, identified critical experimental parameters and offered approaches to resolve such artifacts in WGBS studies. The results we present in this work reveal an additional potentially significant source of false-positive artifacts in bisulfite sequencing, which, to our knowledge, has not previously been reported. Our findings support the earlier observation that the genome of D. discoideum is largely devoid of methylation, but contradict the results obtained by Kuhlmann et al. and Katoh et al., in which they estimated 0.03–0.20% of all cytosines in the genome were methylated with a detectable increase between vegetative and developing AX4 cells. It should, however, be noted that the results of our current study may not be directly comparable to those in earlier studies as the gDNA samples we analyzed were collected over an 18–24 h post-starvation time window, prior to fruiting body formation. Combining our new data with the knowledge that there is a functional DNMT2 homolog with potentially broad substrate recognition in D. discoideum opens up the exciting possibility of further dissecting this evolutionarily conserved epigenetic system. It will be critical for future studies to focus on further characterization of the functional activity of the DNMA enzyme, in particular with reference to previously confirmed tRNA substrates, and investigation of the associated phenotypic impacts in the dnmA KO background in Dictyostelium. DATA AVAILABILITY The sequencing datasets supporting the results of this article are available at the NCBI Sequence Read Archive under BioProject accession number PRJNA946158. Supplementary Material lqad035_Supplemental_Files Click here for additional data file. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Authors’ contributions : R.A.D. conceived of the study, participated in its design, established the genomics pipeline, coordinated and drafted the manuscript. T.C.C. participated in the design of the study, carried out sequence and bioinformatic analysis, performed bisulfite sequencing and helped to draft the manuscript. J.L.S. conceived of the study, participated in the design of the study and helped to draft the manuscript. J.S.D. performed gDNA preparation. J.F.T. and J.M.D. performed sequence and bioinformatic analysis and helped to draft the manuscript. D.A.L. conceived of the study, participated in the design of the study and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Contributor Information Robert A Drewell, Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA. Tayla C Cormier, Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA. Jacob L Steenwyk, Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA. Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA. James St Denis, Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA. Javier F Tabima, Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA. Jacqueline M Dresch, Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA. Denis A Larochelle, Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA. SUPPLEMENTARY DATA Supplementary Data are available at NARGAB Online. FUNDING National Institutes of Health. Conflict of interest statement. None declared. Article information NAR Genom Bioinform. 2023 Jun; 5: lqad035. Published online 2023 Apr 18. doi: 10.1093/nargab/lqad035 PMCID: PMC10111430 PMID: 37081864 Robert A Drewell, Tayla C Cormier, Jacob L Steenwyk, James St Denis, Javier F Tabima, Jacqueline M Dresch, and Denis A Larochelle Robert A Drewell Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA Find articles by Robert A Drewell Tayla C Cormier Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA Find articles by Tayla C Cormier Jacob L Steenwyk Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA Find articles by Jacob L Steenwyk James St Denis Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA Find articles by James St Denis Javier F Tabima Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA Find articles by Javier F Tabima Jacqueline M Dresch Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA Find articles by Jacqueline M Dresch Denis A Larochelle Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA Find articles by Denis A Larochelle Robert A Drewell, Biology Department, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, MA, 01610, USA; Contributor Information. Corresponding author. To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 508 793 7625; Fax: +1 508 793 7174; Email: ude.ukralc@llewerdr Received 2022 Oct 14; Revised 2023 Mar 13; Accepted 2023 Mar 30. Copyright © The Author 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Articles from NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press 