 By representing the high-resolution crystal structures of a number of enzymes using the elastic network model, it has been shown that only a few low-frequency normal modes are needed to describe the large-scale domain movements that are triggered by ligand binding. Here we explore a link between the nearly invariant nature of the modes that describe functional dynamics at the mesoscopic level and the large evolutionary sequence variations at the residue level. By using a structural perturbation method, which probes the residue-specific response to perturbations, we identify a sparse network of strongly conserved residues that transmit allosteric signals in three structurally unrelated biological nanomachines, namely, DNA polymerase, myosin motor, and the Escherichia coli chaperonin. Based on the response of every mode to perturbations, which are generated by interchanging specific sequence pairs in a multiple sequence alignment, we show that the functionally relevant low-frequency modes are most robust to sequence variations. Our work shows that robustness of dynamical modes at the mesoscopic level is encoded in the structure through a sparse network of residues that transmit allosteric signals. Keywords: DNA polymerase, myosin, GroEL, elastic network model, robustness A common theme in the function of many biological nanomachines is that they undergo large-scale domain movements in response to binding of ligands or other biomolecules. DNA polymerases are well studied examples in which such large conformational changes have been described using crystal structures and biophysical studies. The global structure of polymerases is described by using the hand metaphor. The first step in the function involves the binding of the duplex DNA to the unliganded polymerases, which triggers the closing of the thumb domain around the DNA. Subsequent binding of dNTP to the binary complex results in the rotation of the fingers from the open conformation to the closed state. Similarly, large-scale conformational changes, induced by ATP binding and hydrolysis, are involved in the directed movements of myosins on actin filaments. In another class of nanomachines, binding of ATP to the equatorial domain of the Escherichia coli chaperonin GroEL results in a downward movement of the intermediate domain, which results in the locking of the ATP-binding sites. Upon binding of GroES, the apical domain swings upward and simultaneously twists, thus doubling the volume of the cavity as compared with the unliganded state. Such large-scale conformational changes are linked to the function of GroEL. To obtain insights into these universally prevalent motions, normal modes analysis of the elastic network model representations of large protein complexes have been used to describe ligand-induced conformational changes. A number of studies on vastly different enzymes have shown that the domain movements are dominated by one or a few normal modes. To understand how the allosteric transitions are executed with high fidelity, it is important to explore the relationship between the global dynamics at the macromolecular level and the amino acid variations at the microscopic level. In the context of ENM, we introduce a previously undescribed method to assess the robustness of all of the normal modes to the variations in model parameters. Such variations naturally arise from differences in sequences in homologous proteins. We propose that evolution should preferentially conserve strongly those contacts that are critical to the functional dynamics, while leaving those functionally unimportant contacts susceptible to unconstrained mutations. Therefore, we hypothesize that the functionally relevant normal modes computed from the NMA of the ENM are robust to the sequence variations. Recently, we showed, using the structural perturbation method, that in a number of polymerases a sparse network of physically connected residues that transmit allosteric signals through the functionally relevant modes are also strongly conserved. In this work, we establish, by probing the variations in the response of all of the normal modes to changes in the interactions that are expressed in forms of perturbations involving contacts, that the low-frequency modes are robust to large sequence variations across a given family. Applications to three biological nanomachines, namely, DNA polymerase, myosin II, and the E. coli chaperonin to sequence variations. Moreover, other subdominant modes show that robustness of the dynamically relevant modes is not only an indicator of the functional relevance but also may be encoded in the structures of biological nanomachines. Results To test our hypothesis, we consider the conformational changes in DNA polymerase, myosin II, and the E. coli chaperonin GroEL. The open/closed transitions in polymerases are well described by just one normal mode. Similarly, only one or two modes account for the large conformational changes in myosin II upon ATP binding. The ligand-induced changes in the structure of GroEL analyzed by ENM also showed the dominance of only the low-frequency modes. We first evaluated the relevance of each normal mode to the observed functional conformational changes. Then, we quantitatively assessed the robustness of each mode to sequence variations using two complementary methods. The final step involved cross-examining the above plots of relevance-vs.-mode and robustness-vs.-mode to assess possible correlations between them. Thermus aquaticus DNA Polymerase I. The transition from the open form, asymmetric intermediates of GroEL are formed with the cochaperonin GroES and nucleotides bound only to one of the seven-subunit rings. The structure of the GroEL–GroES– 7 complex reveals large en bloc movements of the cis ring’s intermediate and apical domains. Elevation and twist of the apical domains double the volume of the central cavity that results in the burial of the hydrophobic peptide-binding residues at the interface between GroEL subunits and GroES. The large-scale domain movement results in a predominantly hydrophilic cavity that is conducive to protein folding. A single mode dominates the ligand-induced conformational changes. We focus on the conformational change for a single subunit from the ADP+GROES state to the apo state. The NMA for the ADP+GROES state structure yields a spectrum of low-frequency normal modes. The conformational change in the transition 1AON_A → 1GRL is dominated by mode 1 that describes multiple hinge motions of the apical, intermediate, and equatorial domains. As the mode number increases, the overlap value decays rapidly, although there are occasional minor peaks. Fig. 5. ENM and sequence analysis for E. coli GroEL. See the legend to Fig. 1 for a description. Low-frequency modes are robust to sequence variations. The measure of contact-based robustness f δ E has a global minimum at mode 1. The minimum value of f δ E for mode 1 is statistically significant. There are several other modes with fairly low f δ E. Almost all of the modes above 10 have statistically insignificant robustness. We found similar results in the plot of δω-based robustness f δ E ′ as a function of mode. There is a global minimum at mode 1. Most of the modes lack statistically significant robustness except for a few among the lowest 10. Therefore, the results from the above two assessments of robustness support our hypothesis that functionally relevant modes are most robust to sequence variations. Based on the dynamical domain partition for mode 1, four domains are found. Three of them correspond to the apical, intermediate, and equatorial domain, respectively, and the fourth corresponds to a loop at the interface between A and I. For mode 1, the hot-spot residues are clustered around domain I and the A–I and E–I interfaces where many functionally important and highly conserved residues are distributed. Fig. 6. Dynamical domain partitions for conformational changes described by the most robust mode 1 of E. coli GroEL. The description of the arrows indicating the relative motions of domains is the same as that given in the legend to Fig. 2. The hot-spot residues... Identification of Network of Residues That Transmit Allosteric Signals. The SPM also can be used to identify the network of distantly connected residues that cooperatively orchestrate the large-scale domain movements. By assessing the degree of response to site-specific perturbations, the importance of a given residue in facilitating allosteric transitions can be gauged. By using the SPM, which can be implemented by the contact-based analysis or the δω-based method, we have identified the mechanically “hot” residues for the three nanomachines. Taq DNA polymerase I. For the Taq DNA polymerase I several residues that span the fingers/palm domains are involved in the three modes that are required in the domain movements. Among the hot-spot residues, I614 and F667 were shown to be critical for fidelity of DNA replication. The network of allostery transmitting residues are explicitly shown in Fig. 2. Dictyostelium myosin II. Many of the residues identified by SPM have been shown to be functionally relevant in myosin II. The amino acid sequence similarity between Dictyostelium myosin II and human β-cardiac myosin have facilitated the study of the structural consequences of those hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mutations in human β-cardiac myosin heavy chain. Five HCM mutations are mapped to residues E492, F506, R695, A699, and F745 in Dictyostelium myosin II. The residues, which have been found to be relevant for myosin allostery, form a sparse network. E. coli GroEL chaperonin. Our analysis correctly identifies Y360 and D361 as being functionally relevant. Mutant Y360E has reduced ATPase activity, whereas D361K lacks the ability to bind to the cochaperonin GroES. Supporting Text contains comparisons between the predictions of the SPM and experiments. The wiring diagram for allostery is shown in Fig. 6. Discussion and Conclusion The ability to transmit signals over long distances so that specific function can be carried out is the hallmark of allostery. In this work, we have established a precise connection between functionally relevant motions that describe allosteric transitions in three structurally unrelated biological nanomachines and their invariance to large sequence changes. The nature of these modes is encoded at the structural level and is evolutionarily conserved. We also used the SPM to identify a network of residues in DNA polymerase, myosin motor, and the E. coli chaperonin that are responsible for allostery. Remarkably, not only do we find that residues in this network are strongly conserved but also that the network is sparsely connected. Methods Multiple Sequence Alignment. We used psi-blast to obtain homologous sequences. Subsequently, we used clustalw to align the sequences. We retained only sequences with >30% sequence identity to the query sequence. To ensure the generality of the results, we also performed psi-blast against other protein databases. ENM. By using the C α atomic coordinates of a protein’s native structure, we built an ENM using a harmonic potential to account for pairwise interactions between all of the C α atoms that are within a cutoff distance. The energy in the elastic network representation is where C ij is the force constant for contact, which is taken to be a constant C for all contacts; d ij is the distance between the C α atoms i and j ; and d ij 0 is the corresponding distance as given in the crystal structure. For the Hamiltonian in Eq. 1, we performed NMA. The eigenvectors of the lowest-frequency normal modes were used to compute the overlaps with the conformational changes between two states with known structures. Our calculations were unaffected when R C was varied in the range 10 Å ≤ R C ≤ 15 Å. Assessing the Dynamical Importance of a Spatial Contact. The dynamical importance of a specific contact for a mode M was assessed by using the elastic energy in the contact if the ENM was displaced along the direction given by the eigenvector of mode M. The perturbation energy E ij M is related to δω i M by The residues with high δω i M are dynamically critical to the ENM motion of mode M and are the “hot-spot residues.” SPM. The basic premise of SPM is that the response of the modes of the ENM to local perturbations can be used to discern the network of functionally relevant residues. The local perturbation in the force constant for contact was modeled by using the MSA of homologous sequences. The contact-dependent changes in the spring constant were taken into account by using a statistical interaction term between residues i and j that explicitly depends on their local environment. By using evolutionary information in the sequences, we used a probability-based modeling to compute δ C ij. For two residue pairs λ 1 = and λ 2 = that form the contact, where α, β are indices for any two homologous sequences in the MSA, we define the residue-pair similarity score using where P ) is the conditional probability of occurrence of residues pair substitution λ 1 ↔ λ 2 provided contact is conserved. By “conserved” we mean that the context-dependent statistical interaction is maintained upon λ 1 ↔ λ 2 substitution. Here we allowed the swapping of residues between, because that should not alter the physical pairwise interaction between them. We use the PAM250 substitution matrix to evaluate residue similarity. We assume that the commonly observed residue substitutions in homologous proteins preserve residue–residue contact interactions within the protein native structure. The variation of the statistical interaction for contact due to the residue pair substitution λ 1 ↔ λ 2 was taken to be proportional to the probability of not conserving the contact if the substitution λ 1 ↔ λ 2 was allowed where Δ is a constant that yields the maximal variation of interaction. For two randomly generated pairs, we computed the average S rand = 〈 S 〉 rand and set By using Eq. 5 and Bayes theorem, we get Here we set P rand = 0.5. The variation of the force constant for contact is where the average is over all for the given pair from the MSA at column i and j. The robustness of a mode to sequence variations was assessed by using the fractional variation of the distortional energy E If f δ E is small, then the specific mode is robust to sequence variations. For the contact-based analysis where δ C ij is computed in Eq. 8 and E ij M is defined in Eq. 2. Statistical Significance of the Mode Robustness. To evaluate the statistical significance of the mode robustness, we calculated the distribution of f δ E for randomly generated sequence–structure alignments. We performed 100 random permutations of the one-to-one mapping between the positions, the MSA, and the positions in the ENM. This procedure eliminates all correlations encoded in the original mapping of the protein structure. For each mode, we compute f δ E for every random permutation and obtain a distribution of f δ E, from which we can compute both its average 〈 f δ E 〉 rand and standard deviation σ rand. The Z score for f δ E is which is used to quantitatively assess the statistical significance of f δ E. The more negative Z is, the more statistically significant is f δ E. A mode is robust if f δ E is small and if Z is as negative as possible. Dynamical Domains Partition. To visualize the collective conformational changes described by each low-frequency normal mode, 6 ), we used the dynamical domains partition analysis based on analyzing the interdomain conformational changes described by the eigenvector of each mode. This analysis was performed by a computational tool called dyndom. Supplementary Material Supporting Information: Click here to view. 