 We use the flexible substrate method to study how and where mechanical forces are exerted during the migration of Dictyostelium slugs. This old and contentious issue has been left poorly understood so far. We are able to identify clearly separate friction forces in the tip and in the tail of the slug, traction forces mostly localized in the inner slug/surface contact area in the prespore region and large perpendicular forces directed in the outward direction at the outline of contact area. Surprisingly, the magnitude of friction and traction forces is decreasing with slug velocity indicating that these quantities are probably related to the dynamics of cell/substrate adhesion complexes. Contrary to what is always assumed in models and simulations, friction is not of fluid type but rather close to solid friction. We suggest that the slime sheath confining laterally the cell mass of the slug experiences a tension that in turn is pulling out the elastic substrate in the direction tangential to the slug profile where sheath is anchored. In addition, we show in the appendix that the iterative method we developed is well adapted to study forces over large and continuous fields when the experimental error is sufficiently low and when the plane of recorded bead deformations is close enough to the elastomer surface, requirements fulfilled in this experimental study of Dictyostelium slugs. INTRODUCTION Coordinated movements of cells are the topic of a great deal of investigation because of their intrinsic interest in morphogenesis and embryonic development and because of their medical importance. The social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum provides an experimentally accessible and simple model system to investigate chemotaxis and cell signaling, and to compare individual and coordinated cell movements. When the environment becomes depleted of nutrients, amebas stop dividing and aggregate to form a mound of cells. The mound elongates to become a finger-like structure called slug that migrates in response to light or heat. Both the aggregation of free living single amebas and the movements in multicellular aggregates including slugs are controlled by the concentration gradient of the chemoattractant cAMP produced and relayed by the cells. Over the last decade, a large amount of information has been obtained on the distribution of cell movements along slug axis both in normal three-dimensional slugs and in two-dimensional slugs formed at the oil water/interface. There is a characteristic pattern of movements in slugs: cells in the anterior prestalk zone show vigorous lateral movement by constantly changing their relative position, whereas cells in the central prespore zone move straight forward in the direction of slug migration in a generally periodic fashion. In 3D slugs, motion of prestalk cells is often helical around the central core of the tip. Siegert and Weijer proposed then that the prestalk cell movement is organized by a rotating scroll wave of cAMP, which serves as pacemaker for the formation of planar cAMP waves, which in turn direct periodic forward movement of prespore cells. Periodic motions and optical waves with the same period have been observed in 3D slugs of many Dictyostelium strains and in 2D slugs. The distribution of mechanical forces exerted by the migrating slug was never directly measured. Hence the mechanisms by which motive force is transmitted to the substrate and their location have been subject to numerous speculations and hypotheses. According to Dormann et al., anterior prestalk cells do not contribute to slug migration because the tip is often raised, only prespore cells propel the slug forward due to their close contact to the substrate. On the other hand, other studies suggested that the anterior cells exert larger forces than the posterior ones and this is proposed to be the primary cause of the anteroposterior pattern of prestalk and prespore cells in the slug. Some models assumed that migration involves coordinated force of a special group of peripheral cells. The only indirect measurement of motive force was made by Inouye et al.. Assuming a viscous drag in their analysis of the experimental data, the total motive force was found proportional to slug volume suggesting that the sum of the crawling movements of the whole cells is propelling the slug forward. Many models of slug migration have since then simply postulated that the motive force is volumetric. However, the mechanisms by which interior cells can transfer forces to the substrate remain unclear. Recently, Dallon and Othmer predicted that only cells in contact with the substrate can reasonably gain traction to produce a motive force for the slug. All these models take friction forces proportional to the relative velocity between object considered. This assumption has never been verified experimentally. The role of extracellular matrix surrounding the slug made of cellulose and glycoproteins was also never investigated in models. It has been shown experimentally that the slug velocity is correlated to the slug length. One of the motivations of this work came from our own measurements of this relation over extended ranges of lengths, using both 2D and 3D slugs. To understand the origin of this relation and more generally the mechanisms of the slug migration, one must have an idea of the force distribution along slug axis which is clearly not the case presently. Therefore, we apply here for migrating slugs the flexible substrate method which was so far only used to measure mechanical forces exerted by single cells like fibroblasts or keratocytes. The method lies on the observation of the deformations of fluorescent beads embedded inside an elastomer substrate. Complex calculations are necessary to invert the system of coupled integral equations given by linear elasticity theory that relate the substrate deformations to the forces. It was demonstrated that this inverse problem is ill-posed for usual levels of noise and that regularization in general cannot be neglected. Regularization is the process of solving these problems numerically by introducing some additional information about the solution, such as an assumption on its localization, on its smoothness, or a bound on the norm. In the Appendix of this article, we show using simulations that for slug force fields and for our range of experimental parameters, regularization is not necessary using our iterative method. Taking the advantage that slugs often have a linear steady trajectory, the deformation field is averaged in the moving slug frame. This average reduces the displacement error drastically especially for long slugs for which the lower magnification increases bead position error. We discuss the relevance of the averaging procedure in the results section. We measure the forces exerted by migrating 3D slugs of various lengths ranging between 400 and 1100 μ m. The force patterns confirm our preliminary measurements on 2D slugs. We find resistive forces in the slug tip and tail, traction in the central prespore area and large perpendicular forces on the sides. In addition, we find that traction and friction stresses are decreasing function of slug velocity. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells and culture Wild-type Dictyostelium discoideum NC-4 amebas were grown according to the standard protocol of two-member culture. For development of three-dimensional slugs, 10 μ l of a suspension at 10 7 cells/ml was dropped on polyacrylamide gel and incubated for 16 h before observations at 21°C. Polyacrylamide gels Flexible polyacrylamide gel sheets were prepared with 10% acrylamide, 0.03% bis, ammonium persulfate, TEMED, and either 1- μ m fluorescent beads or 4- μ m fluorescent beads. The mixture was poured on treated glass slides and the droplet was flattened using a nontreated slide glass and 400- μ m spacers. After polymerization, the nontreated slide glass was removed, the elastomer was covalently coated with type I collagen using Sulfo-SANPAH. The Young's modulus of the elastomer was characterized using the method described in Wang et al.. We found values in the range 5–8.5 kPa. The Poisson ratio v of polyacrylamide gels was taken as 0.5. Detection of substrate deformations We visualized simultaneously with a confocal microscope the ventral portion of the slug and the beads. We selected a field of view with the slug approaching on the side and we took the initial image as the undisturbed position to calculate the displacement vector of each bead. The focus plane Z M was fixed just underneath the elastomer/cell surface and was carefully measured at the end of the experiments. After thresholding and binarizing images, all bead centroids and sizes were first recorded at every time using Scion-Image. The threshold was chosen to eliminate beads <2 pixels. We then reconstructed bead trajectories using our own C codes. Briefly, for each bead, we examine all possible corresponding beads next image with the following criteria: i), the fluorescent area change of the bead should be <75% to eliminate beads coming into contact; ii), relative bead displacement between two successive images should be less than a value determined for each experiment ; iii), if several bead pairs fulfill the previous criteria, we stop at that time the bead trajectory to avoid mixing trajectories. The efficiency of this code depends greatly on the image resolution that is fixed by the microscope objective, the bead size, the confocal scan, and photomultiplier settings. In case of the slug A displayed in Figs. 1 and ​ and2, 2, which is recorded with a 20× objective and a large density of 1- μ m beads, 580 beads could be followed until t = 45 min. However, many beads were lost in the inner slug area where large displacements induce blinking or collisions between beads. It is possible to mark manually several hundreds of beads in the slug area using the brush tool of Scion image for interesting experiments. In case of the slug B recorded with a 40× objective, the efficiency of the tracking code is very good because the bead density is lower and the focus plane is closer to the surface. More than 75% of the 440 beads could be followed during the whole experiment. Bead centroids are measured with an accuracy of about δ XY = 0.15 ∼ 0.5 μ m depending on the experimental conditions. The error σ B on the displacement vector was measured experimentally from nondeflected beads far from the slug. FIGURE 1 Bead displacement vector field created by an intermediate length slug at t = 22 min. The background image shows general slug shape and in particular... FIGURE 2 Optimal force field at slug A calculated at #4 at t = 22 min, t = 28 min. Force is null outside the slug except in the trail region; the larger forces are perpendicular to the slug boundary,... FIGURE 3 Central part of the bead displacement vector field created by the long slug B, visualized with a 40× objective at t = 30 min. Enlarged bead displacement vector field... We performed a time average of the displacement field in the slug frame as follows. At every time, we adjust a grid divided in unit cells of Δ = 20 μ m side whose origin is fixed at slug tip. The grid is moving and crossing the recorded field of view. The mean displacement in each cell unit corresponds then to an average displacement over the set of beads N B belonging at a given time to the moving unit cell. This average over a large number of beads reduces greatly the error σ XY on the average displacement vector in each unit cell as Experimentally, we measured typically σ XY ∼ 0.15 μ m far from the slug. There is also an uncertainty in the relative bead depth that affects the Green functions. This error, arises from the finite depth of field of the objective and from the eventual geometrical roughness of the elastomer surface. With δ ZF ∼ 2 μ m for a 20× objective and a probably overestimated roughness of the elastomer surface δ ZG ∼ 5 μ m, we obtain σ Z ∼ 1.7 μ m. Calculations of forces In the framework of linear elasticity theory, the deformation field u inside a semiinfinite elastic medium caused by a distribution of forces F on the surface is described by a Fredholm integral equation of the first kind: where i and j refer as the components x, y, z of the vectors and G ij are the Green functions scaling as −1. If one makes the reasonable assumption that there are no vertical forces, there are four Green functions Gxx, Gxy, Gyx, and Gyy. Our method is an unconstrained method : we calculate the forces at the sites where deformations are measured but at finite depth Z M and we do not impose the calculated force to be zero outside the slug area. The integral equation from Eq. 1 becomes a set of linear equations, u = GF, in which u =, u y, u x, u y,...), and F =, F y, F x, F y,...) are 2 N -vectors and G is a 4 N 2 -matrix. To solve these equations, we run a numerical program based on iterative biconjugate gradient method generally used to invert large sparse matrix. Of course, here the matrix is dense but this method is known to give good results especially for 2D problems because, in this case, direct solution of Eq. 1 is hopeless because the matrix G is too large. It takes typically 5 min to invert a 10 7 -terms matrix using a personal computer with a 1.6-GHz microprocessor. We start from a zero initial force solution at iteration zero and the solution progressively builds up with increasing iterations. At every iteration, we record the force field, the mean error per site on the calculated displacements Er = | u − GF| and the mean force per unit area | P out | and | P in | outside and inside the slug area. Experimentally, the optimal # is chosen when Er reaches the experimental error for Δ/ Z M is large, or when Er is minimal within the range #1–10 for Δ/ Z M low. In the Appendix, we show using simulations that, for slug force pattern, the minimum of ø ext = | P out |/| P in | provides a good estimation of the optimal # and of the accuracy of the calculated force pattern. Indeed, the study performed on simulated force pattern shows that ø ext ∼ Δ F where Δ F = | F real − F | slug /| F real | slug is the mean force deviation from the original real simulated pattern in the slug area. Typically it takes <10 iterations to reach the optimal #. At higher #, chaotic solutions may exist for large recorded bead depth, but they are easy to distinguish from regular solutions. Deformation and stress profiles When forces are calculated from time-averaged deformations in the moving slug frame, forces are divided by the lattice site area to obtain stress components. Parallel and perpendicular stress profiles are obtained by averaging stress over slug width W and a central band half-slug length, respectively. Parallel direction is the direction of the slug migration. When forces are calculated from raw data, parallel and perpendicular stress profiles in slug frame are calculated by first summing up forces over slug width W and a central band half-slug length, respectively, and then by dividing these sums by Δ xW and Δ yL /2, respectively, where Δ x = 25 μ m and Δ y = 15 μ m are the bin sizes. Error on stress profiles is determined in the Appendix using the bootstrap analysis. We have computed the parallel and perpendicular deformation components in the slug frame using the same definition. The statistical error and the geometrical error due to the slug angle choice are used to estimate the error on the deformation profiles. We recorded as a function of slug velocity the following characteristic features of stress profiles: the mean net traction per unit area T is the average traction over the length L T of the traction area where stress is negative, including arches when present; the tip and tail frictions per unit area f P and f R are also averaged over the length L P and L R, respectively, of the friction peaks. RESULTS Substrate deformations Dictyostelium cells are able to aggregate on polyacrylamide substrata treated with type I collagen. The resulting slugs migrate at the same speed than on agar. We have recorded the deformations created by 3D slugs ranging between 400 μ m and 1100 μ m. These slugs induce large displacements of fluorescent beads. Fig. 1, A and B, shows the displacement fields for intermediate length slug A at two different times ). Substrate deformations present for all slugs a characteristic pattern in the slug frame. The bead displacements are oriented in the direction of migration in the tip region and opposite to this direction in the central region with a perpendicular component directed centrifugally. In Fig. 2 E, we present the deformation field averaged over time in the slug frame using a 20- μ m grid spacing. The linear portion of the trajectory between the dotted lines was used for the average. The noise level is estimated to σ B = 0.5 μ m for nonaveraged deformations and to σ XY ∼ 0.15 μ m for time-averaged deformations. The maximal deformations are u max ∼ 9 and 6.6 μ m for nonaveraged and time-averaged deformations, respectively. In Fig. 1, C and D, we computed the parallel and perpendicular component of these deformations. The parallel deformation presents some important fluctuations larger than the error bar, the tip friction peak is sometimes sharper but the characteristic shape of the profile described by the time average is well conserved. As a function of the perpendicular direction, the parallel deformation is maximal in the inner area corresponding to the lighter area of the slug clearly visible in the transmission images. This inner lighter area is presumably the region of close contact between cells and the substrate. For the perpendicular deformation, instantaneous and averaged profiles are all identical. It is maximal just after the inner lighter outline. After that maximum, both the parallel and perpendicular components of the deformation field decrease continuously with perpendicular distance with no sign of break-off at slug external black outline. Far behind the slug, the beads returned slowly to their initial positions in the parallel direction but not in the perpendicular direction. The transmission image shows that the elastomer presents wrinkles in this area ). This surprising result indicates that the slime trail has enough mechanical stiffness to keep the substrate in a stretched state. Typical migrating slug force pattern The force field of the slug A is first calculated from raw data at different times when the slug is mostly entirely within the field of view. The force pattern has the same characteristic properties as the force field calculated from the averaged deformation field : large perpendicular forces, friction in the tip and in the tail, and traction in the central prespore area. It is easy to demonstrate using simulations that all these ingredients are absolutely necessary to retrieve the recorded deformation patterns. Unlike the deformation field, force or stress vectors are almost absent outside the slug. Fig. 2 G shows the force field recalculated after adding supplementary in-plane and vertical Gaussian noises with zero mean ± SD σ XY ∼ 0.15 and σ Z ∼ 1.7 μ m. The similarity between Fig. 2, F and G, demonstrates the robustness of the solution. Largest forces are exerted at the outline of the lighter close contact area perpendicular to slug axis where the bead deformations are larger. These perpendicular forces decrease almost to zero at the external black outline of the slug. The parallel stress profiles present large fluctuations with time but at every time we found two positive peaks in the anterior and very posterior region of the slug indicating resistive forces there. Although smaller than in the tip, parallel and perpendicular stresses in the posterior region extend beyond the tail of the slug in the trail left by the collapsed sheath and are responsible for the deformations already commented in this area. In average, the remaining parallel component in the trail is always resistive. In the central prespore zone of the slug, parallel stress is negative in average indicating dominance of traction here. Note also the presence of two distinctive traction zones at 75 and 600 μ m from the tip separated by a central zone with almost vanishing parallel forces. This traction free zone is often but not always present in other investigated slugs. It corresponds probably to the presence of a steady arch as found previously. The overall sum of parallel or perpendicular stresses is not significantly different from zero as expected for a slowly moving body. However, to satisfy exactly the force balance it would be necessary to sum up the forces along the full slug trajectory due to the remaining friction forces in the trail. Fluctuations, correlations, and waves of forces When we averaged deformations over time in the moving slug frame, we selected portions of their trajectory where slugs are moving straight at constant velocity with a constant shape. However, before presenting the slug velocity dependence of time-averaged forces, we must question the statistical validity of our averaging procedure. Only two times are represented in Fig. 2, A – D, but we calculated at 12 different times the force field from raw displacement data with a slug almost entirely in the field of view. We found always a perfect correspondence between instantaneous and time-averaged perpendicular forces. Instantaneous parallel force profiles although presenting fluctuations follow also the characteristic averaged profile described above. In particular, we always find the two distinctive traction zones separated by a central traction free zone that is also present in the force calculated from the time-averaged displacements. When averaging the force profiles obtained at different times, central fluctuations are smoothed and we obtain almost exactly the force calculated from the time-averaged displacements. For our purpose of measuring the mean traction and friction forces as a function of slug velocity, we can state that the time-averaged deformations and subsequent force calculations are well representative of slug behavior. They are also robust as we used different time intervals and different portions of the slug trajectory, and we never observed significant difference between the resulting force or deformation patterns. We may now ask whether the large fluctuations present in the parallel deformations and stresses are correlated. Do they correspond to waves of forces? We know that optical waves and periodic motions with the same period have been observed in 3D slugs of many Dictyostelium strains and in 2D slugs. Although a direct chemical demonstration is still required, it was proposed that these waves of motion correspond to periodic cAMP waves originating in the prestalk tip and progressing backward toward the tail. Whatever their exact origin, waves may just polarize the cell deformations in the migrating direction or increase the motive force of the cells or both. Obviously, to detect waves of forces, it is necessary first that some periodicity could be detected in the deformation raw data. We performed for that purpose an autocorrelation-function calculation for the parallel component of deformation. The results indicate that a weak oscillatory component of a 6-min period may exist. However, by identifying the amplitude of the oscillation with the calculated amplitude of the autocorrelation function of u = u dc + u ac cos, we found that the experimental u ac is as small as 10% of u dc. This estimation is comparable with the estimated error bars: in the central traction area of Fig. 1 C, mean deformation is 〈 u 〉 = 2.7 μ m and error that originates from experimental resolution is 〈Δ u 〉 = 0.24 μ m. Fluctuations larger than 10% from the time-averaged deformation exist in the parallel direction but they are not correlated temporally. Assuming, however, that the 10% u ac oscillation is meaningful, can we calculate the oscillatory part f ac of the force from which it originates? For that, we used a realistic force pattern keeping the same features with the experimental pattern of Fig. 2 but symmetric with respect to slug to avoid any effect from the perpendicular direction. We introduced a parallel force modulation f = f dc + f ac cos in the central traction area, keeping the total traction force constant, equal to our experimental result from time-averaged data. We tested several ratio p = f ac / f dc and found that u dc / u ac = 10% corresponds roughly to p = 25%. This estimation is comparable to the estimated error on force Δ F from time-averaged data but lower than the one for nonaveraged data. From the series of the 12 different times we calculated forces for the slug A, we never observed any indication of correlated or propagating forces. Therefore, at that moment, there are no clues for the existence of oscillatory forces due to chemical waves. However, if they exist they are certainly smaller than the uncorrelated forces. The irregular tip lift-landing events clearly visible in the supplemental Movie 1 seem responsible for these uncorrelated fluctuations. Measurements of the stress field as a function of the slug velocity The stress fields for a long fast slug and a small slow slug are displayed in Fig. 3. The deformation fields have been recorded at a similar mean bead depth with the same grid spacing Δ = 20 μ m. The force profiles are qualitatively similar to those of the slug of intermediate length. Friction in the tip is generally larger than in the tail. Perpendicular stresses are larger than parallel ones. But, surprisingly, both the parallel and the perpendicular forces are larger for the smaller slug. We have reported in Fig. 4 the characteristic features of the parallel stress profiles as a function of the slug velocity for nine investigated slugs. Both the absolute value of the negative traction T and frictions are decreasing function s of slug velocity. The reported friction is the mean overall friction on both tip and tail defined as F = /, where L P and L R are the lengths of the tip and the tail + trail friction areas. Traction is best fitted by a power law relation ∼ V −1.36 but, due to the large experimental error bars, an inverse velocity form ∼ V −1 that is used in the discussion to model the length dependence of the slug velocity also fits the data. Tip and tail frictions may be fitted by the power law decreasing functions ∼ V −1.31 and ∼ V −0.96, respectively. The overall friction scales as ∼ V −1.26. FIGURE 4 Amplitude of the traction stress as a function of the slug velocity. Solid line is the power-law best fit V −1.36, dotted line is an inverse velocity fit V −1. The slugs presented in Figs. 1–3 ​ are indicated. Amplitude... The choice to plot the mean forces as a function of the slug velocity will be discussed below, but, because a monotonic relation exists between slug length and slug velocity, qualitatively same curves are obtained for the forces as a function of the slug length. As the mean traction, tip and tail frictions are averaged over the friction lengths, these quantities are little affected by the error on the bead positions. On the other hand, the force magnitude is very sensitive to the mean plane Z M of recorded bead deformation. Error in Z M induces directly error in the amplitude of the stress field. Indeed, for a given recorded deformation field, the deeper we estimate the beads, the higher are the calculated forces. The control of the microscope focusing plane and the calibration of the elastomer Young's modulus are the most important points to obtain reliable quantitative forces. Each contributes to ∼20 and 12%, respectively, on the relative error on mean parallel stress components: mean traction and tip and tail frictions. The overall friction F has a supplementary error due to the determination of L P and L R. The amplitude of perpendicular stress, calculated from the maximum of the vertical stress profile, is also decreasing function of slug velocity. But due to the difficulty of finding sharp forces when noise increases, perpendicular forces suffer large errors. We also measured the lengths of the traction area, of the tip and of the tail + trail friction areas. L T is clearly linearly increasing with slug length L. L P and L R values are close to the slug width W. But the large scatter in the data for L P, L R, W, and the overall friction length L F = L P + L R prevents conclusion about the dependence of these quantities with L. FIGURE 5 Lengths of the traction area, tip friction area, tail friction area, and sum of tip + tail friction area as a function of the slug length. Thick gray line is the slug width. Solid lines are linear... DISCUSSION Role of slime sheath in the transmission of forces to the substrate The existence of large forces perpendicular to the direction of slug migration, symmetric with respect to this axis, already observed in the case of 2D slugs is confirmed by this work for all 3D slugs investigated. Symmetric lateral movements from the slug axis toward periphery have never been reported in 3D or 2D slugs. In 2D slugs, cells presented sometimes alternatively elongated shapes but mostly in the slug migration direction. Therefore, the observed perpendicular forces do not result from the lateral movements of the cells; they are likely the result from the mechanical forces transmitted by the slime sheath to the substrate. New surface sheath made of cellulose and glycoproteins is continuously formed in the tip. It is smooth and extremely thin, only 10–50 nm as measured by electron microscopy, but acts as a protective shell for the slug. Once it makes contact with the substrate, it attaches strongly to it and is left behind as a collapsed tube. It is known that newly formed sheath in the tip part of the slug can be deformed by anterior cells but in the posterior part cells move in is a rigid and immobile tube. Our current view of sheath/substrate force transmission mechanism is described in Fig. 6. As the slug advances, sheath production and sheath/substrate anchorage in the tip create a resistive force f P pushing the elastomer forward in the direction of slug migration and possibly also with a component in a direction normal to the hemispherical tip. Although sheath is not moving, it is probably stretched and pulled forward by the moving cell mass. This forward stretching force may cause the parallel friction f R in the tail. We can postulate that the motive force of the slug is supplied by cell traction T mostly in the central prespore region in the inner lighter contact area between slug and substrate, and that this traction is essentially independent from perpendicular forces P and from the sheath. This hypothesis is consistent with the calculated forces 3 ) and with the measured localization of maximum parallel and perpendicular bead deformations. We will examine below in more details the force balance equation between parallel traction and friction forces. Before that, we are now presenting possible mechanisms responsible for the large perpendicular forces. FIGURE 6 Model of a migrating slug. The surface sheath covering the slug is produced in the tip; it immediately anchors to the substrate at various attachment points. In the tip, this anchorage combined with the slug migration creates a force f P pushing the elastomer... We previously postulated that the observed perpendicular forces were due to a mechanism analog to the capillary force acting at the contact line of a liquid droplet placed on a solid surface. We assumed that due to its tension, the sheath can pull out the elastic substrate in the direction tangential to the slug profile where it is anchored in the vicinity of the contact line. There are several possible origins of the sheath tension. One possibility is that frustrated cell movements in the lateral direction cause an internal pressure on the sheath. Another is that slug/substrate adhesion induces sheath tension in a mechanism analogous to the lipid membrane tension induced by the adhesion of vesicles to surfaces. As the elastic substrate assays do not visualize vertical bead displacements, we visualize only the in-plane component of the stretching forces. In case of slugs, there is evidence that the slug has a flattened cylindrical shape from the visualization of the slug ventral profile using the confocal microscope. If slug/substrate contact angle Θ is much larger than 90°, an in-plane stretching force directed outward exists. The localization of deformations and perpendicular forces in the vicinity of the outline of the inner lighter contact area supports this hypothesis. Note that a broad distribution of attachment points between sheath and substrate in this area may spread the perpendicular forces. However, this mechanism does not explain the remaining perpendicular deformations and forces often observed far from the slug in the collapsed sheath trail. Here, it is possible the substrate is kept stretched by the frozen sheath. Forces are decreasing with slug velocity The most important result of this article is that traction and friction forces per unit area are decreasing with the slug length or the slug velocity. We can draw several important consequences from these measurements. First, traction is not constant with slug length or slug velocity contrary to what is usually assumed in models. As a result, the total motive force TL T W is roughly constant at −5 μ N. Second, friction is not a viscous fluid friction increasing with slug velocity as always assumed in these models, but it is probably close to solid friction, stick-slip, or other mechanisms. Moreover, this finding has a very important consequence on the interpretation of the experimental measurements of motive force of Inouye et al.. They indeed assumed a fluid-type resistive force to extrapolate the force. As we show that friction is decreasing with the slug velocity, we believe that the measured motive force is erroneous and the conclusion that motive force is volumetric is not founded. We cannot conclude, however, from our measurements whether traction is a volume or a surface force; it will be necessary for that to measure carefully forces as a function of height for a given slug length. A velocity dependence of cell traction forces was never directly reported to our knowledge, however, several independent observations suggest that for single cells the same relation probably holds. During ameboid migration, traction forces are generated by the actin-myosin cytoskeleton and coordinated with other events: extension of protrusions at the leading edge, attachment/detachment to the substrate, translocation of the cell body. In slowly moving fibroblasts, the force pattern has been resolved to a resolution of ∼2 μ m. Traction at the leading edge is balanced by friction in the tail caused by the passive stretching of stationary adhesive linkages as the cell moves forward. Mean traction stress is ∼2 kPa. In fast-moving keratocytes, significantly smaller traction forces are detected. Moreover, it was found that fibroblast cell speed and traction force depend on the rigidity of the substrate. Fibroblasts move slower but exert a significantly higher traction force on stiffer polyacrylamide substrates. Dictyostelium single cells are also fastly moving but forces are more difficult to resolve due to the small cell size and the fast cell shape changes. It was recently observed by Uchida and Yumura that cell velocity is inversely proportional to the number of active cell/substrate adhesion sites referred to as actin foci. They suggested that actin foci constitute the active feet of Dictyostelium cells. The parallel between these observations and ours is striking. The fact that friction and traction forces are decreasing with slug velocity suggest that the dynamics of the cell/substrate adhesion sites may regulate the slug velocity. Too many sites create large traction but also large friction; as a result the cell is slowly moving like fibroblasts. On the other hand, once the cell is moving fast, the probability for an actin bundle to make an adhesion site with the surface is inversely proportional to the velocity. In dry solid frictional sliding between a rough surface and a smooth surface, one observes often a stick-slip regime in the range of low velocities. In this regime, the friction coefficient is described by a logarithmic decreasing function of V due to a logarithmically strengthening of adhesive joints when aging at rest and their more frequent rejuvenation when slipping fast. At higher velocity, the friction coefficient increases again logarithmically. The fact that we are measuring a friction decreasing with slug velocity in the range 10 ∼ 30 μ m/min suggests that cell/substrate and/or sheath/substrate friction is compatible with a stick-slip mechanism. Both in the study of actin foci or of solid friction cited here, the velocity of the moving or sliding object is playing a central role, but not the macroscopic size of the object. Substrate/moving object interactions indeed always occur at the scale of the micrometric size asperities or adhesion sites. This justifies fully our assumption for the scaling relations derived below that forces depend on slug velocity but not on slug length. Scaling relations of slug migration One of the important questions related to slug migration is why the slug velocity V correlates with the slug length L. We have reported in Fig. 7 our measurements of 2D and 3D slug velocities on acrylamyde as well as 3D results on agar. Several numerical models addressed this point. They found that slug speed increases with slug length L but saturates when L is larger than the wavelength of chemoattractant waves. However experimentally, slug speed still increases by a factor of 8 ∼ 10 between the wavelength, i.e., ∼250 μ m, and the larger 3D slugs observed. FIGURE 7 Slug speed as a function of slug length. Open and solid circles correspond, respectively, to 2D and 3D slugs on elastomer. Squares correspond to the measurements of Inouye and Takeuchi for 3D slugs on agar. Solid line corresponds... Simple phenomenological models are useful because they allow a quick examination and estimate of the relevant parameters describing the phenomena. We propose the following simple 1D model based on the force balance equation: where F is the overall friction on both tip and tail. We already discussed the relation between traction and slug velocity V. We used the simple form T = − t 1 / V = −1467/ V, which fits satisfactorily the experimental data. The overall friction relation is probably not exactly symmetric to the traction relation. Friction is not only affected by the resistance of the actin foci, but also by other sources: cell membrane/substrate friction or old adhesion complexes no more linked to the actin cytoskeleton. Actin foci are, indeed, temporary structures that disappear after 20 s on average, but adhesion complexes may persist even after actin foci disappear. In dry solid friction, friction decreases and then increases logarithmically with V. Here, we found that the simplest form that captures the saturation of the slug velocity is a decreasing function of V, which saturates at high velocities. The relation F = f 0 + f 1 / V = 60 + 1036/ V is therefore used. We postulate now that the lengths of the traction and friction area are proportional to L. Experimentally, L T shows an almost perfect linear increase with L not with V. L F is probably also governed by slug geometry. Tip friction occurs where the newly produced sheath attaches to the substrate, in the contact area between the flattened hemispherical tip and substrate. Tail and trail frictions are caused by collapsed sheath resistance that should occur on a length roughly proportional to the slug lateral dimension. Experimentally, L P, L R, and slug width W are clearly of the same order but it is hard to find a correlation with L due to the large scatter of the data. Extensive studies of slug morphology for a large population of NC-4 slugs showed that W is increasing with L. The fact that W is not clearly increasing with L for the selected slugs of this study is not surprising with respect to the small number of experiments analyzed and the large scatter inherent to such measurements. Finally, we use the following relation for the friction length L F = A F + B F L = 120 + 0.25 L where A F was fitted and B F was chosen to satisfy a sum L T + L F − L = 120 μ m independent of L. This value represents the characteristic friction length remaining outside the slug in the trail of the slime sheath. By injecting the experimental fits of L F, L T, F, and T into Eq. 2, we obtain the length dependence of the velocity. The agreement with the experimental velocity data for the full range of slug lengths is reasonably good except for very small slugs. The reason why the velocity saturates for large slugs is mainly due to the dissymmetry at large V between slug friction that is constant and traction that is decreasing to zero. The maximum velocity is positive because the traction force decreases faster than the friction forces when the slug size increases. Of course, the choice of the scaling relations is not unique. In particular, logarithmic or power-law decreasing functions of the stresses may satisfy as well the force balance equation. The important point to be kept in mind is that forces decreasing with slug velocity satisfy both the force balance equation and the relation between slug length and slug velocity. In conclusion, we directly measured for the first time the distribution of mechanical forces of migrating slugs of different sizes. We found that traction forces as well as friction forces decrease with the slug velocity. In addition, we found a large force perpendicular to slug migration direction. Our measurements and scaling relations propose a new explanation of the well-known relation between slug velocity and slug length. We suggest that it will be interesting to integrate these new findings in numerical models of slug migration taking explicitly forces into account. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL A supplement to this article can be found by visiting BJ Online at. Supplementary Material Click here to view. 