 The signaling network underlying eukaryotic chemosensing is a complex combination of receptor-mediated transmembrane signals, lipid modifications, protein translocations, and differential activation/deactivation of membrane-bound and cytosolic components. As such, it provides particularly interesting challenges for a combined computational and experimental analysis. We developed a novel detailed molecular signaling model that, when used to simulate the response to the attractant cyclic adenosine monophosphate, made nontrivial predictions about Dictyostelium chemosensing. These predictions, including the unexpected existence of spatially asymmetrical, multiphasic, cyclic adenosine monophosphate–induced PTEN translocation and phosphatidylinositol-P 3 generation, were experimentally verified by quantitative single-cell microscopy leading us to propose significant modifications to the current standard model for chemoattractant-induced biochemical polarization in this organism. Key to this successful modeling effort was the use of “Simmune,” a new software package that supports the facile development and testing of detailed computational representations of cellular behavior. An intuitive interface allows user definition of complex signaling networks based on the definition of specific molecular binding site interactions and the subcellular localization of molecules. It automatically translates such inputs into spatially resolved simulations and dynamic graphical representations of the resulting signaling network that can be explored in a manner that closely parallels wet lab experimental procedures. These features of Simmune were critical to the model development and analysis presented here and are likely to be useful in the computational investigation of many aspects of cell biology. Synopsis Cells can orient their migration in response to small local differences in the concentration of extracellular chemicals. Understanding this process requires analyzing the time and position-dependent behavior of the signaling molecules within the responding cell, making it an especially interesting challenge for both experimental and computational investigation. Here, the authors report the development and testing of a new detailed molecular model of the chemosensing apparatus of the amoeba Dictyostelium discoidium reacting to the chemoattractant cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Computer simulations performed using this model predicted unexpected and previously unreported patterns of changes in the concentration and location of two important intracellular signaling molecules. These predictions were experimentally verified using microscopy, suggesting the need for modifications to the current “standard” model of eukaryotic chemosensing. The high degree of detail in their model was made possible by a new software suite called “Simmune,” which allows biologists to enter information about molecular interactions using a graphical interface. Without requiring the user to write any equations, the software automatically constructs the overall reaction network, simulates the model, and provides several ways to view the biochemistry of simulated cells. This new tool should help biologists to translate qualitative representations of cell biological processes into quantitative, predictive models. Introduction The ability of eukaryotic cells to process nonisotropic extracellular stimuli lies at the heart of many aspects of cellular behavior including directed cell growth, movement, and cell-cell communication. When an external stimulus is localized to a discrete patch of membrane, for example, during contact-dependent cell-cell communication, the physical recruitment of signaling components into receptor-associated multimolecular complexes provides a straightforward mechanism for establishing the appropriate directionality of intracellular responses. Under these circumstances, it is readily apparent how the activation of excitatory components at response onset and of inhibitory components during negative regulation is constrained to a specific region of the cell. In contrast, during chemotaxis cells display a very strong intracellular biochemical polarization even though the external stimulus may surround the entire cell and differ by only a few percent in concentration at different points along the membrane. Here, the principle of physical locality invoked in the case of cell-cell contact does not seem to provide an obvious mechanism for the translation of small extracellular directional clues into an almost digital biochemical, cytoskeletal, and morphological polarization of the responding cell. The striking capacity of cells to reliably sense and respond to minute gradients has led to intense experimental analysis at the cell biological level as well as to development of quantitative mathematical models of the chemosensing phenomenon. Many of the core components of the underlying signaling network have been elucidated in several cell types, especially neutrophils and the amoeba of Dictyostelium discoidium. A central role is played by the phospholipid phosphatidylinositol-P 3, the product of the action of the lipid kinase phosphoinositide 3-kinase on the relatively abundant membrane component phosphatidylinositol-P 2. The local concentration of PIP 3 is determined by the competing actions of PI3K and the phosphatase PTEN that dephosphorylates PIP 3 at the 3′ position to produce PIP 2. PIP 3 functions as a membrane anchor for signaling proteins with pleckstrin-homology domains. Such proteins include several that regulate the polymerization of actin, which, in turn, is needed for the extension of pseudopods/lamellipodia that allow cells to crawl. For this reason, localized PIP 3 accumulation is frequently used as a read-out of polarization in response to chemoattractant gradients. In spite of this progress in defining the main molecular players and their interactions, however, we do not yet fully understand how eukaryotic cells are able to amplify the primary receptor signals induced by shallow extracellular gradients of chemoattractants into steep intracellular gradients of signaling molecules like PIP 3. Nor is it known precisely how the chemosensing signaling machinery adapts to attractant stimulations or what the connection is between the mechanisms that lead to amplification and those that lead to adaptation. The dominant hypothesis embodied in existing conceptual and computational models for how cells achieve polarization in the face of shallow chemoattractant gradients is termed “local excitation – global inhibition”. Meinhardt and Gierer in particular showed that combinations of localized positive feedback and long-range inhibition could potentially produce the biochemical inhomogeneity encountered during chemotactic responses, and variations on this theme appear in the other models in this class. The main idea is that polarization results from a combination of local activation processes and one globally acting, signal-induced inhibitor tuned to be just strong enough to suppress the local responses everywhere except in those regions of the cell where the extracellular concentration of the stimulus is highest. The globally acting inhibitor, whose level is determined by the overall occupancy of the chemoattractant receptors, indirectly plays the role of a messenger that provides cell-wide information about the average extracellular chemoattractant concentration. This average is the standard used by the cell to determine which side is experiencing “high” and which side “low” relative chemoattractant concentrations. Adaptation, in this context, is the failure of local signals to significantly rise above the average and overcome the induced level of global inhibition. While these modeling efforts have had a major influence on the way investigators view the molecular basis for chemosensing, the field still lacks a model that reflects to the greatest extent possible the detailed biochemistry revealed by bench experiments and whose predictions have been widely validated by experimental tests at the single cell level. For example, in Dictyostelium, stimulation with homogeneous fields of the chemoattractant cyclic adenosine monophosphate produces a fast rise in PIP 3 around the entire cell circumference, followed by a rapid return to prestimulus level. PTEN shows the inverse pattern, leaving the membrane upon exposure to cAMP and then returning during the adaptation phase. However, the concentration of membrane-bound PTEN is still considerably below its prestimulus level at the time when the PIP 3 concentration peaks and starts to decay. Given the current belief that in these cells, PI3K is the only generator of PIP 3 and PTEN is the most important enzyme metabolizing PIP 3, the point at which PIP 3 's concentration in the membrane peaks must mark the moment at which the activities of PI3K and PTEN are temporarily in equilibrium. The cAMP signal must therefore rapidly activate a component that negatively regulates PI3K so that its activity is balanced by the lower than resting level of PTEN present at the membrane at this point in time. Such a negative regulatory component is not explicitly included in existing models of Dictyostelium chemosensing. In part, the absence of such specific components in previous computational treatments arises from a tendency to use abstract modules in models of complex biological signaling networks whenever the details are incompletely understood. Although such approaches are in part guided by the principle of parsimony, another, more practical reason for the introduction of abstract modules is that the literature mining involved in the creation of complex biological signaling models and their translation into computational representations can be quite difficult. Here we report a two-pronged approach to the development of a more complete and explicit model of Dictyostelium chemosensing. First, at the biochemical level, we started with a basic chemosensing model containing only the principal molecular players incorporated into the current paradigm in the field. We then tried to fill in “logical” blanks so as to be able to reproduce the experimentally reported dynamical behaviors of PIP 3, PTEN, and PI3K upon exposure of a morphologically unpolarized Dictyostelium cell to chemoattractant exposure. Our specific aim was to construct a model that did not contain abstract “black-box” modules but instead used specific molecular components and interactions reported in the experimental literature to provide necessary functions. Second, to help achieve this goal of molecular detail, we utilized a new software approach called Simmune that was created to facilitate the development and simulation of realistic, and therefore frequently quite complex, cell-biological models. Originally developed because of an interest in simulating immune responses, Simmune has no attributes that are unique to immunology and it is applicable to the simulation of any cell-biological system. The software suite allows molecular reactions to be defined directly at the level of interactions between molecular binding sites, using simple graphical representations of molecules and molecular complexes. This permits expert biologists to construct and simulate complex models without direct involvement in the underlying mathematics. The signaling network that we developed through literature mining and the application of Simmune shares some properties with the abstract model developed by Meinhardt, but it goes further by providing an explicit molecular definition of the feedback module and the inhibitory regulator postulated in this earlier work. Our model also includes the action of a second, slower inhibitory component that is reminiscent of Meinhard's “poisoning” element. This element was introduced to prevent cells from locking into the direction of given stimulus and becoming blind to subsequent changes in direction and strength of the external signal. However, the present scheme differs in important aspects from this previous proposal and from the “local excitation–global inhibition” models suggested by Devreotes and coworkers because the locally acting feedback mechanism and the distribution of the inhibitory component are now coupled. Simulations performed with our model predicted previously unrecognized biphasic spatiotemporal changes in PIP 3 and PTEN localization and concentration in Dictyostelium cells responding to cAMP gradients. These predictions were confirmed across a range of gradient conditions by single-cell imaging studies, leading us to propose a substantial modification to the standard “local excitation–global inhibition” model, with locally acting negative feedback now seen as playing a key role in controlling the development of chemoattractant-induced biochemical polarity. Results In constructing a new detailed model of Dictyostelium cAMP chemosensing, we needed to ensure that the major features of the cellular response to chemoattractant exposure would be present in the simulated behavior of a cell. First, when exposed to a uniform concentration of attractant, the model should show a transient membrane response that rapidly reverts to the resting state. Second, when exposed to a shallow gradient of attractant, the simulated cell should generate a much steeper intracellular biochemical gradient. The starting point for the construction of a model with these features was the well-established biochemical scheme described in and. Ligand binding to the cAMP receptor leads to activation of the associated Gαβγ, yielding Gα and Gβγ. These effectors, in turn, promote the activation of Ras and the membrane recruitment and activation of PI3K, along with a G protein–dependent translocation of PTEN from the membrane to the cytosol. The combination of PI3K activation and a loss of membrane-bound PTEN results in a rapid increase of PIP 3 upon stimulation of the cells with cAMP. Figure 1 Standard Model of the Extracellular and Intracellular Distribution of Key Components of Dictyostelium Chemotactic Signaling Development of a Refined Signaling Model of Chemosensing Based on Quantitative Live Cell Imaging and Literature Mining Fusion molecules containing both a PIP 3 -specific PH domain and a fluorescent protein domain have been produced to monitor the dynamics of the distribution of PIP 3 under various modes of Dictyostelium exposure to chemoattractant. When stimulated with a homogeneous field of cAMP, previously unpolarized cells respond with a rapid, transient increase of PIP 3 around their entire perimeter. In contrast, upon exposure to gradients of chemoattractant, the plasma membrane concentration of PIP 3 increases throughout the cell initially and then decays everywhere to below the pre-stimulus level, except for the side of the cell exposed to the higher chemoattractant concentration. Using a fluorescent fusion of PTEN, similar imaging studies have been used to show that, following a homogeneous cAMP stimulus, much of the pool of PTEN translocates from the membrane to the cytosol within a few seconds and then slowly returns to the membrane. Activation of membrane-recruited PI3K and translocation of PTEN to the cytosol are the two “excitatory” mechanisms that lead to the initial increase in membrane PIP 3 revealed by PH-GFP relocalization and qualitative diagrams of chemosensory signaling frequently focus on these excitatory signaling events. Simulations using a model incorporating only these mechanisms would, however, show the concentration of membrane PIP 3 to increase upon introduction of cAMP without being followed by either the experimentally reported rapid decay in the concentration of this membrane phospholipid or the relocalization of PTEN to the membrane. Therefore, the cells must contain inhibitory components that quench PI3K signaling and also reverse those changes that cause PTEN to dissociate from the membrane, allowing it to return to its pre-stimulus distribution. As already noted, a comparison of the dynamic changes in the concentrations of PIP 3 and membrane-bound PTEN upon exposure of Dictyostelium cells to a homogeneous field of cAMP allowed us to conclude that PI3K activity must be rapidly negatively regulated to account for the observed post-stimulus changes in membrane PIP 3 levels. In seeking to account for this regulation of PI3K activity, we took advantage of our previous findings that the α and the βγ subunits of the G proteins remained dissociated as long as chemoattractant was present, establishing that there was ongoing signaling through the excitatory pathways. The inhibitory components thus do not simply shut off receptor signaling but actively compete with ongoing excitatory mechanisms. For the PI3K signaling branch, we therefore included stimulus-induced activation and membrane recruitment of a phosphatase that deactivates PI3K and of a Ras GAP that suppresses Ras activity after an initial spike. Additionally, we assumed that the amount of free Gβγ contributing to activation of PI3K is controlled by a blocking element, because the dynamics of the system did not appear to permit re-association with Gα to dampen Gβγ effector function quickly enough. Receptor-associated kinase was subsequently reported to function in mammalian cells in a manner consistent with this assumption. Figure 2 PI3K and PTEN Regulatory Modules We also needed to add to the model a set of specific biochemical processes regulating PTEN localization within the cell, in particular a link from activation of the sensing receptor to the dissociation of PTEN from its resting location at the plasma membrane and a negative regulatory limb that reverses this active induction of membrane dislocation. We hypothesized that the molecular change causing PTEN to dissociate from the membrane is a phosphorylation event that in mammalian cells is mediated by a Src-like kinase. Reversal of the process that leads to release of PTEN from the plasma membrane thus requires control of the activity of this kinase. We adopted the pathway reported by Ren et al., according to which Src activity is negatively controlled by Csk, which is recruited to the plasma membrane by phosphopaxillin. The phosphorylation of paxillin in turn is controlled by the tyrosine phosphatase SHP2, which is brought into proximity of the membrane-bound paxillin through the PIP 3 -binding adaptor Gab1. Figure S1 shows the full network of enzymatic interactions. Figures S2 and S3 focus on those branches of the network that control PI3K and PTEN activity, respectively. Simmune Permits Construction of Detailed, Biology-Based Models That Avoid “Black-Box” 