 Glycoprotein gp130, found on the plasma membrane of Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae, was postulated previously to play a role in phagocytosis. The gene for gp130 was cloned and when translated, yielded a 768 amino acid preproprotein of 85.3 kDa. It had nearly 40% similarity to the 138 kDa family of glycoproteins implicated in sexual cell fusion during macrocyst formation in D. discoideum. The difference between the calculated size and observed M r of 130 kDa on protein gels likely was due to N-glycosylation that was confirmed by lectin blots. Consistent with its surface-exposure, an antibody raised against recombinant protein stained the plasma membrane of D. discoideum amoebae. Gp130 and its transcripts were high during axenic growth of cells, but relatively low during growth on bacteria. The gene for gp130 was disrupted and cell lines lacking the glycoprotein were efficient phagocytes, indicating that gp130 was dispensable for phagocytosis. Gp130-null cells were similar in size to parent DH1 cells, had enhanced macropinocytosis and grew faster to higher densities. They also exhibited weaker cell-substrate adhesion but displayed greater cell-cell cohesion. Collectively, the data indicated that gp130 influenced macropinocytosis and played a role in adhesion during vegetative growth. INTRODUCTION The processes of phagocytosis, cell-cell and cell-substrate adhesion share a common initial event of recognition, whether it is of specific ligands or the chemical properties of the partner in the interaction. With the long-term aim of understanding the mechanism of phagocytosis at the molecular level, particularly the early steps of recognition and binding, we have focused on surface-exposed molecules of the phagocytically active amoebae of Dictyostelium discoideum. D. discoideum cells are studied also for the related processes of motility and aggregation. When starved, individual but clonal cells coalesce into multicellular structures that, within a day, differentiate into fruiting bodies called sorocarps. Cell-cell recognition and adhesion are vital aspects of this developmental progression, and researchers have established that cell-surface molecules, including gp24, gp80, and gp150, are mediating these interactions. An understanding of the plasma membrane molecules involved in adhesive events during phagocytosis and motility of vegetative amoebae is emerging with the recent identification of cell-substrate adhesion molecule, sadA and the phg1 family of transmembrane 9 proteins. In this study, we present evidence that a plasma membrane glycoprotein gp130 also played a role in cell-substrate adhesion during vegetative growth. Postulated to be a phagocytosis receptor, gp130 is possibly the same molecule as gp126, a surface-exposed glycoprotein suggested to have a dual role as both a phagocytosis receptor and a mediator of cell-cell cohesion. Characteristics of gp130 consistent with a role in phagocytosis are its presence in phagosomes, an association with detergent -insoluble cytoskeletons of bacterially grown cells but a depletion from membranes because of its internalization during phagocytosis, and the presence of an altered form in a D. discoideum phagocytosis mutant. The relationship of gp126 to gp130 remains unresolved as the antibodies used for the studies on gp126 appeared to recognize carbohydrate rather than peptide epitopes. Antibodies raised against partially deglycosylated gp130 inhibited phagocytosis, but they too were not protein-specific as they recognized glycosylation modifications shared by D. discoideum glycoproteins. This finding supported the idea that carbohydrates could be partially responsible for cell-cell and cell-substrate interactions in D. discoideum but uncertainty remained regarding the function of gp130. We report here the genomic sequence of the gene for gp130, expression patterns of the protein during growth and development, and biochemical and functional analyses of two transformed cell lines that specifically lack the protein. Gp130 was related to the family of gp138 proteins in D. discoideum that were postulated to participate in sexual cell fusion events leading to the formation of macrocysts. As expected, gp130 was found at the cell-surface and expressed at high levels during vegetative growth of cells in axenic media. Protein levels were relatively low during growth on bacteria, a finding that undercut an essential role for gp130 in phagocytosis. Cells with the gene for gp130 disrupted by the UMP synthase gene cassette were healthy, growing faster and to higher densities than parent cells. They also were competent in macropinocytosis and phagocytosis, and made normal but slightly smaller fruiting bodies. Compared with parent cells and consistent with its plasma membrane location, gp130-null cells had altered surface properties. They displayed weaker cell-substrate adhesion but paradoxically were more adhesive with each other. The complex phenotype of the gp130-null cells pointed to roles for gp130 in plasma membrane trafficking and cell-substrate adhesion. Preliminary findings and the sequence of gp130 was presented in at the 40th Annual meeting of the American Society for Cell Biology. The sequence is GenBank Accession No. } AY038935.1 and also can be accessed through the Dictyostelium genome sequencing web site using DictyBase ID DDB0214937. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Growth and Development Dictyostelium discoideum strains Ax2, Ax3, DH1, transformants 1C7 and 2F5, and gp138-null were grown at 22°C either axenically in HL5 medium or in suspension with Klebsiella aerogenes as described and shaken at 150 rpm. Cells were counted using a hemacytometer. Bacterial suspensions were monitored using an OD600 of 1.0 corresponding to 1 × 10 9 bacteria/ml. Growth of cells on bacteria was unaffected by the inclusion or exclusion of uracil. For growth on lawns, K. aerogenes was grown overnight on SM plates at 37°C before inoculation with 1 × 10 5 D. discoideum cells. Plates were put at 22°C and colony growth was measured daily. Three trials of growth were done, each with duplicates, and representative data are presented. For starvation-induced development, cells were grown to midlog before their collection by centrifugation. After two washes with Sorensen's buffer, Resuspended cells were spread evenly on nonnutrient agar plates. Plates were stored in the dark and, over 24–36 h, images were recorded with a digital camera attached to a stereomicroscope. Mounds, slugs, culminates, and fruiting bodies were counted at 12, 18, 24, and 36 h, respectively. For expression studies, cells scraped from plate surfaces were transferred to 1.5-ml microfuge tubes containing either 1 ml TRIzol reagent for RNA extraction or Laemmli sample buffer containing 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and a protease inhibitor mix for protein analyses. Nucleic Acid Analyses, Gene Disruption Construct and Transformation A gene replacement vector was constructed by inserting the ∼4-kb UMP synthase gene cassette containing the Dictyostelium pyr5-6 gene into the unique Cla I site of the genomic sequence of gp130 cloned into pCR2.1. The cloning strategy used to acquire the gene for gp130 and details regarding its genomic sequence are described separately. The UMP synthase gene cassette had been released by digestion with Cla I from a gene replacement vector provided by Dr. M. Fechheimer and was originally derived from plasmid pJB1. The disrupted gp130 sequence was cut out of the pCR2.1 vector with sequential digestions using Not I and Bam HI, and used to transform DH1 cells by electroporation. Transformants were selected by their growth in FM media in the absence of uracil and subcloned by limiting dilution. Two transformed cell lines, 1C7 and 2F5, were analyzed in parallel in the studies presented. Genomic DNA was isolated from cultures of DH1, 1C7, and 2F5 grown in HL5 to densities of 6–10 × 10 6 cells/ml. Cells were harvested and lysed to obtain nuclei that were lysed with Buffer G2, and the DNA was further purified following to the protocol provided by the vendor. Using standard molecular techniques DNA was digested with restriction enzymes for 24 h at 37°, precipitated, loaded, and separated on 0.7% agarose gels that were blotted to positively charged nylon membranes. DNA was quantified with the Hoescht assay, using calf thymus DNA as a standard. Probes for Southern blots were prepared by PCR using digoxigenin-11-UTP at one part of the DIG-UTP synthesis mix to three parts of the standard dNTP stock for the gp130-specific probe. The DIG-UTP synthesis mix was used without dilution for the DDPYR56G probe. Primers for the gp130-specific probe were 5′-CAACGGACCCATGTTTAGATAAT and 5′-ATCTTTACCTTTAATAGTAATAATAG-3′. Primers for the DDPYR56G probe were 5′-AGTAACAAGTGGTGCAAGTG-3′ and 5′-ACCAACACACAAAGAACC-3′. The relative positions of primers P1–P4 are shown schematically in Figure 3A. Blots were processed according to the guidelines provided by Roche. Hybridization with the DDPYR56G-specific probe was at 42°C for 16 h. After exposure to film, blots were stripped according to Roche instructions and then hybridized with the gp130-specific probed at 37°C for 16 h. Exposures were 15 to 30 min. Figure 3. Evidence for a disrupted gene for gp130 and the absence of gp130 in transformants. Schematic of contig JCa07f09 with a disrupted gene of gp130. The UMP synthase gene cassette containing DDPYR56G was inserted into... Electrophoresis and capillary transfer of formaldehyde denaturing agarose gels for the separation of isolated RNA was performed according to standard protocols. Using the gp130 cDNA template, dCTP was incorporated into DNA hybridization probes either by random priming using the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase or gene specific primers and PCR. The blot was washed, first with 2× SSC, 0.1% SDS, followed by 0.5× SSC, 0.1% SDS, and then 0.2× SSC, 0.1% SDS and air-dried before exposure to film in the presence of intensifying screens. Production of Bacterially Expressed Protein and Polyclonal Antiserum After identifying a partial gp130 cDNA sequence, a translational fusion was constructed within the PQE-30 expression vector cassette using Bam HI and Hin dIII adapter primers for the 5′ and 3′ ends, respectively. The construct was electroporated into Escherichia coli strain M15 containing the pREP4 plasmid. Screening of transformants, grown at 37°C, expressing the fusion protein initially was performed by colony hybridization with a 32 P labeled probes and later by immunoblotting using rabbit antibodies against a synthetic eight-residue peptide from gp130. The fusion protein, predicted to have a molecular weight of 68.5 kDa, was comprised of an amino terminal sequence of MRGSHHHHHHGS followed by 609 amino acids of the conceptual preproprotein sequence derived from the cDNA. Restriction enzyme digests, PCR and cross-reactivity of the recombinant fusion protein to antipolyhistidine antibodies confirmed the production of the correct chimeric construct. Milligram quantities of the His-tagged protein were isolated and purified under denaturing conditions using nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid metal-affinity chromatography following vendor protocols. Antisera to the purified fusion protein were produced in rabbits at the Antibody Core Research Facility following a standard immunization regime. An enriched IgG fraction that we call anti-gp130 was prepared from the antiserum by ammonium sulfate precipitation and used for detection of gp130 on protein blots. Protein Analyses Cells for lysates and plasma membrane preparations were harvested at densities between 6 and 9 × 10 6 cells/ml, unless otherwise noted in the figure legends. For lysates, cells were collected by centrifugation and washed twice in SB before lysis in 0.5% SDS at 80°C. Plasma membranes, were prepared by filter lysis and sucrose density centrifugation from axenically grown Ax2 or gp138-null cells kindly provided by Dr. Urushihara. Protein levels were measured using either the Bradford method, after precipitating interfering SDS with 100 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.2, or the Lowry method in the presence of 0.1% SDS and bovine serum albumin as a standard. SDS-PAGE was performed essentially as described. Gels electrophoretically transferred to nitrocellulose. Prestained markers were used to monitor electrophoresis. Blots were probed following standard protocols with antibodies followed by goat anti-rabbit or anti-mouse alkaline phosphatase conjugates. To detect glycoproteins, blots were probed with biotinylated concanavalin A followed by streptavidin-alkaline phosphatase. A previously described rabbit antibody was raised against a synthetic eight-residue peptide of gp130. For this work, a different rabbit antibody was raised against bacterially expressed recombinant truncated version of gp130. Mouse monoclonal antibody AC11 reactive with gp138 was provided generously by Dr. Urushihara. For immunolocalization, log-phase axenic cells were fixed and permeabilized at –10°C with 1% formaldehyde in methanol using the agar-overlay method. Slides were stained with or without anti-gp130, followed by either FITC conjugated to goat anti-rabbit IgG adsorbed against glutaraldehyde-fixed Ax2 or Cy2 donkey anti-rabbit conjugates. Coverslips were mounted in buffered Gelvatol containing 50 mg/ml 1,4-diazobicyclo--octane. Images were collected with a Bio-Rad MRC1024ES confocal laser-scanning microscope at the University of Nebraska Center for Biotechnology Microscopy Core Facility. Assays of Function Fluid-phase Endocytosis, Exocytosis, and Phagocytosis. Macropinocytosis and exocytosis were measured with the fluid-phase marker FITC-dextran. For endocytosis, cells in midlog phase were diluted with HL5 to 3 × 10 6 cells/ml and shaken with 2 mg/ml FITC dextran for 3 h. At various times cells were harvested, washed twice with SB, and then lysed with 0.5% Triton X-100 in SB. The fluorescence was measured with a Cary Eclipse spectrofluorimeter using 492 and 525 nm as the excitation and emission wavelengths, respectively. Duplicate samples of all cells were run in at least two trials of each assay. Live cells were imaged with an Olympus FluoView 500 laser scanning microscope equipped with a 60× water immersion objective lens. Volumes of cell pellets were determined by centrifuging cells into calibrated micro- pipettes. For exocytosis, cells in midlog phase were diluted with HL5 media to 3 × 10 6 cells/ml and loaded with 2 mg/ml FITC-dextran for 3 h. Cells then were washed twice with cold HL5 and resuspended in fresh HL5 without FITC-dextran. At times over a 3-h period, cells were harvested, washed twice with cold SB, and lysed with 0.5% Triton X-100 in SB, and their fluorescence was determined. To calculate the percent of fluorescence remaining in the cells, the fluorescence value at each time point was compared with the initial fluorescence, which was assigned a value of 100%. Phagocytosis was measured using Ds-Red fluorescent E. coli. Motility and Adhesion Cells in midlog phase were diluted with HL5 to 3 × 10 6 cells/ml, and 300 μl was placed in each well of an eight-well chambered slide. For starved cells, midlog phase cells were harvested, washed twice with cold SB, and resuspended to 3 × 10 6 cells/ml, and 300 μl was left in a well for 5 h before recording images. An inverted microscope equipped with Hoffman Modulation Contrast optics, camera and CG-7 frame grabber was used to collect video images at 1 frame/s in QuickTime 6.03. Three hundred frames were recorded and cell movement was measured by marking the position of the center of 25 cells every 60 frames. The total distance the cell traveled over a 5 min was determined and converted after determining the magnification using a micrometer scale observed with the same lens. Cell-cell adhesion was assayed using a method previously described. Midlog phase cells were collected and diluted to 3 × 10 6 cells/ml in HL5 or SB and shaken at 22°C. At times indicated, 500 μl were transferred to a 1.5-ml microfuge tube, vortexed for 20 s, and mixed for 20 min using a Labquake shaker. Adhesion was measured by counting the number of single cells, and the number of cells in aggregates with a hemacytometer at each time point. Doublets were counted as aggregated cells. For suspension-development trials, late log phase axenically grown cells were harvested, washed twice in SB, and then suspended to 1 × 10 7 cells/ml in 17 mM phosphate buffer ± 5 mM EDTA. Because of their documented behavior during suspension-development, Ax3 cells were used as control cells instead of DH1. Cells were rotated at 180 rpm on a platform shaker, and at indicated times, aliquots were diluted to 2 × 10 6 cells/ml in the same buffer. Unaggregated cells were counted, and the percentage of aggregated cells was determined. Cell substrate adhesion was measured following Barondes et al.. Cells in midlog phase was collected and diluted to 1 × 10 6 cells/ml in HL5. One hundred microliters of cells were added to wells of a 96-well polystyrene plate and allowed to settle and attach at room temperature for 30 min. The wells were then completely filled with HL5 without disturbing attached cells, sealed with an adhesive plastic sheet, inverted, and centrifuged for 5 min at 300 × g at room temperature in a rotor with swinging microplate holders. After draining unbound cells, 150 μl of 0.4% SDS in SB was added to adhering cells, and the plate was shaken on a plate shaker at 37°C for 15 min to ensure complete lysis. Then, 150 μl of undiluted Coomassie Protein Assay Reagent was added to each well, and the plate was again shaken for 15 min at 37°C. The absorbance at 595 nm was read on a VersaMax microplate reader running SoftMax ProVer 4.6. The percentage of cells remaining in the wells was calculated from a standard curve generated by determining the amount of protein of a known number of cells and lysed in parallel with the experimental samples. At least three separate sets of the assay were done, with each set having the two transformants and parent DH1 in duplicate on the same plate. RESULTS Gp130 Related to the gp138 Family Through a reverse genetics strategy, we obtained the genomic sequence for gp130, a plasma membrane glycoprotein postulated to have role in phagocytosis. Seven unique peptide sequences acquired from proteolyzed, gel-purified gp130 were back-translated to generate oligonucleotides for PCR with different templates. Concurrently, a partial genomic clone containing two sequenced peptides was identified in the databases of the D. discoideum Sequencing Consortium. This genomic clone, together with products from PCR trials, primer walking and anchored PCR, yielded first a cDNA sequence and subsequently the full genomic sequence for gp130. From the amino acid sequence deduced from the coding sequence, the predicted precursor of gp130 has a mass of 85.3 kDa. If the predicted loss of signal peptides both at the N-and C-termini is taken into account, the mass of the mature protein would be 79.7 kDa, which is nearly 50 kDa less than the M r of 130 kDa observed originally on SDS-polyacrylamide gradient gels. The disparity likely is due to N-glycosylation, detected previously of some of the 15 asparagines found in the Asn-X-Ser/Thr sequence used to predict glycosylation. The added carbohydrate would increase the mass of the molecule and also could retard its migration in SDS-gels. Weak glycosylation sites and a site in a sequenced peptide are not indicated. Eleven Cys residues were present in mature gp130 and the absence of reductant increased slightly its SDS-gel mobility compared with the reduced form. The strong biotinylation of gp130 that demonstrated its cell-surface exposure was attributable to the numerous lysines potentially available, and perhaps amino sugars, to react with amine-directed modifying reagents. Figure 1. Features of the deduced amino acid sequence of unprocessed gp130. The putative N-terminal signal peptide of 21 residues is in lower case. A bold N indicates potential N-linked glycosylation sites with the motif NXX. A His-tag was fused to Thr151... Several lines of evidence support the assignment of the start methionine. First, with the extreme AT-rich character of the 5′ region of the gene, there was no other methionine in region that yielded the appropriate open reading frame matching the two microsequenced peptides in the first exon. Second, gp130 showed significant similarity to the gp138 family of plasma membrane glycoproteins. When the protein sequence of gp130 was aligned with the gp138 proteins using ClustalW, the position of the initial methionine of gp130 corresponded closely to the N-termini of the gp138 precursor proteins. Finally, using the assigned methionine, analyses of the preproprotein predicted a signal peptide, consistent with the biosynthesis of gp130 via the secretory pathway and its location at the plasma membrane. Attempts to acquire an N-terminal sequence of gel-purified gp130 were unsuccessful as it appeared blocked, so the first residue of the mature protein could not be verified. Prediction programs for protein secondary structure indicated two major hydrophobic stretches of gp130 that could be embedded in the membrane and identified several additional weakly hydrophobic short, internal segments. The possible membrane domains correspond to an N-terminal signal peptide of 21 residues and a 29-residue sequence at the C-terminus. No other transmembrane regions were predicted by the transmembrane hidden Markov model routine. PSORT, a program to analyze protein localization, also predicts a 21-residue signal peptide. Similarly, the “big-II” routines indicated only two hydrophobic regions long enough to span a membrane. These correspond again to a signal peptide of 21 amino acids and the extremely hydrophobic 29-residue C-terminal sequence. The latter was predicted to direct the addition of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor. Previously, gp130 was postulated to be an intrinsic membrane protein, on the basis of its enrichment in purified plasma membrane fractions and a requirement of detergents for its solubility. A protein with a GPI-anchor would have similar properties. Other than two repeated peptides, no other notable features or credible motifs in the protein were detected using various gene and protein analysis programs. Southern blot hybridization patterns were consistent with a single copy of the gene for gp130. This finding was confirmed by BLAST searches of the Dictyostelium genome sequence databases that revealed a single copy of the gene. There was however significant sequence similarity of gp130 to the D. discoideum gp138 family of cell-surface glycoproteins postulated to mediate sexual cell fusion, although questions have been raised regarding this function. The gp138 genes map to chromosome 5, whereas the gp130 gene is on chromosome 3. Pairwise comparisons, using BESTFIT and GAP show that the four gp138 proteins were much more similar to each other than to gp130. Comparison of gp130 to each of the gp138 proteins showed it to have 40–42% similarity and 34–35% identity with the group. Thus, gp130 is related to the family of gp138 proteins, and the five proteins together comprise a distinct group in D. discoideum with no known relatives in other eukaryotes. Expression and Localization of gp130 The sequenced gene was verified to encode for gp130 when polyclonal antibodies, generated against a truncated version of gp130, reacted strongly with the recombinant protein and specifically with gp130. The recombinant protein used as the antigen migrated at 65 kDa, close to its predicted molecular mass of 68.5 kDa. Gp130 appeared as two closely spaced species in lysates of vegetative cells. As expected, a strong signal for gp130 was present in purified plasma membranes prepared from log-phase Ax2 and gp138-null cells. The gp130 doublet in plasma membranes was more evident with reduced protein loads and may be due to glycosylation differences. Anti-gp130 did not cross-react with gp138. The anti-gp130 signal in plasma membranes from gp138-null cells migrated faster than anti-gp138 signals in Ax2 lysates and membranes. The recombinant protein did not bind Con A, whereas the gp130 signals of lysates and plasma membranes corresponded to species that bound Con A, indicating them to be glycoproteins. This observation supported the idea that glycosylation could account both for the doublet gp130 species and the slower mobility of the authentic protein. Deglycosylation of gp130 in plasma membranes using commercially available reagents was only partially effective, as judged by Con A blots of the treated plasma membranes. The reagents may have limited access to the glycosylated residues or the nature of the oligosaccharide modifications made them resistant to the treatments. Gp130 was localized to the plasma membrane of axenically grown Ax2 cells stained with anti-gp130 as shown by the nearly exclusive staining of cell edges in confocal micrographs of fixed and permeabilized cells. This observation reinforced biochemical studies that showed gp130 to be readily surface-labeled with impermeant cell-labeling reagents and therefore found at the cell surface, and highly enriched in purified plasma membranes. Anti-gp130 reacted neither with native protein in plasma membranes nor Triton X-100–solubilized gp130. It also did not bind to live cells, precluding its use in assays of live cells. The inability of anti-gp130 to react to native protein was expected since bacterially expressed protein was used as the antigen. Another contributing factor that could hinder its reactivity is that the polypeptide backbone of gp130 is masked by carbohydrate modifications, which were likely to be substantial based on the retarded mobility of gp130 on SDS-gels. Figure 2. Localization and expression patterns of gp130. Immunolocalization of gp130 in fixed and permeabilized, axenically grown Ax2. Cells stained with anti-gp130 followed by FITC-labeled sheep anti-rabbit. The middle panel shows the phase... Northern blots of RNA derived from axenically grown cells showed a single transcript for gp130 of ∼2.5 kb. Levels of mRNA were high during vegetative growth and decreased during starvation-induced development. This pattern correlated well with the strong gp130 protein signal detected during vegetative growth, whereas during development protein levels declined. The lower levels of gp130 during development when cells are phagocytically inactive were consistent with the previous suggestion of a role for gp130 in phagocytosis. Unexpected, however, was the observation that during growth phase, levels of gp130 were lower in bacterially grown cells compared with axenically grown cells. The loss of protein was reflected in the northern blots showing reduced mRNA levels in phagocytically active cells compared with cells grown in nutrient media. An examination of gp130 levels by immunoblotting in D. discoideum strain NC4 also showed only modest levels of gp130. These expression patterns of gp130 during vegetative growth indicated that the relative amount of gp130 was inversely correlated with the phagocytic activity of cells. Disruption of the Gene for gp130 DH1 cells, auxotrophic for uracil, were transformed with a construct where the UMP synthase gene cassette was inserted into the genomic sequence of gp130. Transformed cells were selected by their ability to grow in FM without uracil. Southern blots of genomic DNA from transformants 1C7 and 2F5 were probed with either gp130-specific or UMP synthase-specific probes. The hybridization patterns were consistent with a specific disruption of the genomic gene for gp130 with the cassette. Immunoblot analyses also showed the absence of gp130 in the transformants. A signal for gp130 was present in DH1 cell lysates and plasma membranes but missing in 1C7 and 2F5. For comparison, the gp138-null cell line was analyzed in parallel. As shown in Figure 1C, these cells lack two gp138 signals immunoreactive with monoclonal AC11 that were present in PMs of DH1, 1C7, and 2F5. The Con A binding pattern of PMs from DH1, 2F5, and gp138 null cells showed the absence of a species corresponding to gp130 in 2F5. Also, compared with the parent DH1, there appeared to be an enhanced gp138 signal in 2F5. This aligned with a Con A binding species present in PMs of 2F5, but absent in DH1 and gp138 null cells. Corroborating the lack of gp130 in PMs of the transformants, immunofluorescence microscopy showed 1C7 and 2F5 without the cell surface signal seen in DH1 cells. Together, the DNA and protein analyses support the conclusion that 1C7 and 2F5 were genuine transformants in which the gene for gp130 was disrupted. Consequences of Disrupting the Gene for gp130 Growth and Development The growth of the gp130-null cells appeared superior to DH1 both in suspension and on lawns of bacteria. In comparison to DH1, 1C7 and 2F5 grew faster and reached higher densities in HL5 before reaching stationary phase. Similarly, 1C7 and 2F5 exhibited faster growth rates and achieved greater densities than DH1 when grown in bacterial suspensions. Neither the presence nor absence of uracil in DH1 suspension cultures had an effect on its growth. It seemed unlikely that gp130 was a receptor for specific nutrients present in HL5 because bacteria also were ingested at more rapid rates by the transformants. Both 1C7 and 2F5 also exceeded DH1 in terms of rate and overall size of colony growth on lawns of bacteria. In addition, the clear zones of colonies of transformants expanded continuously over a 10-d period, whereas those of DH1 expanded slowly and ceased growing after a week. The absence of the gp130 protein appeared to enhance aspects of vegetative growth of the transformants. Figure 4. Transformed cell lines 1C7 and 2F5 had enhanced growth characteristics compared with parent DH1. Transformants in HL5 grew faster and reached higher densities than DH1. Transformants in bacterial suspensions grew faster and reached higher densities... On starvation-induced development, 1C7 and 2F5 formed normal structures and generated sorocarps that looked like those of DH1. One difference, however, was their slightly slower pace of development. For example, at 12 h, 100% of the structures in DH1 were mounds, whereas only 60–70% of the structures were defined mounds in 1C7. A second difference was that for the same number of cells plated, transformants consistently made 20–40% more structures than DH1. This was more noticeable during the early stages such as when slugs had formed, and less apparent by the time terminal sorocarp structures were formed. There were consequently fewer cells per structure, which led subsequently to slightly smaller sorocarps. Figure 5. Transformed cells underwent development more slowly than DH1 but formed normal and more numerous structures. Slugs of transformants were smaller than those of DH1, and consequently their sorocarps were smaller, but... Membrane Properties The faster axenic growth of the gp130-null cells raised the question of whether they had faster rates of macropinocytosis. Both 1C7 and 2F5 took up FITC-dextran 2.5 times faster than that of DH1 cells during the initial 60 min of the assay where the rate was linear. After 3 h, the fluorescence of 1C7 and 2F5 averaged 158% of DH1 cells. The faster growth rates in suspension cultures of the transformants thus could be attributed to their ability to take up nutrients more quickly than DH1 cells. Exocytosis by the mutants was typically slightly faster than DH1 but it was not statistically significant. Vesicles containing FITC-dextran in the transformants appeared similar in size to those of DH1 after 1 h and 3 h. The transformants spread more quickly than DH1 cells when they settled on slides, making them seem significantly larger. Measurements of cell volumes, however, indicated that 1C7 and 2F5 were only 10–15% larger than DH1 cells. We conclude that the faster internalization of solute by 1C7 and 2F5, and not retarded exocytosis, accounted for their higher overall intracellular fluorescence. In contrast, particle uptake measured directly by phagocytosis of E. coli, by 1C7 and 2F5 was similar to that of DH1, consistent with the findings from the bacterial growth trials that gp130 was unessential for phagocytosis. Figure 6. Gp130-null cells exhibited greater macropinocytosis activity than DH1 cells. Fluid-phase endocytosis by 1C7, 2F5, and DH1. Exocytosis of fluorescence by 1C7, 2F5, and DH1 loaded with FITC-dextran. For both graphs: ▪, DH1; ○, 1C7;... Another altered membrane property of the transformants was revealed by adhesion assays. Tests of cell-substrate adhesion using plastic surfaces showed that gp130-null cells were nearly 50% less adherent to the plastic than DH1 cells. The decreased cell-substrate adhesion did not, however, lead to greater motility, as the average velocity of vegetative 1C7 and 2F5 cells was close to that of DH1. The total distance traveled by the cells in a 5-min period and the patterns of cell movement were comparable. After 5 h in buffer, the three cell lines uniformly exhibited greater motile activity and moved similar distances. Figure 7. Altered adhesiveness of transformants during vegetative growth. Log-phase transformants were less adherent to plastic than parent DH1. Open bar, DH1; cross-hatched bar, 1C7; gray bar, 2F5. Motility of log-phase transformants was similar to DH1.... When cell-cell adhesion was examined, log-phase 1C7 and 2F5 made 20–30% more aggregates in suspension in nutrient media than DH1 over time. When vegetative cells of DH1, 1C7, and 2F5 were starved in SB, they all displayed rapid cell-cell adhesion within 1 h. The tendency of 2F5 to form more aggregates than DH1 was unaffected by the inclusion of EDTA or calcium. When starved for 1 h, disaggregated by pipetting and placed back in HL5, gp130-null cells made more aggregates than DH1 cells that were similarly treated whether EDTA was absent or present. Under the higher shear forces of shaken suspensions, starved 2F5 formed more aggregates than control Ax3 cells. The calcium-sensitive adhesion molecule gp24 was likely responsible for the cohesion of the starved cells because 5 mM EDTA decreased the percentage of aggregates of 2F5 and Ax3. Under these conditions, however, gp130-null cells formed more aggregates than Ax3, raising the suggestion that the absence of gp130 revealed an EDTA-insensitive cell-cell adhesion mechanism during early development. Cell lysis occurred when transformants were shaken in buffer with EDTA for more than 5 h, so these studies did not go beyond 6 h. Figure 8. Increased formation of aggregates of gp130-null cells was EDTA-insensitive. Experiments included both transformants but only data for 2F5 are shown. Aggregation of vegetative 2F5 in suspension was greater than DH1,... In summary, compared with parent DH1 cells, gp130-null cell lines 1C7 and 2F5 during vegetative growth had increased fluid-phase endocytosis, enhanced cell-cell cohesiveness, and decreased cell-substrate adhesion, whereas phagocytosis and motility appeared similar. The altered cell-surface properties appeared due to the absence of gp130 on the plasma membrane and indicated that gp130 influenced how D. discoideum cells interacted with each other and other surfaces. Because expression patterns of normal cells indicated a depletion of gp130 during starvation and development, predictably, under these conditions, gp130-null cells on substrates behaved largely like DH1 cells. DISCUSSION Cloning and Expression of gp130 We have reported the cloning and sequencing of the gene for the glycoprotein gp130, suggested previously to have a role in D. discoideum phagocytosis. The proper reading frame and positions of two introns were established by seven internal microsequenced peptides. Additional corroboration of the sequence was aided by the identification of the sequence in contigs later available through the databases of the Dictyostelium genome sequencing project. The presence and relative abundance of gp130 in vegetative axenically grown cells and purified plasma membranes, and its uniform plasma membrane location were consistent with a phagocytic function. 2A ). The amount of gp130 protein and its transcript were, however, unexpectedly lower in bacterially grown cells than in axenically grown cells. This expression pattern was inconsistent with a vital involvement of gp130 in phagocytosis. Further, because null cells were efficient phagocytes, 6D ), the protein was dispensable for phagocytosis, although different particles and solution conditions were not tested. Aside from an expected N-terminal signal sequence, a C-terminal hydrophobic sequence that might direct the addition of a GPI-anchor, and N-glycosylation motifs, conserved protein regions or patterns in gp130 were not evident nor did various programs that predict protein secondary structure provide immediate insights into the function of gp130. Additionally, gp130 had no significant resemblance to proteins in the databases except for the gp138 family suggested to be involved in sexual cell fusion of D. discoideum, although a subsequent study raises doubts about this role. The absence of relatives for gp130 and the gp138 group in other organisms suggests that these glycoproteins have unique roles in the biology of D. discoideum. Function of gp130 Mutants lacking gp130 in D. discoideum were generated with the expectation that the cells would provide insights into the function of the protein. Southern blot analyses showed the gene for gp130 was disrupted, and immunoblots showed the corresponding absence of gp130 in transformants. Biochemical and physiological analyses indicated that cells lacking the protein had defects in neither growth nor developmental. Rather, gp130-null cells had faster growth rates and attained higher densities in nutrient HL5 media and bacterial suspensions, before reaching stationary phase, than the parent DH1. The more robust growth of 1C7 and 2F5 in HL5 could be attributed to the higher activities of macropinocytosis. Although particle uptake rates were similar for the cells when measured directly for short times, growth of the gp130-null cells in bacterial suspensions was superior to DH1. The higher growth rates might be related to greater endocytotic activity that was more evident over time and consistent with the enhanced rates of fluid-phase uptake. Studies of endocytosis in mammalian cell lines, yeast and D. discoideum commonly yield cases where macropinocytosis is disrupted rather than improved after gene mutations. For example, because the cytoskeleton plays a role in endocytosis, mutations in actin-binding proteins adversely affect macropinocytosis in D. discoideum. A faster doubling time by D. discoideum cells lacking the substrate adhesion receptor sadA was due to the cytokinesis of multinucleate cells and not improved endocytosis. It seems unlikely that the improved growth characteristics of the gp130-null cells were a consequence of the inserted UMP synthase gene because a number of cell lines with genes disrupted with this cassette display rates of endocytosis the same as or less than that of the DH1 parent cell line. The robust growth characteristics of gp130-null cells thus were unforeseen. We offer two explanations for the observed behaviors of the transformants. One is that because gp130 was a component of the plasma membrane, its absence caused changes in the physical nature of the membrane bilayer that led to greater endocytotic activity. A second related scenario is that gp130 was involved directly in a mechanism governing membrane recycling. Its absence led to elevated rates of membrane trafficking, with the consequence of increasing overall endocytotic activity. Because cytoskeletal-membrane interactions are vital for macropinocytosis, the relationship of gp130 to other membrane or cytoskeletal proteins is a focus of future studies. Colony growth rates as well as the continued expansion of clear zones on bacterial lawns by the gp130-null cells pointed to their faster movement on surfaces. This was consistent with their altered membrane flux and their decreased cell-substrate adhesion because cell migration is closely linked to interactions between cell and substratum. However, the rate of movement of the cells in HL5 on glass slides was similar to that of DH1, and their patterns of movement appeared the same when comparing their paths. The larger colony sizes and clear zones may reflect simply the enhanced growth rates of gp130-null cells seen in suspension culture. Alternatively, the nature of the substrate may influence the strength of the cell-substrate interaction. This could explain how the weaker cell-substrate adhesion of the gp130-null cells allowed them to be fully capable of phagocytosis, a localized cell-substrate adhesion event. Typically, cell-substrate adhesion and phagocytic competence are highly correlated. One example is the sadA-null cells unable to attach to plastic that are also phagocytically incompetent. Likewise, phg1 cells, generated by insertional mutagenesis, have defective phagocytosis that coincides with faulty adhesion. Mutants of cortical cytoskeletal proteins such as talin and myosin VII similarly show a tight coupling of phagocytosis and adhesion. Because gp130-null cells had 50% of the cell-substrate adhesion of the parent DH1 cells, but were phagocytically functional, it appeared that gp130 participated in a cell-substrate adhesion mechanism different from the sadA and phg1 proteins, and also distinct from that used in the recognition of Klebsiella aerogenes and E. coli bacteria. We thus consider the idea that gp130 was a lectin-type receptor postulated by Vogel et al.. Phagocytosis by the gp130-null cells could be performed by the “nonspecific” receptors that compensated for gp130 so its absence was not a liability. We also consider the possibility that gp130 was part of the cellular adhesion assemblage of surface molecules postulated to be controlled by the transmembrane 9 family of proteins Benghezal et al.. Thus, gp130 could still have a role in phagocytosis as a specific receptor. Because the adhesion assay tested only cell interactions with plastic, the nature of a cell surface-adhesion system mediated by gp130 should be explored further by testing how cells ingest particles with different chemical properties under different conditions. Although the transformants exhibited weaker cell-substrate adhesion, it was paradoxical to find that compared with the cell-cell cohesion of DH1 cells, vegetative gp130-null cells were relatively more cohesive with each other in suspension. Although cell-cohesion is typically not measured in vegetative cells, Marin et al. observed that nearly half the vegetative cells make aggregates within 30 min in a suspension of nutrient media. The interaction of gp130-null cells was not wholly attributable to gp24, the molecule mediating calcium-dependent cell-cell cohesion during early development, because neither EDTA nor calcium reduced the cohesion of transformants from log-phase cultures. When dis-aggregated and returned to HL5, transformants exhibited stronger cohesion than DH1. Suspension-starved transformants under higher shear forces also made more aggregates than control cells. A component of this aggregation was apparently mediated by gp24 as the inclusion of EDTA decreased the total percentage of transformants and Ax3 cells in aggregates. Transformants, however, maintained a greater number of EDTA-resistant aggregates than Ax3 cells. These observations indicate that cells had the ability to self-cohere, in an EDTA-insensitive manner, which became more evident when gp130 was absent. Although the effectiveness of EDTA in HL5 is unclear, the adhesion mechanism displayed by vegetative transformants and the EDTA-resistant self-cohesion in shaken suspension were likely related. Studies of gp24-null cells revealed a class of EDTA-sensitive cell adhesion sites, although we do not know whether these are responsible for cohesive interactions of the vegetative transformants. Because gp130 contributed to substrate adhesion, a possibility is that its presence masked or suppressed cell-cell cohesion. Alternatively, the greater self-cohesion of transformants could be due to precocious expression of gp80, the EDTA-resistant cell-cell adhesion molecule. Desbarats et al. showed that cell-cell adhesion and contact are involved in the induction of gp80 expression. The complex phenotype of gp130-null cells pointed to a role for gp130 in inhibiting cell-cell cohesion during vegetative growth while participating in cell-substrate adhesion when cells were in contact with dissimilar surfaces. Gp130-null cells also exhibited increased macropinocytosis, indicating that the absence of the glycoprotein enhanced membrane trafficking. We anticipate that analyses of cell lines that maintain or overexpress gp130 during development, or express fluorescently tagged gp130, will provide more details regarding its adhesion functions and impact on membrane flux. Supplementary Material Click here to view. 