 The role of WASP-interacting protein in the process of F-actin assembly during chemotaxis of Dictyostelium was examined. Mutations of the WH1 domain of WASP led to a reduction in binding to WIPa, a newly identified homolog of mammalian WIP, a reduction of F-actin polymerization at the leading edge, and a reduction in chemotactic efficiency. WIPa localizes to sites of new pseudopod protrusion and colocalizes with WASP at the leading edge. WIPa increases F-actin elongation in vivo and in vitro in a WASP-dependent manner. WIPa translocates to the cortical membrane upon uniform cAMP stimulation in a time course that parallels F-actin polymerization. WIPa-overexpressing cells exhibit multiple microspike formation and defects in chemotactic efficiency due to frequent changes of direction. Reduced expression of WIPa by expressing a hairpin WIPa construct resulted in more polarized cells that exhibit a delayed response to a new chemoattractant source due to delayed extension of pseudopod toward the new gradient. These results suggest that WIPa is required for new pseudopod protrusion and prompt reorientation of cells toward a new gradient by initiating localized bursts of actin polymerization and/or elongation. INTRODUCTION Many eukaryotic cells undergo chemotaxis, directed movement toward a soluble ligand. This process is necessary for many biological functions, including the migration of macrophage during wound healing in vertebrates, axonal outgrowth to target cells, and the aggregation of Dictyostelium cells to form a multicellular organism. Chemotaxis also plays a role in disease states such as arthritis, cancer, and multiple sclerosis. Directional cell movement requires a defined cell polarity in which components of the cytoskeleton are differentially localized at the leading edge of a migrating cell as well as its retracting posterior. This polarization can be initiated by the chemoattractant binding of heterotrimeric G protein–coupled membrane-bound receptors, and subsequent activation of downstream signal transduction pathways direct reorganization of the actin and myosin cytoskeleton. A significant focus of current research involves the elucidation of the pathways that mediate both cell polarization and directional sensing, the result of which makes up a cell's proper chemotactic response. Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is a human X-linked immunodeficiency characterized by recurrent infections, hematopoietic malignancies, eczema, and thrombocytopenia. These defects are caused by mutations in the gene encoding the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein, a key adaptor protein that connects multiple signaling pathways to F-actin polymerization, a process essential for chemotaxis. The WASP family of proteins includes WASP, N-WASP, and SCAR or WAVE. We have previously confirmed the necessity of WASP during the chemotactic motility of Dictyostelium via targeted knockdown of this gene. Lowered expression of WASP significantly impaired the ability of cells to polarize, polymerize F-actin, and migrate toward the chemoattractant cAMP. Both WASP and N-WASP possess a WH1 domain, a basic domain, a Cdc42/Rac binding domain, a polyproline domain, a G-actin binding WH2 domain, a central domain, C, and a C-terminal acidic, A, segment. The importance of the WH1 domain has been suggested by the frequency of mutations found to cause WAS. Despite comprising only one-fifth of WASP, more than half of the known missense mutations causing WAS are present in the WH1 domain. The WH1 domain has been implicated in the recruitment of WASP family members to sites of actin polymerization during motility of vaccinia virus, WASP interacting protein -induced membrane protrusions, and PIP 2 -induced intracellular vesicles. WIP has been shown to interact with human N-WASP, a ubiquitously expressed homolog, at the WH1 domain. WIP is known to bind to both G- and F-actin. Depending on the system examined, WIP and other verprolin family members have been found to stimulate F-actin polymerization, initiate filopodia formation, and prevent F-actin depolymerization. WICH, a protein related to WIP, has been shown to induce microspike formation through cooperation with N-WASP. We have identified a homolog of mammalian WIP, WIPa, in Dictyostelium and examined the roles of WASP and WIP in the regulation of F-actin assembly and chemotaxis. The WH1 domain of WASP was found to bind WIPa. Overexpression of WIPa leads to an increase in microspike formation that is dependent on its WH2 domain, WASP, and VASP. WIPa translocates to the cortex of cells uniformly stimulated with cAMP in a time course that parallels F-actin polymerization. Lower levels of WIPa expression reduced prompt chemotactic responses of cells to a changing chemoattractant gradient. We conclude that WIPa is important for proper regulation of actin polymerization at sites of new pseudopod formation, which allows a chemotaxing cell the flexibility to respond to a spatially dynamic chemotactic gradient. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Culture and Development Dictyostelium cells were cultured axenically in HL5 medium supplemented with 60 U of penicillin and 60 μg of streptomycin per ml. All cell lines shown were obtained using G418 to select stable-expressing clones. Equivalent protein expression levels were determined via quantitation of YFP signal in vivo using Metamorph software. For examining developmental phenotypes, cells were washed twice with 12 μM Na/K phosphate buffer and plated on nonnutrient agar plates. Molecular Biology WASP and WIP expression constructs were produced by PCR amplification of Dictyostelium cDNA library or genomic DNA and subcloned into the pEXP4 vector in frame with eYFP at the N-terminus separated by the flexible linker GSGSG. The YFP fusion proteins were expressed under control of the actin-15 promoter. Point mutants were produced by cloning genes into pBS, using the QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit, and subcloned into pEXP4. All mutants were confirmed by sequence analysis. Protein expression constructs were produced using pGEX6P-1 or pET-32a+. Hairpin WIPa RNA construct was made by amplifying full-length WIPa and C-terminal half of WIPa and cloning them into pEXP4 in a tail to tail manner. In Vitro Pulldown Assay Protein expression constructs produced using pGEX6P1 or pET-32a+ were transformed into BL21 cells. Cultures were grown to a cell density of OD 600 = 0.8, and 0.1 mM IPTG was added to induce protein expression for 1 h at 37°C. Proteins were purified according to the manufacturers' instructions. Equal quantities of recombinant protein were added to 500 μl TBS-T containing 60 μl of GST-tagged protein bound to glutathione-conjugated agarose beads and incubated at 4°C for 1 h. The agarose beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 5 min and washed three times with 1 ml TBS-T. Protein was then stripped off the beads in 2× sample buffer by boiling for 4 min. Samples were resolved on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel, and proteins were identified via Western analysis using a mouse anti-6x His antibody. In vivo pulldown experiments were similarly performed, but agarose beads were incubated in 100 μl cell lysate, and proteins were identified using a mouse anti-GFP antibody. In Vitro Actin Polymerization Assay Experiments were performed as described by Zigmond,. High-speed supernatants were prepared by pulsing cells with 30 nM cAMP at 6-min intervals for 5 h, shaking with 3 mM caffeine for 30 min, lysing cells by passage through a 5-μm pore filter in PM buffer, spinning for 20 min at 2.8e 5 × g, and freezing in liquid nitrogen. One hundred nanomolar purified RacC was charged with either 100 μM GTPγS or 100 μM GDPβS for 10 min at 30°C. Supernatants were then stimulated at room temperature with the nucleotide-bound RacC at time 0. Aliquots of 50 μl were taken at each time point and stopped by dilution into 850 μl of actin buffer containing 6% formaldehyde, 0.15% Triton X-100, and 1 μM TRITC-phalloidin. Actin was stained for 1 h at room temperature and spun down at 14,000 rpm for 10 min. Rhodamine-phalloidin was extracted with 300 μl of 100% methanol, and fluorescence was measured. For visualization of actin filaments, supernatants were allowed to polymerize in the presence or absence of 0.4 μM phalloidin on a slide coverslip for 5 min at 37°C before stopping reactions with actin buffer containing formaldehyde and TRITC-phalloidin. Images were taken using fluorescent microscopy with a 60× objective lens and Metamorph software. F-Actin Pulldown Assay Experiments were performed the same as in vivo actin polymerization assays, except 100 μl of cells were mixed at each time point in Dictyostelium lysis buffer. Lysates were spun down at 14,000 rpm for 10 min. Pellets were boiled in 2× loading buffer, resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, and blotted onto nitrocellulose, and YFP-WIPa was detected using an anti-GFP antibody. F-Actin Staining For phalloidin staining, cells were pulsed with 30 nM cAMP at 6-min intervals for 5 h and placed on glass coverslips in 12 mM sodium phosphate buffer + 200 μM each of MgCl 2 and CaCl 2 for at least 30 min. Cells were fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde for 10 min. Cells were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100, washed, and incubated with TRITC or Alexa 594 -phalloidin in PBS containing 0.5% BSA and 0.05% Tween-20 for 30 min. Cells were washed in PBS containing 0.5% Tween-20. Images were captured with a Roper Coolsnap camera and Metamorph software. For labeling barbed-ends, cells were permeabilized with 100 mM PIPES, pH 6.9, 1% Triton X-100, 4% PEG, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl 2, 3 μM phalloidin for 3 min and 0.4 μM rhodamine-labeled G-actin in 1 μM ATP solution was added. After 5 min staining, cells were washed three times with PIPES buffer and fixed with 3.7% paraformaldehyde. For quantitation of leading edge F-actin content, the amount of F-actin at the leading edge of these cells was quantitated by measuring the integrated phalloidin signal at the leading edge divided by the average intensity of phalloidin staining throughout the cell body. Chemotaxis Assay Cells were pulsed with 30 nM cAMP at 6-min intervals for 5 h. These conditions maximally induce expression of aggregation-stage genes, including the cAMP receptor cAR1 and the coupled G protein α subunit Gα2. The chemotaxis assays were performed as previously described. After pulsing, cells were plated on glass-bottomed microwell dishes. A micropipette filled with 100 μM cAMP was positioned to stimulate cells by using a micromanipulator, and the response and movement of cells were recorded by using Metamorph software. Cell movement was examined by tracing the movement of a single cell in a stack of images. Subcellular Localization and Fluorescent Microscopy Cells were pulsed as normal and plated onto glass-bottomed microwell dishes. Cells were stimulated with 100 μM cAMP either using a micropipette or globally with an Eppendorf pipetman. YFP localization and translocation were recorded by using Metamorph software and a YFP emission filter. Quantitation of YFP signal was performed using line scan of lines transecting the cell body for each time point before and after stimulation. RESULTS WH1 Mutations Lead to Aberrant Regulation of Actin Polymerization and Chemotaxis More than one-half of the known missense mutations causing WAS are found in the WH1 domain. Though many of these mutations lead to lowered protein expression, some have been shown to affect WASP–WIP interaction. A previous study identified an aromatic triad of residues within the EVH1 domain of Mena necessary for its interaction with a ligand containing the consensus binding sequence FPPPP. The WH1 domain of N-WASP has been shown to bind a proline-rich motif of WIP similar to that recognized by the EVH1 domain of Mena. Sequence alignment of the WH1 domain of Dictyostelium WASP with other EVH1/WH1-containing proteins revealed that the triad of residues is conserved. To investigate the role of the WH1 domain in the function of WASP, we chose to mutate the three aromatic residues that correspond to the aromatic triad: tyrosine 33, tryptophan 39, and phenylalanine 91 to alanine. A fourth residue, phenylalanine 90, was mutated because of its proximity to F91. A construct for full-length WASP carrying all four mutations was made. This construct and wild-type WASP were expressed in WASP TK cells. This strain has been shown to express very low levels of WASP and exhibits strong chemotaxis defects, although random movement appears not to be significantly affected. Western analysis revealed equivalent expression of each protein, and a lack of degradation indicated that the aromatic residue mutations do not affect protein stability. Expression of either wild-type or mutant WASP rescued the ability of cells to polarize in response to cAMP pulsing; however, the WASP mutant exhibited a reduced ability to polymerize F-actin at the leading edge. Figure 1 D shows that the leading edge F-actin content of WASP TK cells expressing wild-type WASP is threefold greater than that of wild-type cells alone, presumably because of ectopic overexpression of WASP. However, YWFF WASP mutant exhibit less than a twofold increase in F-actin accumulation over wild type. Consistent with this data, YWFF WASP-expressing WASP TK cells exhibited a reduced level of F-actin polymerization in response to global cAMP stimulation, indicating that the aromatic triad residues are required for full WASP function. Chemotactic parameters such as mean velocity, angular deviation, and chemotactic index were measured. In each measurement, WASP TK cells expressing YWFF WASP exhibited an intermediate level of stimulation between that of WT WASP-expressing cells and WASP TK cells alone, indicating WH1 domain is required for the full function of WASP. Figure 1. Conserved WH1 domain aromatic residues are important for WASP function. Comparison of the amino acid sequence of DdWASP WH1 domain with other species: Hs, Homo sapiens ; Mm, Mus musculus ; Ce, C. elegans ; Dm, Drosophila melanogaster ; Dd, D. discoideum... Table 1. Chemotactic parameters WIPa, a Dictyostelium Homolog of Mammalian WIP, Binds to the WHI Domain of WASP An attempt to identify homologues of WIP was made using the Dictyostelium genome database. A gene encoding a 197 amino acid protein exhibited the highest sequence homology to mammalian WIP and was designated WIPa. A comparison of the derived amino acid sequence of Dictyostelium WIPa with WIP family members from various metazoans shows a moderately conserved primary sequence and domain structure. WIPa is enriched in proline residues and has a conserved WASP Homology 2 domain at its N-terminus. This domain has previously been reported to bind G- and F-actin. Figure 2. DdWIPa is structurally and functionally similar to mammalian Wasp Interacting Protein. Schematic representations of mammalian WIP and Dictyostelium WIPa. Sequence alignment of Wasp Homology 2 domain shown with conserved residues in black.... To determine whether WIPa interacts with the WH1 domain of WASP, we performed pulldown experiments with GST-WH1–bound glutathione beads incubated with the lysate of cells expressing YFP-WIPa. Figure 2 B shows that WT WH1, but not YWFF WH1, pulls down WIPa from cell lysate. Coomassie staining of the membrane revealed equal amounts of the GST fusion proteins present. To confirm that this interaction was direct, pulldown experiments were performed using purified His-tagged WIPa. GST- WT WH1- and GST- WT WASP beads pulled down significantly more His-WIPa than GST- YWFF WH1 beads. We next attempted to identify the region of WIPa that interacts with the WH1 domain. Unlike human WIP, WIPa does not have a prominent WH1-binding domain at its C-terminus. One potential binding region lies in the middle of the protein. This region has preserved the “LPPPP”-binding motif, as well as conserved residues that have been suggested, using modeling data, to form electrostatic interactions with conserved charged residues within the WH1 domain. We mutated two of these conserved residues to alanine and performed GST pulldown experiments. Figure 2 D shows that the mutant WIPa exhibits a significant reduction in affinity to the WT WH1 domain. This reduction in binding averaged to 41.7 ± 8.9% of wild type over three independent experiments. WIPa Is Enriched at the Leading Edge and Membrane Protrusions We previously showed localization of WASP at the leading edge of chemotaxing cells. YFP-WIPa expressed in vivo also localized to the leading edge of polarized, chemotaxing cells. YFP-WIPa colocalizes with CFP-WASP at the leading edge, although they do not colocalize within intracellular compartments. WIPa is transiently enriched at membrane protrusions, which appears to be an early stage of pseudopod formation. WIPa enrichment, however, seems to be lost during retraction of these protrusions, indicating that WIPa might be required for the onset of extension or maintenance of protrusion. Figure 3. WIPa localizes to leading edge, sites of membrane protrusion, and colocalizes with WASP. WIPa localization in chemotaxing cells. YFP-tagged WIPa, but not actin-binding domain mutant K36A. WIPa, is enriched at the leading edge of polarized cells.... Reduced WIPa Expression Lowers Leading Edge F-actin and Microspike Formation Alexa 594 -phalloidin was used to visualize the F-actin distribution in polarized cells expressing WIPa. Both the average steady state number of microspikes per cell, as well as the accumulation of F-actin staining at the leading edge, was significantly increased in cells overexpressing wild-type WIPa. WIPa expression in WASP TK cells did not stimulate microspike formation, indicating that WIPa binding to the WH1 domain is required to stimulate microspike formation. To investigate the role of the WASP Homology 2 domain of WIPa in its activity, the lysine residue 36 was mutated to alanine. This residue is conserved among WH2 domain-containing proteins and has been shown to be critical for binding to G- or F-actin. The K36A WIPa mutant lost its ability to localize to the leading edge of chemotaxing cells. Overexpression of K36A WIPa did not exhibit a significant increase in either microspike formation or F-actin accumulation, suggesting that actin binding is also required for WIPa activity. Figure 4. F-actin accumulation and filopodia formation are induced by WIPa. Expression of hairpin WIPa hp WIPa construct reduces WIPa mRNA level. RT-PCR reactions were performed using mRNA purified from 5 h pulsed Dictyostelium cells. Expression of other genes... We used RNAi technology to reduce WIPa expression. A construct designed to express hairpin WIPa RNA was electroporated into AX3 cells to reduce endogenous WIPa expression. RT-PCR analysis revealed significant reduction in the expression of WIPa mRNA, but not the messages of unrelated genes involved in F-actin regulation such as WASP, RacC, and VASP. Northern analysis showed similar results. Phalloidin staining of hp WIPa cells demonstrated moderately reduced F-actin accumulation at the leading edge; however, these cells are more polarized and elongated compared with wild type. These cells exhibit a lower steady state number of microspikes along the cell body, indicating that these cells may be defective in their ability to extend lateral membrane protrusions. WIPa Facilitates F-actin Polymerization via Promoting Elongation of Actin Filaments Increased level of F-actin and number of microspikes in cells overexpressing WIPa suggest that WIPa stimulates F-actin polymerization. To address more specifically the role of WIPa in actin regulation during membrane extension, the barbed ends of newly formed F-actin were labeled with TRITC -G actin in cells expressing WIPa. Figure 5 A shows that wild-type WIPa, but not K36A WIPa, induces an almost twofold increase in leading edge barbed-end staining, suggesting that WIPa stimulates new actin filament formation. To support this data, in vitro F-actin polymerization assays were performed using HSS prepared from cAMP-pulsed Dictyostelium cells as described previously. GTP-bound RacC binds the GTPase-binding domain domain of WASP and relieves its autoinhibitory interaction with the WASP acidic domain, presumably allowing WASP to activate the Arp2/3 complex. GTP-bound RacC initiated a roughly threefold stimulation of actin polymerization in wild-type supernatants, but not in supernatants prepared from WASP TK cells. Consistent with Zigmond et al., this small G protein activation of actin polymerization depended on its binding to GTP, as the inactive GDP-bound conformation of RacC failed to stimulate polymerization. Addition of 100 nM recombinant WIPa increased F-actin levels in wild-type supernatant, but not in supernatants of WASP TK cells. WIPa knockdown cell supernatants exhibited a decrease and delay in the polymerization of F-actin relative to wild-type supernatant. Addition of 100 nM recombinant WIPa to hp WIPa supernatants rescued this defect. To visualize assembled F-actin, these experiments were repeated on glass coverslips and viewed with fluorescent microscopy. RacC appears to increase the number of F-actin nucleation sites, presumably via activation of WASP and the Arp2/3 complex. Addition of recombinant WIPa increases the length of these actin filaments, suggesting that WIPa promotes the elongation of actin filaments. We considered the possibility that WIPa stabilizes F-actin by preventing depolymerization of F-actin. If this were true, addition of WIPa in the presence of phalloidin stabilizing F-actin would be unlikely to lead to a further increase in the length of actin filaments. These reactions were repeated in the presence of 0.4 μM unlabeled phalloidin. The same WIPa-induced increase in the length of actin filaments was observed, suggesting that WIPa's activity does not depend solely on prevention of F-actin depolymerization. WIPa addition to the supernatant in the absence of GTPγS-charged RacC does not stimulate filament formation, indicating WIPa alone does not stimulate nucleation of F-actin. Figure 5. WIPa stimulates de novo F-actin polymerization. Barbed-end staining of cells expressing wild-type WIPa or mutant. At least 60 cells taken from three independent experiments were used for quantitation. In vitro F-actin polymerization... WIPa Translocates to the Cell Cortex upon cAMP Stimulation Because F-actin polymerization and subsequent membrane protrusion and chemotaxis are processes downstream of cAMP receptor activation in Dictyostelium, WIPa localization was monitored before and after uniform stimulation of cells with cAMP. A biphasic, cortical translocation of the F-actin marker coronin and the PH CRAC domain, a marker for PIP 3 /PIP 2, has been observed in response to uniform cAMP stimulation previously. Similarly, two phases of WIPa translocation to the cell cortex after cAMP stimulation were observed. The first phase of translocation appeared to be more uniform along the cortex and peaked after 6 s. In contrast, the smaller second peak of WIPa translocation is less uniform and more localized to sites of membrane protrusions as PH CRAC domain does. WIPa translocation appears to require its WH2 domain, as K36A WIPa showed a significantly lower level of translocation. This is consistent with the inability of this mutant to localize to the F-actin–enriched leading edge of chemotaxing cells. Similarly, WIPa expressed in WASP TK cells exhibited a reduced ability to translocate to the cortex. These data suggest that new F-actin polymerization at the cell cortex drives WIPa translocation. To confirm this, we determined the amount of WIPa that cosedimented with the detergent-insoluble F-actin pellet after centrifugation of lysate from cells stimulated with cAMP. Consistently, two peaks of WIPa translocation to F-actin pellet were observed. However, either mutation of the WIPa WH2 domain or WASP deletion significantly reduced the levels of WIPa in the F-actin pellet. Figure 6. WIPa translocates to the cell cortex upon global cAMP stimulation. Images of cells expressing YFP-WT WIPa or K36A mutant globally stimulated with 100 μM cAMP are shown. Data points were taken at 3-s intervals. Two linescan measurements from... We then measured the effects of WIPa overexpression on the polymerization of F-actin in response to uniform stimulation of cAMP. Interestingly, WIPa leads to a significant increase in F-actin polymerization 30 s after cAMP stimulation, presumably at sites of membrane protrusions, whereas it does not significantly increase the first peak of F-actin polymerization at 5–10 s. This WIPa-induced increase in actin polymerization is dependent on endogenous WASP expression. PI3 kinase activity also appears to be necessary for WIPa cortical translocation, as LY294002, a PI3 kinase inhibitor, but not vehicle alone eliminated translocation. This appears to occur via a mechanism independent of actin polymerization, because LY294002 did not significantly hamper the peak increase in actin polymerization. WIPa Is Important for the Ability of Cells to Promptly Respond to a New Gradient To determine the role of WIPa in controlling cell motility, we performed micropipette chemotaxis assays. Polarized cells were plated on a glass slide and allowed to chemotax toward a cAMP-releasing micropipette for at least 5 min before taking images. Table 1 shows that WIPa overexpression reduces the mean velocity and chemotactic index of cells migrating toward the micropipette, whereas angular deviation is significantly increased, indicating these cells make more directional changes presumably due to the increase of microspike/pseudopod protrusion. These chemotactic defects are not seen in cells overexpressing K36A WIPa. Reduction of endogenous WIPa message, however, appears to have little effect on chemotaxis efficiency. Cells expressing the hp WIPa construct are well polarized and exhibit little change in mean velocity and chemotactic index when migrating in a single direction toward a stably localized micropipette, suggesting that WIPa may not be essential for the stabilization or maintenance of a mature leading edge. Because WIPa overexpression caused frequent directional changes, we examined whether WIPa might be responsible for the ability of a cell to sense and respond to changes in the chemoattractant gradient, the micropipette was moved to a new location during chemotaxis. The instantaneous velocity of cells was measured immediately after the pipette was shifted to a location approximately perpendicular to the cell. Figure 7 A shows that wild-type cells redirect themselves toward the new chemoattractant source quickly. However, hp WIPa cells exhibit a delayed response to the new direction. Although wild-type cells resume normal velocity in <60 s, hp WIPa cells took more than 300 s to resume normal speed. We speculated that the delayed response might be due to a delay in making a new pseudopod toward the new directional cue. To test this, we measured the time required for each cell type to initiate pseudopod protrusion, in clear response to the new chemoattractant source, which eventually developed into the new leading edge. The average time required for new pseudopod formation toward the new cAMP source was 48 s for wild-type cells, whereas hp WIPa cells took 145 s. These results suggest that WIPa stimulates lateral membrane protrusion and prompt formation of a new pseudopod when cells respond to a change in the direction of a chemoattractant source. Figure 7. WIPa is necessary for prompt response to a changing chemoattractant gradient. Pulsed cells were allowed to chemotax toward a cAMP-releasing micropipette for ∼5 min. Time 0 indicates the first frame after which the micropipette was moved... VASP Is Important for WIPa-induced Microspike Formation Vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein is a member of the Ena/VASP family, and targeted knockout of this gene in Dictyostelium was shown to reduce filopodia/microspike formation. It is of great interest to determine if both WIPa and VASP are required for microspike formation. We expressed WIPa in a vasp null cell line. F-actin was stained to determine the steady state level of microspikes in each cell type. Consistent with a previous study, vasp null cells showed a significantly lower number of microspikes. Overexpression of VASP without a membrane-targeting myristoylation tag does not significantly increase the number of fliopodia/microspikes per cell. vasp − cells overexpressing WIPa failed to exhibit an increase in the steady state level of microspikes as seen in the wild-type background. Coexpression of VASP and WIPa in vasp null cells restored increased microspike formation, suggesting that VASP might be required for microspike formation by WIPa. Figure 8. VASP is required for WIPa-induced microspike formation and membrane translocation. Overexpression of WIPa fails to significantly increase the steady state level of microspikes in a vasp null background. The number of microspikes from at least 50 cells... As VASP has been shown to translocate to the cell cortex upon global cAMP stimulation and membrane targeting appears to be required for filopodia formation, we considered the possibility that VASP may be involved in the translocation of WIPa to the cortex where it could then initiate microspike formation. Figure 8 B shows a reduced WIPa translocation in the vasp null background, raising the possibility that a lack of WIPa at the plasma membrane partially explains the lack of microspikes in the vasp null background. VASP has been shown to nucleate and bundle actin filaments in vitro, and as we observed a dependence of WIPa translocation upon F-actin, we measured the actin polymerization response of VASP null cells to cAMP. An increase in whole cell levels of F-actin in response to cAMP was diminished in vasp null cells. Consistently, expression of the F-actin–binding protein ABP in vasp null cells revealed a reduced level of actin accumulation at the cell cortex. Significantly less WIPa was pelleted with F-actin after cAMP stimulation of vasp null cells, presumably due to a decrease in levels of actin polymerized and/or bundled. These data suggest that, like WASP, VASP plays a role in the actin polymerization response to global cAMP. Diminished cortical actin levels in these cells lead to a decrease in the translocation of WIPa to the plasma membrane, where it might normally facilitate microspike formation with VASP. DISCUSSION Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton is a key event for directed cell migration. Our study suggests a role for WIPa in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton and motility during chemotaxis. WIPa plays a role in lateral membrane protrusion and pseudopod extension that is important for prompt response to a dynamic chemoattractant gradient, whereas WASP appears to be responsible for cell polarity and the majority of actin polymerization necessary to establish the bulk protrusive force against the leading edge plasma membrane. Our data suggests that WIPa stimulates microspike formation and lateral membrane protrusion in a polarized cell. In these processes, WIPa may facilitate elongation of actin filaments already nucleated by WASP's activation of the Arp2/3 complex as shown in our in vitro polymerization assay. It is also possible that WIPa may provide WASP with an additional actin monomer during Arp2/3 complex activation and enhances its rate of filament assembly. The number of WH2 domains in a complex of proteins including the Arp2/3 complex may determine the degree to which the complex enhances actin polymerization. WIP enhances F-actin polymerization of cortactin, which has no WH2 domain. Similarly, WASP, which has one WH2 domain and is known to be a better Arp2/3 activator than cortactin, is also stimulated by WIP in a manner that depends on WIP's own WH2 domain. Consistently, the VCA domain of N-WASP, which possesses two WH2 domains, was found to be a better activator of the Arp2/3 complex and microspike formation than VCA domains possessing a single WH2 domain. NMR spectroscopy and computer modeling studies have provided insight into the pathogenesis of WAS by revealing structural details of the WASP WH1 interaction with WIP. Consistently, we showed that Dictyostelium WIPa binds to the WASP WH1 domain and that the aromatic triad residues are essential for this interaction. We identified a potential WH1-binding region of WIPa that lies within the middle of the protein. This region has preserved a polyproline binding motif, as well as conserved residues that have been suggested to form electrostatic interactions with conserved aspartic acid residues within the WH1 domain. Mutation of two of these residues reduced the affinity of WIPa for the WH1 domain. This region, however, is oriented in a C- to N-terminal manner. As proline-rich binding modules like the WH1 domain are known to isoenergetically dock with PPII ligands in two possible orientations due to the twofold rotational pseudosymmetry of the ligand, it is plausible that this region of WIPa interacts with the WH1 domain of WASP. When cAMP-pulsed Dictyostelium cells are globally stimulated with chemoattractant, two distinct phases of actin polymerization are triggered. Both phases have been shown to correspond to a translocation of an F-actin marker and a PIP 3 marker to the cell cortex. Cytosolic WIPa also appears to translocate to the cortical membrane in two distinct phases that parallel this actin polymerization. The reduction in translocation caused by the K36A mutation would imply that WIPa translocation is partially mediated by a WH2-F-actin interaction. Interestingly, the second phase of translocation of WIPa is localized to sites of pseudopod/microspike formation. Overexpression of WIPa would result in increased WIPa translocation to the cortex, leading to more F-actin assembly and more lateral membrane protrusion and thus lower chemotactic efficiency. WIPa translocation to the membrane also appears to require PI3 kinase activity, suggesting that PIP 3 might trigger WIPa translocation. We do not fully understand how this translocation is dependent on PI3 kinase yet. In our previous study, WASP localization was significantly changed upon the inhibition of PI3 kinase by LY294002. Sequestration of WIPa by WASP in LY294002-treated cells might result in defective translocation of WIPa to the cortical membrane. We suggest that upon cAMP stimulation, membrane-bound WASP stimulates actin polymerization at the cell cortex presumably via activation by PIP 3 and RacC. The polymerized actin recruits cytosolic WIPa to the cortex, where it facilitates elongation/polymerization of F-actin with WASP, resulting in membrane extension and protrusion. Cell cortical actin accumulation in response to cAMP also appears to require VASP, perhaps via its nucleation or bundling activity. A loss of this actin accumulation in VASP null cells appears to lead to a reduction in WIPa translocation similar to that seen in WASP TK cells. The reduction in cortical WIPa may be responsible for the reduced ability of WIPa overexpression to increase the steady state level of microspikes in the absence of VASP. We have provided evidence that WIPa regulates chemotaxis. Although WIPa overexpression increases microspike formation, decreases speed, and increases angular deviation of a cell toward a chemoattractant source, reduction of WIPa expression decreases microspike formation, slightly improves the chemotactic index, but decreases the ability of cells to reorient toward a new chemoattractant source. The effects of the Dictyostelium formin dDia2 on cell migration are similar. Overexpression of dDia2 increases filopodium formation and leads to a decrease in cell motility. Deletion of the dDia2 gene resulted in cells with fewer filopodia but higher cell velocity. Because WIPa stimulates onset of early pseudopod at the plasma membrane, WIPa may allow cells to respond to new gradient promptly by initiating localized bursts of actin polymerization and/or elongation, whereas WASP may provide the main driving force of lamellipodia protrusion by stimulation of F-actin polymerization at the leading edge. The severe chemotactic defects exhibited by the WH1 domain WASP mutant and the lack of significant defects of WIPa knockdown cells during chemotaxis toward a single direction would imply that another polyproline-containing protein might participate in the stabilization or maintenance of WASP-generated actin assembly during lamellipodia protrusion at the leading edge. We have shown in vitro that WIPa increases the length of RacC-induced, WASP-dependent actin filaments and, in vivo, WIPa localizes to sites of newly forming pseudopodia on the cortical membrane. When a chemotaxing cell senses a change in direction in cAMP input, a localized increase in WIPa activity might provide the cytoskeletal framework for the formation of a new pseudopod and, eventually, a new leading edge by facilitating actin polymerization. A decrease in WIPa expression, then, would result in cells with a reduced ability to change direction promptly upon change of chemoattractant gradient due to delayed formation of pseudopodia/microspikes. It is likely that chemotaxis of these cells already committed toward a single chemoattractant source would not be altered or even faster due to less angular deviation. An increase in WIPa expression would produce more lateral pseudopodia resulting in a corresponding increase in the number of turns, and thus a greater angular deviation. A role for both WIP and WASP in Dictyostelium chemotaxis is consistent with the severe impairment of T-cell homing to spleen and lymph nodes from WASP −/− WIP −/− double knockout mice. A species-specific difference, however, between the importance of the WASP family of proteins may exist. Although lamellipodia and filopodia formation appear to be more dependent on SCAR in Drosophila BG2 cells and WAVE2 in mammalian cells, WASP deficiency appears to have a greater effect on membrane protrusion and actin assembly than SCAR deficiency in Dictyostelium. SCAR deficiency does lead to decreased actin assembly at the leading edge, but these cells polarize well and form visible streams, unlike WASP TK cells, suggesting the possibility of rather normal chemotactic movement despite abnormal F-actin organization. It has been suggested that SCAR is not required for the generation of actin protrusions, but may be more involved in extending and reshaping them. This would imply the evolutionary acquisition of WASP-dependent roles of actin assembly during chemotaxis by WAVE/SCAR family members sometime after the divergence of the protozoans. Alternatively, it is conceivable that WASP function is more essential in highly motile cells such as Dictyostelium, neutrophils, and macrophage to provide highly dynamic regulation of the actin cytoskeleton than in slower moving cells like fibroblasts. It has been demonstrated that the VCA domain of SCAR shows different potency in stimulating Arp2/3 than that of WASP or N-WASP, at least in in vitro systems. The VCA domain of N-WASP and WASP induce rapid actin polymerization, whereas SCAR1 induces the slowest rate of nucleation. It is conceivable to expect WASP or N-WASP to be the primary regulators of dynamic F-actin assembly. Thus, lack of WASP function might cause more severe phenotypes in highly motile cells. In conclusion, WIPa translocates from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane upon cAMP stimulation. The regulation of the F-actin cytoskeleton by WIPa at sites of membrane protrusion and pseudopod formation appears necessary to allow chemotaxing cells the flexibility of responding to new sources of chemoattractant and to prevent premature commitment to a single chemoattractant source. 