 The generation of diacylglycerol in response to receptor stimulation is a well-documented signalling mechanism that leads to activation of protein kinase C. Putative alternative effectors contain sequences that interact with DAGs, but the mechanisms of signal transduction are unknown. We have identified a Dictyostelium gene encoding a novel protein which contains a domain with high identity to the DAG-binding domain of PKC. It does not encode a PKC homologue as the conservation does not extend outside this region. We confirm that the proposed DAG-binding domain is sufficient to mediate interaction of a fusion protein with vesicles containing DAG. The protein also shows significant homology to mammalian phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinases and we show that this domain has PIP kinase activity. The protein, PIPkinA, is enriched in the nucleus and abrogation of gene function by homologous recombination inhibits early developmental gene expression, blocking development at an early stage. Thus, we have identified a PIP kinase from Dictyostelium which is required for development, is a candidate effector for DAG and has the potential to synthesize nuclear PIP 2. Keywords: diacylglycerol/ Dictyostelium /gene expression/nucleus/phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase Introduction A wide range of signals lead to the transient or sustained generation of diacylglycerol via activation of phospholipase activity. The consequences of these signals for cell function are varied, but if they can be brought about by phorbol ester treatment they are assumed to involve protein kinase C activation. In many cases, direct activation of PKC in response to increased DAG levels has been established through stabilization of membrane association of the enzyme after cell lysis. The DAG-binding domain of both novel and classical PKC family members is a cysteine- and histidine-rich motif. Two copies of this C 6 H 2 motif are found in all PKC isoforms that interact with DAG, but a single copy has been shown to be sufficient for DAG interaction in vitro. Other proteins have been isolated from mammalian cells which have domains homologous to those known to be responsible for DAG binding in PKC. These include n -chimaerin, a brain-specific protein isolated from human cells, the proto-oncogene c-vav, and unc-13, which is encoded by a gene whose deletion causes uncoordinated movement in Caenorhabditis elegans. The existence of these proteins raises the possibility that DAG can activate alternative signalling pathways in the cell and that some of the effects of DAG generation on cell function may be PKC independent. In early development, Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae aggregate together in response to pulsatile emissions of cAMP from a signalling centre. In addition to its role as chemoattractant, extracellular cAMP acts at several stages in development to regulate gene expression. Extracellular cAMP binds to cell surface receptors, which stimulate multiple signalling pathways inside the cell. A phospholipase C activity has been described which is present during early aggregation. The transient generation of inositol trisphosphate is proposed to be due to activation of this PLC by a G protein-dependent mechanism. Hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate by PLC would also lead to the transient generation of DAG. A role for DAG has been demonstrated in actin nucleation, phagocytosis and regulation of gene expression. However, the molecular details of the signalling pathways downstream of DAG generation have not been characterized. Several PKC-like activities have been identified in vegetative cells or during the early stages of development, but the sequences encoding these proteins have not been determined. We have identified a protein which contains a sequence tract that is highly homologous to the DAG-binding domain of mammalian PKCs and we show that the conserved domain can, indeed, interact with DAG. Primary structure analysis also identified a putative phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase domain and we demonstrate that this domain has PIP kinase activity when expressed heterologously. The protein, which we term PIPkinA, is enriched in the nucleus. Analysis of strains in which the gene encoding PIPkinA has been disrupted by homologous recombination reveals that this protein is required for early changes in developmental gene expression and aggregation. Results Isolation and sequence analysis of the gene encoding PIPkinA A synthetic oligonucleotide, based on the sequence of the DAG-binding domain of bovine PKCs, was used to screen a genomic library of Dictyostelium DNA and a set of overlapping clones was isolated. The entire gene sequence was determined and revealed an open reading frame of 4767 bp, which would give rise to a protein of 1589 amino acids with a predicted mol. wt of 182 kDa. Only one short intron is present in the gene, as indicated on Figure 1 A. There are several long runs of repetitive AT-rich DNA within the coding sequence and several long tracts of AAC repeats. Similar AAC repeats have been found in the coding regions of many developmentally regulated genes. As is normal for Dictyostelium genes, the non-coding DNA is extremely AT rich. Fig. 1. Sequence of the PIPkinA protein. The protein sequence of the PIPkinA open reading frame is shown. The areas of homology are indicated with the ankyrin-repeat domain underlined,... Sequence analysis revealed a stretch of DNA with high homology to the probe, and the putative protein sequence of this region has a high degree of identity to the DAG-binding domain of mammalian PKCs. The highest degree of homology is seen with a PKC homologue isolated from Drosophila, but there is significant homology to the mammalian sequences. The PIPkinA open reading frame does not encode a PKC homologue as there is no significant homology to protein kinases, and the sequence homology to mammalian PKCs does not extend outside the area required for DAG interaction. On searching a database of protein sequences, three other areas of interest became apparent. PIPkinA contains a region with a high degree of homology to human ankyrin. The homology lies in a region containing multiple repeats of the 33 amino acid ankyrin repeat, a motif present in a wide range of proteins. In many cases, ankyrin repeats have been shown to be responsible for mediating protein–protein interactions. Dictyostelium PIPkinA has five copies of the ankyrin repeat. The third and fourth copies are interrupted by a 57 amino acid region containing several stretches of a single amino acid, most commonly asparagine. Similar homopolymeric stretches of amino acids have been reported in many Dictyostelium proteins, although their function is unknown. The protein also contains a short region with high homology to a region of α-actinin. The significance of the α-actinin homology region is not known. The most extensive region of homology is between the C-terminal 330 amino acids and the phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinases. This homology includes the sequences that are conserved between all family members. PIPkinA shows greatest homology to human and yeast type I enzymes PIP5KIα, Mss4, PIPKIIα and plant PIP kinases identified in Arabidopsis and Nicotiana. Mammalian PIPKs of this family fall into two types. The type I enzymes phosphorylate PI 4-phosphate in the 5 position, whereas type II enzymes phosphorylate PI 5-phosphate in the 4 position. PIPkinA shows a similar degree of homology to both classes. It has been shown that sequences at the C-terminus of PIPKs, called the activation loop, contribute to determining the substrate specificity of PIPKs. This region of PIPkinA again shows a comparable degree of homology to both classes over this region and does not show distinguishing features which allow it to be placed in either class. The PIP kinase domain of PIPkinA shows a much lower degree of homology to the related family of PI 3-phosphate kinases such as Fab1p. Pattern of expression of the gene encoding PIPkinA The 5.1 kb PIPkinA transcript is expressed at an undetectable level in cells growing on a bacterial food source. It increases in abundance very rapidly upon starvation and is maintained at this level throughout the remainder of aggregation. The transcript continues to be present at a reduced level throughout the rest of development. As with many genes expressed during early development, the PIPkinA mRNA is present in axenically growing cells at an abundance characteristic of cells in early aggregation. Fig. 2. Developmental expression of PIPkinA. RNA was isolated from V12M2 Dictyostelium cells grown on bacteria and following starvation on agar plates to induce development. At the times indicated, total cellular RNA was extracted and the resulting northern... Subcellular localization of PIPkinA A polyclonal antiserum was raised against the ankyrin-repeat region of PIPkinA and western blot analysis confirmed the interaction of the antiserum with a single band of ∼180 kDa, with a time course of expression consistent with that seen by northern blot analysis. Immunofluoresence revealed a nuclear enrichment of PIPkinA in growing cells. The green staining indicates the position of the nuclear membrane, revealed using mab17, a monoclonal antibody that recognizes a component of the nuclear pore apparatus. Antibodies raised against the putative DAG-binding domain of PIPkinA also showed a nuclear enrichment. Expres sion of a PIPkinA–green fluorescent protein fusion protein, driven by a Dictyostelium promoter that expresses constitutively in early development, revealed that the fusion protein was enriched in nuclei of growing Dictyostelium amoebae, further confirming the nuclear localization of PIPkinA. Cells expressing GFP alone showed no significant nuclear enrichment. No change in the localization of the PIPkinA–GFP fusion protein was apparent in cells developed through to the aggregation stage of development. Fig. 3. Localization of PIPkinA protein. Affinity-purified antisera raised against the ankyrin-repeat region of PIPkinA were used to investigate the time course of expression of the PIPkinA protein by western blotting of a developmental time... PIPkinA is a DAG-binding protein The ability of the cysteine-rich domain to interact with DAG was determined by examining the association of a fusion protein containing the Crd with lipid vesicles containing DAG. The sequence encoding the Crd was inserted downstream of the glutathione S -transferase gene so as to create a fusion protein. This protein was purified from bacterial lysates and its ability to associate with artificial lipid vesicles containing DAG was monitored by western blotting using antisera directed against the GST portion of the fusion protein. Association of the GST portion alone with the lipid vesicles was low and not significantly increased by the inclusion of DAG. In contrast, the Crd–GST fusion protein was able to associate with lipid vesicles and this association was significantly stimulated by the inclusion of DAG in the vesicles. Under identical conditions, a fusion protein containing GST fused to both of the Crds from bovine PKCα showed a comparable level of vesicle association to that of the PIPkinA Crd–GST fusion protein, both in the absence and presence of DAG. No increased association of the PIPkinA Crd was observed with vesicles containing a range of other lipids including PIP 2. It did not bind to the phorbol ester phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate in a phorbol binding assay, although, as a control, PDBu showed the expected high level of binding to the Crd of PKCα. Fig. 4. Association of GST fusion proteins with artificial membrane vesicles. Lipid vesicles containing or not containing 5mol% DAG were incubated with GST alone or with fusion proteins incorporating the Crd... PIPkinA encodes PIP kinase activity The C-terminal 369 amino acids of PIPkinA were fused in-frame to GST and the lipid kinase activity of the purified protein confirmed by the generation of PIP 2 from PIP. The addition of phosphatidic acid did not stimulate the kinase activity, unlike mammalian type I enzymes. Fig. 5. PIP kinase activity of the C-terminal domain of PIPkinA.GST alone or a fusion protein of GST and the C-terminal domain of PIPkinA was purified by elution from glutathione–Sepharose 4B beads, and incubated with PIP in the presence of ATP and 10 µg of purified GST or GST–PIPK protein, in the presence or absence of phosphatidic acid. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 200 µl of 1 N HCl. Phospholipids were extracted with chloroform:methanol: HCl, separated by thin-layer chromatography in chloroform:methanol: H 2 O: NH 4 OH and detected by autoradiography. Generation of antibodies Polyclonal antisera were raised in rabbits against purified GST fusion proteins containing the PIPKinA ankyrin-repeat motif. Depletion of antisera against GST and subsequent purification on a fusion protein affinity column were carried out as described in Maeda and Firtel. Growth and development of Dictyostelium Dictyostelium strain Ax2 was grown in HL-5 medium at 22°C. For development, exponentially growing cells were harvested and washed three times in KK 2 and developed on Millipore nitrocellulose filters supported on a buffered pad. Chemotaxis assays were carried out as described in Tillinghast and Newell and the ratio of the diameter of the spot on agar containing the chemoattractant to the initial diameter plotted against time. For pulsing experiments, cells were resuspended in KK 2 at 1 × 10 7 /ml, shaken at 110 r.p.m. for 2 h and then pulsed with 100 nM cAMP at 5 min intervals for 5 h. Isolation of RNA and northern blot analysis Total cellular RNA was isolated and northern blot analysis carried out as described in Huang et al.. A riboprobe was used to detect expression of mRNA encoding PIPkinA. The RNA probe was transcribed using T7 polymerase from a subclone of a central Acc I fragment from the Ddpik6 gene. Expression of early developmental genes was detected using randomly primed 32 P-labelled cDNA. Generation of PIPkinA – cells A 3.76 kb fragment of the PIPkinA coding region was inserted into the vector pGEM-7Zf. A cassette encoding the blasticidin resistance gene downstream of the actin 15 promoter was inserted into the Nhe I site at position 2243 within the coding region of PIPkinA, relative to the start site of the open reading frame. The resulting plasmid was electroporated into Ax2 cells and blasticidin-resistant clones screened for homologous recombinants by PCR using primers flanking the insertion site. Two single clones with a disrupted Ddpik6 gene were identified in two separate electroporation experiments, and these clones showed indistinguishable phenotypes. PIPkinA – cells were grown in medium supplemented with 5 µg/ml blasticidin. Complementation experiments A vector to express a PIPkinA–GFP fusion protein in Dictyostelium was created using a restriction fragment stretching from residues 31 to 4767 of Ddpik6, which contains the entire coding sequence apart from the first 10 amino acids. This was inserted into the pAct15-GFP vector between the constitutive actin 15 promoter and the sequences coding for GFP. A construct lacking the PIP kinase domain of PIPkinA was generated by inserting a DNA fragment from 31–3796 into the same vector to create pKG3001. The PIP kinase domain was replaced with the homologous domains from other PIPKs by PCR amplification of the relevant fragment and insertion between the deleted PIPkinA sequences and GFP in pKG3001. The sequences encoded the C-terminal 333 amino acid residues of Mss4 from S.cerevisiae, 320 residues of rat type Iβ and 340 amino acid residues of human type IIβ. The resulting plasmids were all sequenced to confirm that all the fusions were in-frame and that no mutations were present following PCR amplification. The plasmids created were transformed into the PIPkinA – strain and selected with 20 µg/ml G418. Acknowledgements We are particularly indebted to Kath Hinchliffe for her help with lipid kinase assays as well as providing recombinant type I and type II enzymes and cDNA clones. We would like to thank H.Mahubani, J.Kirk, E.Coghill and A.Salako for technical assistance at various stages of the project, and Julian Gross and Nigel Goode for critical reading of the manuscript. We are grateful to M.Hall and T.Beck for supplying the MSS4 gene. This work was supported by Wellcome Trust Programme Grant 039899/Z to J.G.W., the BBSRC and Wellcome Grant 039430 to C.P. R.N. is the recipient of a BBSRC studentship. Article information EMBO J. 2001 Nov 1; 20: 6017–6027. doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.21.6017 PMCID: PMC125292 PMID: 11689442 Kunde Guo, Richard Nichol, Paul Skehel, 1, 2 Dirk Dormann, 3 Cornelis J. Weijer, 3 Jeffrey G. Williams, 3 and Catherine Pears 4 Paul Skehel Department of Biochemistry, Oxford University, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, 1 ICRF Clare Hall, Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar, Herts and 3 School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Wellcome Trust Biocentre, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK 2 Present address: Department of Neuroscience, University of Edinburgh, 1 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK 4 Corresponding author e-mail: pears@bioch.ox.ac.uk K.Guo and R.Nichol contributed equally to this work Find articles by Paul Skehel Dirk Dormann Department of Biochemistry, Oxford University, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, 1 ICRF Clare Hall, Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar, Herts and 3 School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Wellcome Trust Biocentre, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK 2 Present address: Department of Neuroscience, University of Edinburgh, 1 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK 4 Corresponding author e-mail: pears@bioch.ox.ac.uk K.Guo and R.Nichol contributed equally to this work Find articles by Dirk Dormann Cornelis J. Weijer Department of Biochemistry, Oxford University, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, 1 ICRF Clare Hall, Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar, Herts and 3 School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Wellcome Trust Biocentre, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK 2 Present address: Department of Neuroscience, University of Edinburgh, 1 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK 4 Corresponding author e-mail: pears@bioch.ox.ac.uk K.Guo and R.Nichol contributed equally to this work Find articles by Cornelis J. Weijer Jeffrey G. Williams Department of Biochemistry, Oxford University, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, 1 ICRF Clare Hall, Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar, Herts and 3 School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Wellcome Trust Biocentre, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK 2 Present address: Department of Neuroscience, University of Edinburgh, 1 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK 4 Corresponding author e-mail: pears@bioch.ox.ac.uk K.Guo and R.Nichol contributed equally to this work Find articles by Jeffrey G. Williams Catherine Pears Department of Biochemistry, Oxford University, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, 1 ICRF Clare Hall, Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar, Herts and 3 School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Wellcome Trust Biocentre, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK 2 Present address: Department of Neuroscience, University of Edinburgh, 1 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK 4 Corresponding author e-mail: pears@bioch.ox.ac.uk K.Guo and R.Nichol contributed equally to this work Find articles by Catherine Pears Department of Biochemistry, Oxford University, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, 1 ICRF Clare Hall, Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar, Herts and 3 School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Wellcome Trust Biocentre, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK 2 Present address: Department of Neuroscience, University of Edinburgh, 1 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK 4 Corresponding author e-mail: pears@bioch.ox.ac.uk K.Guo and R.Nichol contributed equally to this work Received 2001 Jan 30; Revised 2001 Aug 31; Accepted 2001 Sep 13. Copyright © 2001 European Molecular Biology Organization Articles from The EMBO Journal are provided here courtesy of The European Molecular Biology Organization 