 Controlling intracellular osmolarity is essential to all cellular life. Cells that live in hypo-osmotic environments like freshwater must constantly battle water influx to avoid swelling until they burst. Many eukaryotic cells use contractile vacuoles to collect excess water from the cytosol and pump it out of the cell. Although contractile vacuoles are essential to many species, including important pathogens, the mechanisms that control their dynamics remain unclear. To identify basic principles governing contractile vacuole function, we here investigate the molecular mechanisms of two species with distinct vacuolar morphologies from different eukaryotic lineages—the discoban Naegleria gruberi, and the amoebozoan slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. Using quantitative cell biology we find that, although these species respond differently to osmotic challenges, they both use actin for osmoregulation, as well as vacuolar-type proton pumps for filling contractile vacuoles. We also use analytical modeling to show that cytoplasmic pressure is sufficient to drive water out of contractile vacuoles in these species, similar to findings from the alveolate Paramecium multimicronucleatum. Because these three lineages diverged well over a billion years ago, we propose that this represents an ancient eukaryotic mechanism of osmoregulation. INTRODUCTION Osmoregulation is critical for cell survival, and must be tightly controlled. Many species that inhabit hypo-osmotic environments use contractile vacuoles to collect excess water and pump it out of the cell—a similar strategy to bailing water from a leaking boat. Although these organelles are common across eukaryotic phyla, 1 – 11 have been long-studied, 12 and are considered relevant drug targets in important pathogens, 4, 5, 13 the mechanisms that drive contractile vacuole pumping remain mysterious. Figure 1. Naegleria has a contractile vacuole network that requires vacuolar-type H+ ATPase activity. Osmotic regulation by contractile vacuoles can be divided into two major steps: collection of water into a contractile vacuole network, and expulsion of water from the cell. The collection step relies on active transport of solutes and passive flow of water: vacuolar-type H + -ATPases embedded in contractile vacuole membranes raise the osmotic strength of the lumen, facilitating passive water flow from the cytosol through aquaporins. 3, 14 – 22 Contractile vacuole network morphology is dynamic and varies among species. Paramecium, for example, has two star-shaped contractile vacuole networks, with “canals” that extend outward into the cytosol to collect water that then flows into a central “bladder.” 23, 24 In contrast, the contractile vacuole networks of Dictyostelium are less uniform, comprising tubules that collect water and expand to form bladders. 9, 16, 25 Meanwhile, Amoeba proteus collects water into clusters of vacuoles that fuse to form bladders. 26 In all of these networks, the bladders periodically expel their contents into the environment. During expulsion events, the contractile vacuole is maintained as a distinct compartment, which collapses into a membranous network when emptied. 9, 25, 26 Paramecium contractile vacuoles expel water through a stable, dedicated pore, 27 while Dictyostelium forms a transient pore encircled by an actin mesh that prevents intermixing of contractile vacuole and plasma membranes. 28 The forces that power bladder emptying have been the focus of much speculation. One hypothesis suggests that contractile vacuole membranes prefer to form thin tubules rather than spherical bladders, and this tendency to tubulate pushes water out of the cell. 16, 28 – 30 This hypothesis has not been directly tested, although water expulsion is slower in Dictyostelium cells lacking proteins that reinforce membrane curvature, consistent with an important role for tubulation in contractile vacuole function. 31 A second hypothesis, based largely on localization data from Acanthamoba, 32 – 35 invokes the existence of actomyosin networks that surround the bladder and contract to squeeze water out of the cell. 10, 36 A third hypothesis, supported by analytical modeling of Paramecium contractile vacuoles, 6 suggests that cytoplasmic pressure alone is sufficient to drive expulsion. 11 To test these hypotheses and identify basic principles underlying contractile vacuole function, we study species from two distinct eukaryotic lineages: the well-studied amoebozoan slime mold Dictyostelium and Naegleria— a freshwater amoeba that diverged from amoebozoans over a billion years ago 37 – 39. In addition to occupying an evolutionary position useful for identifying conserved contractile vacuole mechanisms, Naegleria amoebae also have simplified cell biology and potential relevance to human health. Naegleria amoebae lack cytoplasmic microtubules, 40 – 45 which guide contractile vacuole membrane trafficking in Dictyostelium, 46 and anchor the contractile vacuole in a stable location in other species. Contractile vacuoles are obvious in Naegleria ; even early cell biologists observed 1–3 large contractile vacuole bladders forming from the coalescence of smaller vacuoles. 1, 47 Studying Naegleria contractile vacuoles also has practical value; one Naegleria species, the “brain-eating amoeba” N. fowleri, causes a deadly brain infection for which we currently lack effective therapeutics. 48 During infection, Naegleria transition from freshwater to cerebrospinal fluid, which is two orders of magnitude higher in osmolarity, 49 making the contractile vacuole a potential Naegleria drug target. Here, we identify core mechanisms used by both Naegleria and Dictyostelium to drive contractile vacuole function. We show that Naegleria, like Dictyostelium, rely on vacuolar-type proton pumps for filling contractile vacuoles. We also show that, although Naegleria and Dictyostelium respond differently to osmotic challenges, they both use actin networks for osmoregulation, but not for the water expulsion step. Finally, we use biophysical modeling to show that cytoplasmic pressure is sufficient to drive water expulsion in both Naegleria and Dictyostelium. These findings suggest the potential for a universal mechanism of contractile vacuole pumping. RESULTS Naegleria use asynchronously filling contractile vacuole networks that require vacuolar-type proton pump activity Unlike Dictyostelium, 9, 15, 16, 25, 28, 29, 31, 46, 50 – 59 there is limited information available about Naegleria contractile vacuoles. 1, 47, 60 To determine how similar Naegleria contractile vacuoles are to those of Dictyostelium, we quantified their dynamics using live cell imaging. To this end, we treated Naegleria gruberi cells with FM4–64—a membrane dye used in other species to label contractile vacuole membranes 16, 26 —and restricted the contractile vacuole networks to a single focal plane using an agarose overlay. Consistent with previous descriptions, 1, 47, 60 we observed membrane-enclosed vacuoles that grew and shrank at regular intervals, with large bladders forming from the merging of smaller vacuoles. Also in line with prior reports, 1, 47, 60 these vacuoles were localized to the back of migrating cells. To track the fate of each compartment of a contractile vacuole network, we imaged cells through multiple pump cycles using phase contrast microscopy at a higher frame rate of 4 frames/sec. This analysis revealed occasional pauses during the expulsion period, where bladders neither grew nor shrank. Rather than a single vacuole swelling period followed by a single pumping event, concurrent swelling and shrinking occurred in distinct compartments ; as one large bladder collapses, other, smaller vacuoles grow, and eventually fuse to form the next bladder. This means that multiple generations of contractile vacuoles co-exist, with vacuoles sometimes becoming detectable two pumps in advance of their own pump. The identity of the contractile vacuole system appears fluid, with vacuoles occasionally dispersing to occupy distinct spaces in the cell, and dispersed vacuoles sometimes fusing into larger systems. We next sought to determine how water moves from the cytosol into contractile vacuole networks. Other species, 14, 19, 20, 22, 61 including Dictyostelium, 15, 16 transport protons into their contractile vacuoles using vacuolar-type proton pumps, resulting in a contractile vacuole lumen that is hyperosmotic relative to the cytosol. 21 Aquaporins in the contractile vacuole membrane then allow water to flow passively into the contractile vacuole. 3, 17, 18 In Dictyostelium, vacuolar-type proton pumps are readily visualized using deep etch electron microscopy, where they appear as 10 nm pegs protruding from the contractile vacuole membrane. 16 Similar pegs have been reported in Naegleria as well, 16 consistent with our identification of a full complement of vacuolar-type H+ATPase subunits along with aquaporins in the Naegleria genome. To directly test if these proton pumps are required for contractile vacuole function in Naegleria, we treated cells with the vacuolar-type H+ATPase inhibitor Bafilomycin A1. 62, 63 Treatment with 100 nM Bafilomycin A1 prevented the refilling of contractile vacuoles, consistent with vacuolar-type proton pump activity facilitating water flow from the cytosol into the contractile vacuole. Table 1. The Naegleria genome contains homologs of aquaporins and a bafilomycin-sensitive v-ATPase. Because the contractile vacuole membrane and associated vacuolar-type proton pumps facilitate water flow into the vacuole lumen, its surface area likely plays a key role in osmoregulation. Having multiple smaller vacuoles provides a larger surface area than one single compartment of equal volume. To explore whether this increased surface area helps in building and/or maintaining an osmotic gradient, we developed a mathematical model based on mass conservation to derive a relation between the osmotic gradient across the contractile vacuole membrane and the osmotic gradient across the plasma membrane. This model suggests that an increased surface area allows water to flow into the contractile vacuole at a lower osmotic pressure difference between the cytosol and vacuole lumen. This means that a larger contractile vacuole membrane requires less vacuolar-type proton pump activity— and therefore less ATP—to regulate intracellular osmolarity. We also performed an orders-of-magnitude estimation of the “critical size” at which a contractile vacuole will pump by balancing the energetic gain from lowering the osmotic pressure and the energetic penalty from increasing membrane surface area. Entering reasonable values for membrane tension and cytosolic elastic energy 64 – 66 into this equation results in a critical radius of 1 μm, which is consistent with our experimental observations. Taken together, these analyses indicate that the filling of Naegleria contractile vacuoles can be explained by a simple energetic balance between the osmotic pressure and membrane tension. The contractile vacuoles of Naegleria respond differently to environmental changes than those of Dictyostelium Cells typically modulate their contractile vacuole dynamics based on environmental conditions. 7, 59, 67 – 70 For example, Dictyostelium pumps more water through its contractile vacuoles when in more dilute solutions. 53 To determine how Naegleria contractile vacuole dynamics change under varying environmental conditions, we imaged Naegleria at two temperatures and two osmolarities using sorbitol—a non-metabolizable sugar used to increase osmolarity 6, 59. We then quantified the frequency of expulsion events from the largest recurring bladder and the largest bladder size for each of ten cells in five independent experiments. The pumping rate more than doubled at the higher temperature, regardless of external osmolarity: at 20 °C, contractile vacuoles pumped at an average of 0.9 pumps/min in both 0 and 50 mM sorbitol, while at 35 °C, contractile vacuoles pumped at 2.0 pumps/min in both osmolarities. These rates are within the previously reported range of 0.3–2.4 pumps per minute. 1, 60 Although pumping frequency did not vary with osmolarity, the maximum size of the bladder did: contractile vacuoles were over 3 times larger in 0 mM sorbitol than in 50 mM sorbitol. At 35 °C, the vacuoles in 0 mM sorbitol were significantly larger than at 20 °C. To determine the extent to which Naegleria can respond to external osmolarity by altering contractile vacuole size but not pumping rate, we repeated these experiments under an extended range of osmolarities, from 0 to 100 mM sorbitol at room temperature. We found a similar result: the maximum size decreased from 54.5 μm 2 in 0 mM sorbitol to 7.7 μm 2 in 100 mM sorbitol, while the pumping rate did not vary significantly. Together, these data indicate that, while Naegleria contractile vacuoles respond to temperature primarily by modulating pumping rate, they respond to osmolarity by modulating bladder size. Figure 2. The contractile vacuoles of Naegleria respond differently to environmental changes than those of Dictyostelium. Our finding that Naegleria maintains a constant contractile vacuole pumping rate under different osmolarities contrasts with Dictyostelium discoideum, which has been reported to increase pumping activity as a response to hypo-osmotic stress. 53 To confirm this difference, we directly compared the contractile vacuole networks of Naegleria and Dictyostelium in side-by-side experiments. We measured every pumping event in both cell types across a range of sorbitol concentrations. Both Naegleria and Dictyostelium cells formed larger vacuoles at lower concentrations of sorbitol. The average maximum vacuole size per cell for Naegleria was 43.0 μm 2 in 0 mM sorbitol and 7.0 μm 2 in 100 mM sorbitol, while those of Dictyostelium ranged from 9.7 μm 2 in 0 mM sorbitol to only 2.6 μm 2 in 100 mM sorbitol. Unlike Naegleria cells, which maintained a pumping rate of 1.0–1.1 pumps/min across sorbitol concentrations, Dictyostelium cells had a higher pumping rate at lower concentrations of sorbitol. Collectively, these data show that while both amoebae adjust vacuole size to account for osmolarity, only Dictyostelium pumps more frequently when under higher hypo-osmotic stress. Actin is involved in Naegleria osmoregulation, but is not required for contractile vacuole pumping Because actin networks have been hypothesized to drive contractile vacuole pumping in Acanthamoeba, 10 we searched for actin polymers at Naegleria contractile vacuoles in samples subjected to quick-freeze deep-etch electron microscopy. Although we did observe actin filaments at the cell cortex, we did not observe any actin filaments at contractile vacuole membranes, a similar result to what has been described for Dictyostelium. 16 Although the lack of actin at contractile vacuoles strongly suggests that actin network contraction cannot drive water expulsion from contractile vacuoles, it is possible that actin assembly is transient and difficult to detect using electron microscopy. Therefore, we treated cells with 5 μM latrunculin B —which results in global actin depolymerization 71, 72 —and measured contractile vacuole activity. Strikingly, this treatment did not eliminate contractile vacuole pumping. The ability of these vacuoles to continue pumping in the absence of actin filaments is incompatible with the actomyosin contractility hypothesis that relies on the existence of an actin network. Figure 3. Actin is involved in osmoregulation but is not required for contractile vacuole pumping events. Although Naegleria contractile vacuoles clearly do not require actin to pump, cells treated with actin inhibitors do have defects in osmoregulation. To quantify these defects, we estimated the volume of water expelled over time by summing the maximum bladder sizes from each pumping event. Treating cells with LatB resulted in a ~65% reduction in water pumped compared to a DMSO carrier control. To explore the nature of this defect, we treated cells with 50 μM CK-666, which inhibits the Arp2/3 complex to specifically block branched actin network assembly. 73, 74 This resulted in ~23% drop in water pumped out that was not statistically significant compared to the inactive control CK-689. These differences must be due to changes in contractile vacuole numbers, sizes, and/or pumping rates. We therefore quantified each parameter and found that compared to DMSO-treated cells, LatB-treated cells have fewer pumping events per minute —a difference that is exacerbated when looking only at large pumping events, which were relatively rare in LatB-treated cells. Meanwhile, although CK-666-treated cells had fewer large pumping events than control cells, these included some of the largest pumping events observed in this study, with some topping 200 μm 2. These results show that, although not required for contractile vacuole pumping, actin is important for osmoregulation and the reformation of large vacuoles. This may be due to a requirement for cortical actin to prevent loss of contractile vacuole membranes to the plasma membrane, similar to what has been described for Dictyostelium. 28 Actin networks are also dispensable for Dictyostelium contractile vacuole emptying The lack of visible actin polymers around Dictyostelium contractile vacuoles in deep-etch electron micrographs 16 suggests that Dictyostelium contractile vacuoles may also empty using an actomyosin-independent mechanism. We therefore directly tested the requirement for actin polymers in Dictyostelium contractile vacuole pumping by treating cells with LatB. Similar to Naegleria, depolymerizing Dictyostelium actin 75 did not eliminate contractile vacuole pumping. As a final test of the actomyosin contractility hypothesis, we imaged cells transfected with RFP-LimE, a probe for polymerized actin. While contractile vacuoles were readily observed as voids that routinely grew and shrank, there was no detectable enrichment of actin at these sites as vacuoles filled or emptied. The Latrunculin data and this live imaging support an actin-independent mechanism for contractile vacuole emptying. Although actin is not required for expulsion events, the cytoskeleton of Dictyostelium has been implicated in osmoregulation. Dictyostelium contractile vacuoles use microtubules to traffic through the cell, and a type V myosin to engage the actin cortex. 46 We therefore directly tested the role of cytoskeletal polymers in Dictyostelium osmoregulation by treating cells with a panel of actin and microtubule inhibitors. Consistent with a role for the cytoskeleton in contractile vacuole membrane trafficking, LatB-treated cells expelled ~67% less water compared to controls, while CK-666-treated cells pumped out ~45% less, and nocodazole-treated cells pumped out ~36% less water. Taken together, these data show that, like Naegleria, Dictyostelium uses actin for osmoregulation but not to drive water expulsion from the contractile vacuole. Biophysical modeling suggests that cytoplasmic pressure is sufficient to power water expulsion from Naegleria and Dictyostelium contractile vacuoles Having ruled out actomyosin-mediated contraction, we next explored other mechanisms that could explain the rapid emptying of Naegleria and Dictyostelium contractile vacuoles. Physical models of fluid expulsion from Paramecium multimicronucleatum contractile vacuoles have suggested that cytoplasmic pressure alone can provide sufficient force to empty the contents of a vacuole within seconds. 6 We therefore wondered whether cytoplasmic pressure could also be driving vacuole emptying in Naegleria and/or Dictyostelium. To test this possibility, we developed a model based on the previous Paramecium work. 6 Here, we define cytoplasmic pressure as the pressure on the cell periphery due to high intracellular concentrations of ions, osmolytes, and macromolecules. This pressure is a combination of both osmotic and oncotic pressure. 76 Under this model, we assume all of the contents of the vacuole exit through a pore of defined size. Flow through this pore is driven by the pressure difference on either side of the pore, meaning that increasing cytoplasmic pressure increases the emptying rate. The pore itself resists flow, such that having a longer, thinner pore reduces the emptying rate. Using this model, we calculate that cytoplasmic pressure can expel the entire contents of a contractile vacuole within one second for a wide range of biologically-relevant cytoplasmic pressures and pore sizes, a finding that is consistent with our measurements of Naegleria contractile vacuole emptying rates. This model also predicts that the rate of vacuole expulsion is constant in time, meaning the cross-sectional area decreases linearly. To test this prediction, we measured Naegleria and Dictyostelium contractile vacuole areas through expulsion events. In both species, the cross-sectional area decreased linearly with time, C ), consistent with our cytoplasmic pressure model. Taken together, we find that cytoplasmic pressure is a plausible mechanism for the rapid expulsion of water from contractile vacuoles. Figure 4. A biophysical model of cytoplasmic pressure-driven contractile vacuole emptying is consistent with contractile vacuole expulsion rates measured in Naegleria and Dictyostelium. DISCUSSION Osmoregulation is critical for cell survival and must be tightly controlled. Here, we show that Naegleria and Dictyostelium amoebae osmoregulate using contractile vacuole networks that respond to environmental changes. We also show that, like other species, Naegleria use vacuolar-type proton pumps for contractile vacuole filling. We confirm that although actin plays roles in osmoregulation, it is dispensable for expelling water from contractile vacuoles of both Naegleria and Dictyostelium. Instead, our analyses indicate that cytoplasmic pressure is sufficient for this process, similar to findings from the alveolate Paramecium multimicronucleatum. 6 Together, these data reveal simple, conserved mechanisms that underlie contractile vacuole function in diverse eukaryotic species. Our detailed quantification of contractile vacuole pumping shows that once Naegleria bladders begin to empty, they never again swell, suggesting that water may no longer be flowing into these compartments. This raises the possibility that cytosolic water concentration could spike during pumping events. This possibility is ameliorated by a key feature of Naegleria ’s contractile vacuole network—a division of labor: when one contractile vacuole bladder is pumping water out of the cell, other vacuoles are filling. This asynchronous activity allows for constant water flow out of the cytosol, a potentially conserved feature. For example, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii has two bladders that take turns, 77 and Paramecium has canals that continue to fill while the bladder empties. 24 Exploring the responses of contractile vacuoles to environmental changes also reveals new directions for future research. Similar to other species, 67 – 69 Naegleria’s contractile vacuoles pump more frequently at higher temperatures, a finding that is consistent with the hypothesis that the historical increase in reported pumping rates of Naegleria contractile vacuoles may be due to improvements in laboratory heating. 78 Unlike other protists, 7, 53, 68 however, Naegleria maintains a constant contractile vacuole pumping rate in different osmotic environments. In side-by-side comparisons, Dictyostelium quintupled its pumping rate in water compared to 100 mM sorbitol, while Naegleria continued to pump about once per minute in both solutions. This raises an obvious question: how does Naegleria maintain a constant contractile vacuole pumping rate? One possible answer may lie in work from Paramecium that showed regular membrane tensing of surgically-removed contractile vacuoles, 79, 80 hinting at the existence of a membrane-associated cycling activity. At the molecular scale, pump frequency may be regulated by ion channels, which are critical for pacemaking activity in cardiac and neuronal cells. 81 – 83 Although not required for pumping, actin networks do contribute to osmoregulation, as the contractile vacuoles of Latrunculin-treated cells expelled 65% less water in Naegleria and 67% less in Dictyostelium compared to controls. This defect could be due to impaired contractile vacuole membrane trafficking, 46 potentially combined with differences in actin networks at pore sites. In Dictyostelium, the actin mesh encircling the pore acts as a barrier to prevent intermixing of contractile vacuole and plasma membranes. 28 Without an actin cortex, contractile vacuole membranes may completely fuse with the plasma membrane, thereby reducing the available volume of the contractile vacuole network. On the other hand, having too much actin may also impede osmoregulation. CK-666 treatment—which results in a thicker actin cortex in Naegleria cells 72 —could block the contractile vacuole from contacting the plasma membrane. This would explain the slower pumping rate and large contractile vacuole bladders we observed upon treating Naegleria with CK-666. While our data confirm previous descriptions of Naegleria contractile vacuole dynamics, 1, 47, 60 they refute previous hypotheses of how contractile vacuoles pump. Despite the popularity of the actomyosin contractility hypothesis in the literature, 10, 13, 32, 34 – 36, 84 we and others failed to observe actin around active contractile vacuole bladders in any species, 16, 85 – 88 and disassembly of all actin networks in Naegleria and Dictyostelium failed to halt water expulsion. Furthermore, analytical modeling of this mechanism is unable to explain the dynamics of contractile vacuole emptying in Paramecium. 6 These data do, however, fit the cytoplasmic pressure model, 6 as do our biophysical modeling of expulsion events in Naegleria and Dictyostelium. Based on these data, we propose that there are only three requirements for pressure-driven contractile vacuole systems: a membrane-bound vacuole that can connect to the cell exterior, a system for transporting water up a gradient, e.g. vacuolar-type proton pumps, and cytoplasmic pressure that can push on the contractile vacuole membrane. The simplicity of this system raises the possibility that contractile vacuole networks may be even more widely distributed amongst eukaryotic phyla than is currently appreciated. We now know that cytoplasmic pressure is sufficient to drive contractile vacuole emptying in at least three eukaryotic lineages that diverged from each other over a billion years ago, suggesting that this may represent an ancestral eukaryotic mechanism for regulating intracellular osmolarity. METHODS Cell culture Naegleria gruberi cells were cultured axenically in M7 Media M7 Buffer ) in plug seal tissue culture-treated flasks and grown at 28°C. Cells were split into fresh media every 2–3 days for a maximum of 30 passages. Naegleria gruberi strain NEG was used for Quick-Freeze Deep-Etch Electron microscopy and grown on lawns of Klebsiella pneumoniae bacteria as previously described. 78 Dictyostelium discoideum cells 89 were grown axenically in HL5 Media supplemented with streptomycin and ampicillin on tissue culture-treated plastic 100 mm or 150 mm plates at 21°C and maintained at 50% confluency by sub-culturing. For transformation and exogenous gene expression of the plasmid RFP-LimE, cells were electroporated as previously described. 90 Briefly, cells were washed twice and resuspended in H-50 buffer. 5–6 million cells were transferred to a cold 0.1cm electroporation cuvette containing 2 μg of the plasmid and electroporated twice with a 5 s gap between pulses. Electroporated cells were maintained under selection in HL5 supplemented with 20μg/mL G418. FM4–64 membrane staining To visualize cell membranes, ~3X10 5 NEG-M cells were seeded into a 6-well glass-bottom plate. FM™ 4–64 Dye was added to a final concentration of 50 μg/mL. A 1.5% agarose pad was overlaid, and the media/staining solution was aspirated off the cells. Cells were imaged in DIC and fluorescence, with images captured every 1.58 s for several pumping cycles. See the microscopy section for details. Quantification of contractile vacuole area over time ~3X10 5 cells were seeded into a 6-well glass-bottom plate, rinsed with 1 mL of water, and confined under a 1.5% agarose pad. Images were acquired every 250 ms, for multiple pumping cycles. Pumping events were quantified in Fiji 91 by outlining contractile vacuole bladders at their largest, then measuring the vacuole size every 250 ms as it shrank until it was undetectable, and also working backward from the maximum size to measure the combined area of every smaller vacuole that fused to form that bladder every 2 s. This information was used to color code the vacuoles by pump using Adobe Illustrator or Adobe Photoshop. A similar analysis was performed for Fig. 1D, but with measurements every 250 ms. To quantify contractile vacuole expulsion, C ), cells were treated as above and videos of N. gruberi were taken at a rate of 110 ms/frame, and videos of D. discoideum were taken at a rate of 250 ms/frame. 10 cells were quantified for each species; the area of the bladder was determined at its largest, and the vacuole area was measured in each frame until it was no longer detectable. Because contractile vacuoles sometimes pause during expulsion, periods of rapid expulsion were isolated for analysis using a threshold of 14 μm 2 /s for N. gruberi and 4.9 μm 2 /s for D. discoideum. Cells that had rapid expulsion events encompassing at least 5 data points were used to analyze the linearity of contractile vacuole area over time. Homolog Identification To identify N. gruberi v-ATPase subunit homologs, PFAM models corresponding to each of the 13 subunits were extracted from the Pfam-A database and used to search a curated list of predicted N. gruberi proteins, using HMMER v3.3.2 with default gathering thresholds to filter matches. A BLASTP search was performed by comparing each of the resulting N. gruberi genes to proteins from Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain S288C and Dictyostelium discoideum strain AX4, using a word size of 3 and the BLOSUM45 scoring matrix, with all other settings set to their default. Only the top-scoring hit from each species was reported. The score for all reported hits was greater than 74 and the E-value was less than 1e-17. When running this BLASTP search, no significant hits were found matching the N. gruberi subunit G. This may be due to the small size of the protein and its low sequence complexity. A second BLASTP search was conducted for this protein removing the low complexity filter, which returned the reported hits, which had a score greater than 44 and an E-value less than 3e-7. A reciprocal BLASTP search, with the low-complexity filter applied using the S. cerevisiae homolog as bait, returned both N. gruberi and D. discoideum hits. The sequences were aligned with T-COFFEE using default settings and displayed with JalView, using the Clustal coloring scheme with a conservation threshold of 30. N. gruberi aquaporins were identified using HMMER, scanning the curated list of N. gruberi proteins for matches to the Major Intrinsic Protein PFAM model that passed default gathering thresholds. Examination of these matches with InterProScan only returned related domain predictions. A BLASTP search using the same settings described above was performed to return the closest matches in S. cerevisiae or D. discoideum, which had scores greater than 57 and E-values less than 2e-9. Measurement of contractile vacuole orientation ~1X10 5 N. gruberi cells were seeded into a 6-well glass-bottom plate, rinsed with 2 mL of water, and confined under a 1.5% agarose pad. Cells were imaged at a rate of 1 frame/s for 5 min. A semi-automated procedure was developed to quantify the contractile vacuole orientation across multiple cells over time. Briefly, phase contrast movies of sparsely seeded N. gruberi cells under agarose were manually contrast-adjusted, and the initial positions of cells were recorded manually. Cells were automatically segmented using an edge-detection filter and Otsu segmentation, followed by a watershed algorithm and refinement of the cell boundary using active contours. Cells were tracked in the process of segmentation using the centroids of cells in frame t – 1 as seeds for cell segmentation in frame t. Once cells were segmented and tracked, the centroid velocity was calculated from the total displacement over 5 frames. Contractile vacuole locations at the moment of pumping were identified manually using Fiji, and each pump was associated with the corresponding cell. The orientation of the contractile vacuole was then defined as the angle between the cell to contractile vacuole centroid-to-centroid vector and the cell centroid velocity vector, with the origin of both vectors at the cell centroid. Custom code for these operations and the resulting windrose plot was written in Python v3.9.1 using scikit-image v0.19.3, pandas v1.4.4, SciPy v1.9.1, and numpy v1.23.2. 92 – 94 Code is available on Github:. Environmental perturbations and under agarose assays To assess the effects of temperature and sorbitol concentration on N. gruberi cells, 1.5% agarose pads were prepared by microwaving low-melt agarose in water or 50 mM sorbitol, and pipetting 1.5 mL of solution into wells of 6-well tissue culture treated plates. Agarose pads solidified at room temperature, and were then wrapped in parafilm and stored at 4 °C for up to 1 month. Prior to the start of an experiment, agarose pads were warmed to room temperature. To control the temperature, an air conditioning unit in the microscope room was turned on >1 h prior to the experiment to achieve a stable temperature of 20±1 °C for the colder condition, and a stage heater was set to 35 °C for the warmer condition. 3X10 5 - 5X10 5 Naegleria gruberi NEG-M cells were seeded into each well of a fresh 6-well tissue culture plate and allowed to settle for ~5 min. For each well, media was aspirated, cells were rinsed with 2 mL of water, and then 1 mL of water or 50 mM sorbitol was added. Using a small scoopula, agarose pads with matching concentrations of sorbitol were loosened at the edges, and a wedge was removed, resulting in a pac-man shape. The agarose pad was transferred onto the cells, and the solution was pipetted out of the well from the mouth of the pac-man. Sample preparation was staggered such that each well was treated approximately 1 h before imaging. Cells were transitioned to the proper temperature at least 20 min prior to imaging, and imaged for 16 min with 2 s between images using phase contrast. Experiments shown in Fig. 2B were performed similarly at room temperature, with the following exceptions: after seeding, cells were rinsed in 1 mL of 0–100 mM sorbitol, then 0.5 mL of 0–100 mM sorbitol were added prior to the addition of the agarose pad; cells were imaged after ~30 minutes of treatment; cells were imaged for 10 min total. For Fig. 2A - ​ -B, B, conditions were tested in a different order for each of 5 trials, and file names were blinded prior to analysis. For each replicate, 10 cells or 5 cells from each condition were randomly selected from the initial field of view for analysis. The largest recurring vacuole in each cell was analyzed by measuring its area at its largest point prior to the pump using the freehand selection tool and measure command in Fiji. The pumping rate was calculated by dividing the number of pumps −1 by the time between the first collapse and the last fullest point. Data were analyzed and graphs were created using GraphPad Prism. Comparisons of N. gruberi and D. discoideum under agarose For the side-by-side comparisons of N. gruberi and D. discoideum, 1.0% agarose pads in 12.5–100 mM sorbitol were prepared and stored as described above. Approximately 5X10 5 Naegleria gruberi NEG-M cells or 1X10 6 Dictyostelium discoideum Ax2 cells were seeded into each well of a 6 well plate and allowed to settle. Media was aspirated from cells, and 1 mL of fresh media was added to each well prior to starting the experiment. For each well, media was aspirated, cells were rinsed with 2 mL followed by 1 mL of water or 12.5–100 mM sorbitol, and the agarose pad was transferred onto the cells as described above. 10 minutes were intentionally left between wells, to maintain a consistent timing of approximately 1 hour between exposure to water/sorbitol and imaging. Cells were imaged for 8 min with 2 s between images using phase contrast. Conditions were tested in a different order for each trial, and file names were blinded prior to analysis. For each replicate, 5 cells from each condition were randomly selected from the initial field of view for analysis. Every time a vacuole pumped, the vacuole was measured at its largest point prior to the pump using the freehand selection and measure command in Fiji. Because every pumping event was measured, B ), the pumping rate was calculated by dividing the total number of pumps by the length of the movie. Data were analyzed and graphs were created using GraphPad Prism. Chemical inhibitors Chemical inhibitor experiments were performed under agarose at room temperature as described above, with the following modifications. When making 1.5% agarose pads, small molecule inhibitors and controls were incorporated for final concentrations of: 5 μM Latrunculin B ; 50 μM CK-666 ; 50 μM CK-689 ; or 0.1% DMSO. After media was aspirated from cells, 1 mL of water was used to rinse cells, and 1 mL of inhibitor or control solutions was added. Cells were imaged by phase contrast, beginning ~20 minutes after the addition of the agarose pad, and for 15 minutes with 2 seconds between frames. 20 minutes were left between wells to stagger the imaging times. Images of D. discoideum were taken at a rate of 250 ms/frame. Cells were imaged under 1.5% agarose pads with inhibitors as described above at 10 μg/ml). Experiments with Bafilomycin were performed in a similar way with the following exceptions: 100 nM Bafilomycin A1, 0.1% DMSO, or 0.1% water were used in the 1.5% agarose pads and to make the inhibitor or control solutions; agarose pads and solutions were diluted into 10% M7 media instead of water; and cells were seeded into 6-well glass-bottom plates. Actin staining of DMSO and Latrunculin-treated N. gruberi cells was performed live on the microscope using the OneStep fixing and staining protocol. 95 Briefly, ~2X10 4 cells were seeded into a 96-well glass bottom plate, and imaged using DIC. During imaging, cells were treated with 150 μl of 0.2% DMSO or 10 μM LatB. We verified that DMSO- and Latrunculin-treated cells continued to pump their contractile vacuoles. Then, 150 μl of solution was removed from the well and 150 μl of OneStep fixing and staining solution were added. Imaging continued, adding in fluorescence to detect actin polymer and DNA. Once the staining had plateaued, a Z-stack was taken to encompass the thickness of the cells. The images shown in Fig. S3A are maximum intensity projections. Microscopy The experiments shown in Fig. 1B, Fig. 2A, and Fig. S3A were performed using a Nikon eclipse Ti2, equipped with a Crest X-Light spinning disk, a Photometrics Prime 95B camera, a Lumencor Celesta light source for fluorescence, controlled through NIS-Elements AR software. Images in Fig. 1B and Fig. S3A were taken in DIC and Fluorescence, 477, and 405 ; emission wavelengths: 620, 535, and 460 ) with a Plan Apo λ 100x 1.45 NA oil objective or a Plan Apo λ 40x 0.95 NA air objective. Experiments shown in Fig. 2A were performed without the spinning disk, using a ph2 40x S Plan Fluor 0.6 NA objective. The images in Fig. 1C - ​ -D, D, Fig. 2B - ​ -D, D, Fig. 3B, Fig. 4B, and Fig. S1A were collected using a Nikon eclipse Ti2, equipped with a pco.panda sCMOS camera, external phase system, and controlled through NIS-Elements AR software. A Plan Apo λ 100x 1.45 NA oil objective was used for Fig. 1C and Fig. 4B, a Plan Fluor 40x 1.3 NA oil objective was used for Fig. 1D, Fig. S1A, and Fig. S1D, and a ph2 40x S Plan Fluor 0.6 NA air objective was used for Fig. 2B - ​ -D, D, Fig, 3B. Microscopy for Fig. 4C was completed using Nikon eclipse Ti2 equipped with a Ds-QI2 cMOS camera, external phase, and Plan Apo 40x 1.2 NA oil objective, controlled through NIS-Elements AR software. Experiments in Fig. 3D and Fig. S3C were completed using a Zeiss 980 laser scanning confocal with AiryScan2 equipped with a Plan Apo 63x 1.4 NA oil objective, and controlled by Zen Blue software. Line scans The line scans shown in Fig. 3D and Fig. S5B were generated by drawing a line through a contractile vacuole and using the plot profile tool in Fiji. The same line was used for multiple frames, to determine the intensity along the line over time. The data were exported into GraphPad Prism to plot final graphs. Fig. 3D used a line thickness of 5 pixels, those in Fig. S5B used a line thickness of 10 pixels. Quick-Freeze Deep-Etch Electron Microscopy Amoebae were scraped from bacteria-seeded agar plates and quick-frozen using the Heuser-designed slammer/cryopress device. 96, 97 The freezing, which occurs at liquid helium temperatures, is sufficiently rapid that water is immobilized in its vitreous state and does not associate to form distorting ice crystals. The frozen samples were stored at −196°C and transferred to an evacuated Balzers BAF 400 D Freeze Etching System, cooled with liquid N 2, for fracturing. Fracturing was followed by etching, during which the temperature is raised from −196°C to −100°C for two minutes, allowing a surface layer of frozen water to sublimate into the vacuum, and leaving behind cellular elements and macromolecules suspended in their physiological state. The temperature was then reduced, and a film of vaporized platinum was deposited onto the fractured surface from an angle of 25°. The sample is rapidly rotated during the deposition process and hence exposed to the Pt stream from all directions. A thin film of carbon was then deposited to hold the Pt grains in place. Pt does not condense on the surface as a uniform and amorphous coat. Instead it forms small crystals, 10–20 Å on the texture and composition of the surface. Hence the resultant replica is a high-resolution platinum cast which mimics the contours of the exposed sample. The replica was cleaned with chromosulfuric acid to remove biological material, generating a very thin film of Pt/C – the replica -- that was placed on a formvar-coated copper grid and viewed using the electron beam of a transmission electron microscope ), equipped with an AMT V601 digital camera. Biophysical modeling of contractile vacuole emptying The cytosolic pressure model assumes that all of the contents of the vacuole exit through a single pore in the membrane. The pore is assumed to have constant radius and thickness throughout time. The fluid in the vacuole is assumed to be an incompressible Newtonian fluid engaging in laminar flow through the pore. The flow through this pore is therefore determined by the Hagen–Poiseuille law for laminar flow through a cylinder: d V d t = γ Δ P. The pressure difference across the pore forces fluid through the pore. The small size of the pore gives a resistance to fluid flow, defined by γ. For a cylindrical pore, γ = A P 2 8 π η L P, where A P and L P are the area and length of the pore, respectively, and η is the viscosity of the medium. See the Text S2 for a full derivation for the equation shown in Fig. 4A. Importantly, this model assumes the membrane is impermeable to water at short timescales, such that water can only leave through the pore. Water cannot leave or enter through the membrane itself. We can make this approximation because the rate of fluid flow through the vacuole membrane is more than ten times slower than that of the fluid expulsion rate through the pore. Statistical analysis Experiments shown in Fig. 1, ​,2, 2, ​,3B 3B and ​ and3C 3C were each performed at least 5 times. All data were analyzed using Graphpad Prism, and plotted as SuperPlots 98 when possible. Because all comparisons included more than two conditions, statistical significance between experiment-level averages was determined using ordinary one-way ANOVAs with Tukey’s multiple comparisons tests to calculate p values. 0.05 was used as a cutoff for significance. Supplementary Material Supplement 1 Figure S1. Characterizing Naegleria contractile vacuoles and their mechanisms. A representative N. gruberi amoeba under agarose illustrates the definition of the orientation angle, θ, between the centroid velocity and the contractile vacuole. A windrose plot shows the orientation of the contractile vacuole at the time of pumping relative to the velocity of the cell’s centroid at that moment. The histogram depicts 80 pumping events from 15 cells across 5 biological replicates. Open colored circles show the average orientation from populations of cells measured on 5 separate days ; the gray square shows the average of these 5 biological replicates. Alignments produced by T-COFFEE of the hits for V 1 subunit G, show the sequence similarity of these genes. Residues are colored to indicate amino acids with similar properties, with darker shading indicating greater conservation. Alignments of V 0 subunits c and a. Key residues are highlighted, including those that form the Bafilomycin A binding site or are functionally disrupted by Bafilomycin A binding. Residues are based on cryo-EM structures of the B. taurus v-ATPase. 99 Cells were incubated with or without the vacuolar-type H+ ATPase inhibitor Bafilomycin A1 or DMSO. Each contractile vacuole bladder was measured at its maximum size, and the cumulative contractile vacuole area was calculated over 8 min. Left panels show the cumulative area pumped out of the cell for 25 cells: 5 cells each from 5 experiments. The right panel shows the area pumped per minute, with each small gray symbol representing a single cell, and larger symbols representing experiment-level averages for 5 replicates, with symbols coordinated by experiment. Figure S2. Naegleria and Dictyostelium contractile vacuole bladders are larger under more hypo-osmotic stress. Violin plots show the maximum contractile vacuole area for each pumping event in N. gruberi or D. discoideum for each of five experimental replicates, which were pooled in Fig. 2C - ​ -D. D. White lines indicate the median and quartiles. Figure S3. Naegleria and Dictyostelium contractile vacuole emptying can occur in the absence of cytoskeletal polymers. N. gruberi cells were treated with DMSO or Latrunculin B, then fixed and stained for actin polymer and DNA. Maximum intensity projections of representative cells are shown, adjusted to the same brightness and contrast settings. The same DMSO and Latrunculin data shown in Fig. 3C is shown within the context of a wider drug panel. Graphs show the area pumped per minute by Dictyostelium contractile vacuoles, the number of pumps per minute, and the maximum contractile vacuole area per cell. A D. discoideum cell expressing a fluorescently-labeled actin-binding protein is shown through a pumping cycle. Line scans bisecting a contractile vacuole show no enrichment of actin around the pumping bladder. Figure S4. Estimating contractile vacuole pore size. Model parameters for the cytoplasmic pressure model that allow the contractile vacuole to dispense its entire volume in 1 s. The required pore diameter is plotted as a function of the choice of pore width, given a cytoplasmic pressure of 10 Pa, 100 Pa, or 1000 Pa. Any reasonable choice of cytoplasmic pressure in between 10 and 1000 Pa allows for a wide range of possible pore diameters and pore depths. A table shows the allowable parameters 66 representing the results shown in. Text S1. Modeling contractile vacuole filling Text S2. Modeling contractile vacuole emptying Click here to view. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Dr. Ursula Goodenough for providing Quick-Freeze Deep-Etch Electron Microscopy images of Naegleria cells, Dr. Chandler Fulton for providing NEG cells for Quick-Freeze Deep-Etch Electron Microscopy and the NEG-M cell line. We thank Dr. Nicholas Martin and Manuela Richter for important discussions and experiments during the Physiology Course at the Marine Biological Laboratory. We also thank Erik Kalinka for translating key sections of the reference into English, and Dr. Sam Lord, Dr. Ken Campellone, Dr. Madelaine Bartlett, and Dr. Meg Titus for providing feedback on this work. This work was supported by: the National Institute Of Allergy And Infectious Diseases of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number F32AI150057 to K.B.V.; the National Institute of General Medical Science of the National Institutes of Health under award number K99GM147656 to K.B.V., award number F32GM148023 to A.S.K., award number R35GM143039 to L.K.F.-L., and award number 1R15GM143733–01 to M.E.; a Smith Family Foundation Award for Excellence in Biomedical Science to L.K.F.-L.; and The Pew Charitable Trusts. R.M.G and C.L. were supported by The National Science Foundation Simons Center for Mathematical and Statistical Analysis of Biology at Harvard. L.K.F.-L. Is a fellow of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research Fungal Kingdom Program. Footnotes SUPPLEMENTAL ITEMS Video S1. Contractile vacuole networks in Naegleria comprise small vacuoles and large bladders, with multiple generations co-existing. An N. gruberi cell stained with the membrane dye FM4–64 cell shows a contractile vacuole pumping cycle. Frames from this movie were selected for Fig. 1B. A representative cell shows multiple contractile vacuole pumping cycles, with full bladders pseudocolored through their expulsion. Note the surrounding network of uncolored vacuoles grows as each pseudocolored bladder pumps. This movie was also used in Fig. 1C. Video S2. Naegleria contractile vacuole networks are dynamic. A representative contractile vacuole fusion event is shown, with initial contractile vacuoles fusing to form a single bladder at 3 min 34 s. The two networks that merge are indicated with pink asterisks, displayed for 2 frames prior to the start of the pump. The single merged bladder is indicated with a magenta asterisk. A representative fission event is shown, where a single bladder becomes smaller contractile vacuoles. A cell with multiple large and small contractile vacuole networks is shown. The two largest systems are indicated with yellow and cyan asterisks. Cells in A and B were untreated control cells from the experiments shown in Fig. S1D. Cells in C are from a control experiment shown in Fig. 3B. Video S3. Latrunculin does not prevent contractile vacuole pumping events in Naegleria. A representative video of LatB-treated N. gruberi cells shows that contractile vacuole expulsion events are still common. Video S4. Actin does not localize to Dictyostelium contractile vacuoles. A representative video of an RFP-LimE-expressing D. discoideum cell shows no enrichment of actin at contractile vacuoles. Article information Version 1. bioRxiv. Preprint. 2023 Mar 2. doi: 10.1101/2023.03.01.529730 PMCID: PMC10002747 PMID: 36909496 This is a preprint. It has not yet been peer reviewed by a journal. The National Library of Medicine is running a pilot to include preprints that result from research funded by NIH in PMC and PubMed. Katrina B. Velle, 1 Rikki M. Garner, 2 Tatihana K. Beckford, 1 Makaela Weeda, 3 Chunzi Liu, 4 Andrew S. Kennard, 1 Marc Edwards, 3 and Lillian K. Fritz-Laylin 1, # Katrina B. Velle 1 Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA Find articles by Katrina B. Velle Rikki M. Garner 2 Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA Find articles by Rikki M. Garner Tatihana K. Beckford 1 Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA Find articles by Tatihana K. Beckford Makaela Weeda 3 Department of Biology, Amherst College, Amherst, MA Find articles by Makaela Weeda Chunzi Liu 4 Department of Applied Mathematics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA Find articles by Chunzi Liu Andrew S. Kennard 1 Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA Find articles by Andrew S. Kennard Marc Edwards 3 Department of Biology, Amherst College, Amherst, MA Find articles by Marc Edwards Lillian K. Fritz-Laylin 1 Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA Find articles by Lillian K. Fritz-Laylin 1 Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA 2 Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 3 Department of Biology, Amherst College, Amherst, MA 4 Department of Applied Mathematics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA # Corresponding author: ude.ssamu@nilyalztirfl PMC Copyright notice This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, which allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format for noncommercial purposes only, and only so long as attribution is given to the creator. Updated version available: A peer-reviewed version of this article, " A conserved pressure-driven mechanism for regulating cytosolic osmolarity ", has been published in Curr Biol. The complete version history of this preprint is available at bioRxiv. Articles from bioRxiv are provided here courtesy of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Preprints 