 Macroendocytosis comprising phagocytosis and macropinocytosis is an actin-driven process regulated by small GTPases that depend on the dynamic reorganization of the membrane that protrudes and internalizes extracellular material by cup-shaped structures. To effectively capture, enwrap, and internalize their targets, these cups are arranged into a peripheral ring or ruffle of protruding actin sheets emerging from an actin-rich, nonprotrusive zone at its base. Despite extensive knowledge of the mechanism driving actin assembly of the branched network at the protrusive cup edge, which is initiated by the actin-related protein 2/3 complex downstream of Rac signaling, our understanding of actin assembly in the base is still incomplete. In the Dictyostelium model system, the Ras-regulated formin ForG was previously shown to specifically contribute to actin assembly at the cup base. Loss of ForG is associated with a strongly impaired macroendocytosis and a 50% reduction in F-actin content at the base of phagocytic cups, in turn indicating the presence of additional factors that specifically contribute to actin formation at the base. Here, we show that ForG synergizes with the Rac-regulated formin ForB to form the bulk of linear filaments at the cup base. Consistently, combined loss of both formins virtually abolishes cup formation and leads to severe defects of macroendocytosis, emphasizing the relevance of converging Ras- and Rac-regulated formin pathways in assembly of linear filaments in the cup base, which apparently provide mechanical support to the entire structure. Remarkably, we finally show that active ForB, unlike ForG, additionally drives phagosome rocketing to aid particle internalization. Macroendocytosis comprises phagocytosis and the closely related macropinocytosis, in which larger particles and bulk fluid are taken up from the extracellular space by actin-rich, cup-shaped cell protrusions, respectively. In higher eukaryotes, phagocytosis by the so-called professional phagocytes of the innate immune system is crucial for immune surveillance and tissue homeostasis by clearance of pathogens, apoptotic cells, or debris, whereas in lower eukaryotes such as the soil-dwelling amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, phagocytosis is primarily used for nutrient acquisition. Therefore, it has been widely assumed that the evolutionary origin of phagocytosis is the uptake of nutrients by simple unicellular eukaryotes. Moreover, phagocytosis has been in the focus of lively discussions of eukaryogenesis for many years, where it has been argued that it is either a requirement for or a consequence of the acquisition of the ancestral mitochondrion. Despite serving different purposes in higher and lower eukaryotes, the regulation and the core mechanisms of phagocytosis and macropinocytosis driven by actin polymerization are highly conserved across species. Given its repertoire of actin-binding proteins and regulators of the actin cytoskeleton that is comparable to that of mammalian cells as well as its ease of manipulation and availability of laboratory strains with highly up-regulated rates of macropinocytosis, Dictyostelium has proven an excellent system for the study of macroendocytosis serving as a model for immune cells. Although macropinocytosis and phagocytosis are mechanistically similar processes that share many components with the machinery driving protrusion of lamellipodia or pseudopodia in motile cells, there are nevertheless important differences between the two internalization pathways. Phagosomes are typically sculpted by a receptor-guided, zipper-like advance of the membrane and the cytoskeleton over the particle they ingest, whereas the structurally related macropinosomes can form autonomously in the absence of any external guidance cues. Macropinocytic cups appear to be organized around a signaling patch of the phosphoinositide PIP 3, active Ras, and active Rac that guides actin polymerization to its periphery, whereas phagocytic cups are initiated primarily by receptor activation and localized signaling due to contact with the prey. While in both cases active Rac is important for regulating actin protrusions, active Ras is restricted to the cytosolic site of the interior of the cup. The first important step of phagocytosis entails particle recognition and binding through a diverse set of receptors to initiate phagocytosis. The most extensively studied phagocytic receptors of mammalian cells include the Fcγ- and the integrin-type CR3 receptors that interact with antibody- and complement-opsonized particles, respectively. D. discoideum cells use the integrin-like receptors SibA and SibC for adhesion and phagocytosis, whereas the G protein-coupled receptor fAR1 is used for both chemotaxis and phagocytosis. Receptor binding elicits local actin assembly to initiate formation of a phagocytic cup, followed by extension of pseudopods wrapping around the particle, and finally terminates by the closure of the cup through fusion of converging protrusions followed by disassembly of the F-actin coat after particle internalization. Comparable to pseudopods and lamellipodia of motile cells, actin assembly at the tips of macroendocytic cups is initiated by the actin-related protein 2/3 complex downstream of the SCAR /WAVE complex activation and Rho family GTPase signaling. Consistently, inactivation of SCAR in Dictyostelium, which accumulates in a ring-like fashion along the cup edge, diminishes F-actin at the protrusive cup rim and is accompanied with significantly reduced rates of macropinocytosis and phagocytosis. The barbed ends of newly formed filament branches are eventually capped by heterodimeric capping protein. However, actin filament elongation factors such as Ena/VASP and formin family proteins protect filament ends from capping and also markedly accelerate filament elongation rates. Consistently, elimination of the single Ena/VASP member in Dictyostelium cells VASP, which also accumulates as a ring at the protrusive cup rim, results in markedly reduced rates in macroendocytosis. Formins are dimeric multidomain proteins that nucleate and elongate linear actin filaments such as those found in filopodial bundles, the cleavage furrow, or the cell cortex. The proline-rich formin homology domain 1 recruits profilin –actin complexes to enhance filament elongation by the adjacent FH2 domain. Members of the subfamily of Diaphanous -related formins are tightly regulated. By virtue of regulatory sequences located in the N- and C-terminal regions, these proteins are intrinsically autoinhibited, preventing subcellular localization. Typically, the binding of Rho subfamily GTPases to the N-terminal GTPase-binding domain releases autoinhibition mediated by interaction of the C-terminal diaphanous autoinhibitory domain with the GBD, thus rendering the protein active and allowing it to interact with downstream effectors. Like all Ras family members, Rho subfamily GTPases cycle between an active GTP-bound state and an inactive GDP-bound state to regulate various aspects of intracellular actin dynamics including macroendocytosis. In contrast to the Arp2/3 complex activator SCAR/WAVE, which was previously found to localize exclusively at the rim of macropinocytic cups, F-actin is highly enriched in the entire structure beneath the plasma membrane. Of note, in D. discoideum, the Ras-regulated formin ForG was shown to specifically contribute to actin assembly at the nonprotrusive base of macroendocytic cups. Loss of ForG is accompanied by a 50% reduction of F-actin content in the base of phagocytic cups and is associated with strongly impaired macroendocytosis, which additionally suggests the presence of other factors that specifically contribute to actin assembly in the cup base. Here, we identify the Rac-regulated DRF ForB as an additional actin assembly factor prominently localizing to endocytic cups in its active form. Consistent with its rather weak actin assembly activity in vitro, loss of ForB alone does not noticeably interfere with macroendocytosis. However, the combined elimination of ForB and ForG virtually abolishes phagosome formation and leads to severe defects in macroendocytosis, illustrating the relevance of converging Ras- and Rac-regulated formin pathways in assembly of the cup base, which apparently serves as a mechanical support of the entire structure. Results ForB Localizes to Macropinosomes and Phagosomes. Given that the actin signal at the base of cups in forG − mutants is only diminished by about 50% and the cells still capable to internalize particles, although with a reduced rate, we reasoned that an as yet uncharacterized formin could synergize with ForG in cup formation. The D. discoideum genome encodes ten formins from which five are predominantly expressed during the growth phase where macroendocytosis occurs. Four of them have already been attributed specific cellular functions: ForG acts in macroendocytosis, whereas ForA, ForE, and ForH operate in regulation of actin cell cortex mechanics, thus leaving ForB as the only remaining candidate. Although a previous study found no detectable null-mutant phenotype, more recent evidence suggests ForB to be involved in the propagation of actin waves, which resemble frustrated phagocytic cups, pointing toward a potential role of ForB in macroendocytosis. Formin B is a DRF with the characteristic domain architecture GBD/FH3-FH1-FH2-DAD. As expected, due to autoinhibition, ectopically expressed full-length ForB N-terminally tagged with GFP localized uniformly in the cytoplasm of Ax2 wild-type cells and ForB-deficient cells. Thus, we monitored localization of constitutive active variants either missing the C-terminal DAD or harboring three amino acid substitutions in the C-terminal DAD which abrogates autoinhibition. Additionally, we evaluated localization of the N-terminal region encompassing the GBD/FH3 domain alone fused to YFP. All three constructs localized prominently to macropinosomes, although the N-terminal construct exhibited a higher nonspecific background. Thus, if not stated otherwise, in all subsequent localization studies, constitutively active YFP-ForBΔDAD construct was used. Coexpression of YFP-ForBΔDAD with the F-actin marker Lifeact fused to mRFP in growth phase cells revealed ForB to colocalize with filamentous actin in ruffles and macropinosomes. Confocal time-lapse imaging of YFP-ForBΔDAD or YFP-ForB FL-3A in the presence of tetramethylrhodamine -labeled yeast particles further revealed that ForB is also enriched along the entire actin-rich base of phagocytic cups throughout particle engulfment but vanishes rapidly after cup closure. Combined, these results corroborate further evidence for a functional role of ForB in macroendocytosis. Fig. 1. Active ForB accumulates in endocytic cups. Representative confocal images of autoinhibited ForB FL fused to GFP show uniform cytosolic localization. Constitutively active ForB FL-3A fused to YFP exhibits clear accumulation at macropinocytic cups.... Combined Loss of ForB and ForG Severely Impairs Phagocytosis. Next, we sought to validate expression of ForB during the early stage of development by immunoblotting since previous studies analyzed expression exclusively on RNA level. A developmental time course confirmed ForB to be expressed at similar levels in growth-phase cells and during the first 9 h of development as assessed by the appearance of the early developmental marker contact site A. To assess the function of ForB in macroendocytosis, we eliminated ForB in Ax2 WT cells by homologous recombination. To allow examination of a potential synergy of ForB with ForG in large-scale endocytosis, we used the forG − single mutant and additionally disrupted the forB gene to obtain a forB − / forG − double mutant devoid of both formins. Loss of ForB in single and double mutants was confirmed by immunoblotting. During isolation of the mutants, we noticed that the double mutant formed much smaller colonies on bacterial lawns as compared to control. Thus, we measured the size of plaques formed by WT and mutant cells when grown on a dense lawn of Klebsiella aerogenes as the only nutrient source. Impaired growth on bacterial lawns as seen with the double mutant can occur due to the poor uptake of bacteria, but it can also result from defects in cell division or migration. However, the double mutant exhibited no noticeably defects in cytokinesis of cells cultivated in contact with the substrate and random migration rate as compared to WT and the single knockout mutants, suggesting a specific defect in particle uptake. Of note, the forB − single mutant formed plaques that were only slightly smaller as compared to the area of plaques produced by WT and forG − mutant cells. Remarkably, the combined elimination of both formins resulted in plaques that were more than 94% smaller in area than those formed by WT cells, strongly suggesting a synergistic role of ForB and ForG in phagocytosis. Reconstitution of double-mutant cells with either YFP-ForG FL or YFP-ForB FL partially or fully rescued the plaque area, respectively. We then examined the growth of WT and mutant cells in liquid medium in shaken suspension as a proxy for macropinocytosis. Unexpectedly, the growth curves of forB − cells and WT cells were highly similar, with calculated mean generations times of 11.0 ± 0.7 h and 11.1 ± 1.0 h, respectively. The forG − cells grew slightly slower compared to the WT and had a mean generation time of 11.7 ± 0.7 h, whereas the forB − / forG − double mutant had 12.8 ± 0.5 h, the slowest generation time. This further reduction in growth of the double mutant is presumably due to its defect in cytokinesis at the high shear forces in shaken suspension rather than an increased defect in macropinocytosis. This was corroborated by directly measuring the uptake of the fluid-phase marker TRITC-Dextran, which showed that the forB − / forG − double mutant exhibited only a slightly lower uptake rate compared with forG cells, whereas the relative uptake rate in forB − cells dropped by only 13% compared to the WT control. Fig. 2. Combined loss of ForB and ForG dramatically impairs phagocytosis. Expression profile of ForB during early development of D. discoideum WT cells. Time of starvation is indicated in hours. Contact site A served as an early aggregation marker,... Next, we quantified clearance of bacteria from shaken suspension by phagocytosis. Consistent with the formation of smaller plaques on bacterial lawns, we observed a markedly diminished clearance rate of bacteria only upon combined loss of ForB and ForG, whereas the single knockout mutants displayed slightly lower, although not statistically significant, rates of about 90% as compared to the WT. Notably, the defect in phagocytosis was even more pronounced during the uptake of the much larger yeast particles, with the forB − / forG − mutant having an uptake rate of only 26.5 ± 8.3% compared to the WT. Consistently, once again, elimination of ForB alone did not lead to a defect in uptake, whereas loss of ForG reduced the uptake rate to 62.9 ± 16.0% compared to the WT, which is in excellent agreement with previous work. Consistently, upon reconstitution of the double mutant with YFP-ForB FL, the phagocytic defect was reverted to that of the forG − cells, showing that this effect is specific to additional loss of ForB. Taken together, these data clearly show that ForB contributes primarily to phagocytosis, although the consequences of its loss become evident only in the combined absence with ForG. ForB Is a Weaker Actin Assembly Factor Compared to ForG. Thus, to better understand the different contributions of these formins to macroendocytosis, we compared the biochemical activities of ForB and ForG in vitro. Since expression of a C-terminal ForB fragment harboring the complete FH1 domain with its four highly repetitive polyproline stretches was not possible in Escherichia coli, we purified a ForB fragment with two polyproline stretches preceding the FH2 domain and DAD for biochemical analysis. Bulk polymerization assays with pyrene actin and increasing amounts of ForB-2P in the higher nanomolar range revealed that ForB stimulated spontaneous actin assembly in a concentration-dependent manner, although with substantially lower activity compared to a corresponding C-terminal ForG fragment, which has been characterized previously and was used as a reference. Subsequently, both formin fragments were analyzed for nucleation activity by total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy at the single-filament level. A relatively high concentration of 250 nM ForB-2P had to be used to obtain a visible and quantifiable increase in nucleation, and once again, it was almost three times less effective compared to ForG-3P. Quantification of filament elongation in the presence of Dictyostelium profilin I revealed that ForB-2P with 16.9 ± 2.2 subunits/s only slightly exceeded the growth of control actin filaments with 12.8 ± 2.1 subunits/s, while ForG-3P reached elongation rates of 51.7 ± 3.2 subunits/s. These data not only show that, at least in vitro, ForB is a relatively weak actin assembly factor compared to ForG but may also explain the lack of a detectable phenotype in the single knockout mutants by the presence of the more powerful formin ForG. ForB Interacts with Active RacB. ForB encompasses a canonical GTPase-binding domain characteristic for DRFs. We therefore explored which GTPase could be responsible for activation of ForB by yeast two-hybrid analyses using an N-terminal ForB fragment harboring the GBD and the FH3 region as bait. Dictyostelium cells lack genuine Rho and Cdc42 homologs but express 20 Rac subfamily GTPases. Thus, we systematically screened ForB-N with all these Rac GTPases in their constitutively activated forms derived by amino acid substitutions corresponding either to position 12 within the P-loop or to position 61 within switch II of human Rac1. Given that ForG was previously found to interact with the Ras family proteins RasB, RasG, and RasD, we additionally tested active variants of all 13 Ras family GTPases as prey in the Y2H screen. ForB did not interact with any of these Ras GTPases, except with RasB Q61L, which, however, proved to be nonspecific as growth of yeast cells on selective media was even observed in the absence of the bait. In contrast, ForB interacted with several active members of the Rac family under less stringent selection including Rac1a-c, RacB, RacF1, RacH, and RacM, although interactions with RacH and RacM also turned out to be false positive. Notably, upon selection at the highest stringency, ForB interacted only with the active RacB variants G12V and Q61L but not with the dominant-negative form T17N, thus rendering this GTPase the most likely activator of ForB. To validate the ForB–RacB interaction in an independent assay, we employed bimolecular fluorescence complementation that enables direct visualization of protein–protein interactions in living cells. To this end, ForBΔDAD was fused to the C-terminal fragment of mVenus, and interactions were tested in combination with dominant-negative RacB T17N, RacB WT, or the constitutively active variant RacB Q61L fused to the N-terminal fragment of mVenus. Of note, fluorescence complementation was only seen with WT and constitutively active RacB but not with dominant-negative RacB that served as a negative control. Moreover, the fluorescence signal formed with RacB WT was distributed along the entire periphery of the cell, whereas localization with the RacB Q61L variant was more confined to phagosomes, macropinosomes, ruffles, and protrusions. The excellent fluorescence and localization with the constitutively active RacB variant allowed us to perform confocal time-lapse imaging showing that the ForB–RacB complex is specifically restricted to phagosomes and macropinosomes. Combined, these data demonstrate that active RacB also specifically interacts with ForB in vivo. Fig. 3. ForB interacts with active RacB. Y2H screen of ForB-N with all 20 Rac GTPases of D. discoideum showed the strongest interaction with constitutively active RacB. The presence of bait and prey plasmids was scored by growth on double-dropout media... To explore whether loss of RacB would mimic the defects of forB − in macroendocytosis, we generated a racB − mutant by homologous recombination and assayed the mutant for a number of parameters in large-scale endocytosis. In comparison to the WT, the racB − mutant grew considerably slower in shaken suspension containing growth medium and exhibited markedly diminished macropinocytosis rates. The uptake of bacteria and large yeast particles was reduced by 30% and 8%, respectively. Thus, although inactivation of the main regulator RacB partially phenocopies the defect of the forB − cells, it has a stronger effect on large-scale endocytosis. This notwithstanding, RacB is expected to regulate and activate additional downstream targets such as the WRC and Arp2/3 complex, which also drive macroendocytosis. ForB − /forG − Mutants Exhibit a Dramatically Reduced F-Actin Content in the Phagosome Base. To assess potential defects in actin assembly during large-scale endocytosis, we then monitored and compared the F-actin distribution in semiclosed phagosomes of WT and mutant cells engulfing fluorescent yeast particles after phalloidin staining. Line scan measurements recorded at identical settings revealed that F-actin in WT cells was more or less evenly distributed around the entire phagocytic cup engulfing the yeast particles, whereas F-actin levels at the cup base of forB − cells were moderately reduced by about 18%. Consistent with previous findings, forG − cells exhibited a strong reduction in F-actin contents at the base of the cup of approximately 54%. Of note, the F-actin content in the base of cups in forB − / forG − cells was dramatically reduced by almost 70% on average, with many phagosomes completely lacking F-actin at the base. Moreover, we noticed that capturing of appropriate images for quantification of F-actin distribution in the double mutant proved exceptionally difficult because these cells hardly formed any cups. Thus, we incubated WT and mutant cells at identical cell densities with the same amount of yeast particles in droplets on glass coverslips for 40 min prior to fixation and then determined the fraction of cells containing yeast particles. WT, forG −, and forB − cells internalized yeast particles at a similar rate, with about 50% of cells containing yeast particles. ForB − / forG − cells, on the other hand, internalized yeast particles at a drastically reduced rate, with more than 77% of the double-mutant cells failing to internalize any yeast particle. From these images, we also determined the fraction of cells forming phagosomes. Approximately 12 to 15% of the WT cells and both single mutants had formed phagosomes at various stages of particle engulfment, whereas this value was drastically reduced to 2.4% in the forB − / forG − double mutant. This was confirmed by confocal imaging and 3D reconstructions of phalloidin-stained WT and mutant cells fixed in solution, showing a severely perturbed cup formation in the double mutant. Consistently, expression of YFP-tagged ForG FL, ForB FL, or ForB FL-3A in forB − / forG − mutants largely rescued F-actin content and cup morphology in reconstituted cell lines. In agreement with the specific contribution of respective formins, the quantifications revealed a gradual rescue of the F-actin content in the base of the cups, with ForG FL having the stronger effect. Taken together, these data strongly suggest that formin-generated actin filaments formed by ForB and ForG, and accumulating at the cup base, are decisive for the formation and integrity of phagocytic cups to allow for efficient engulfment of extracellular particles. Fig. 4. Combined loss of ForB and ForG severely perturbs phagosome formation Representative phagosomes of fixed WT and mutant cells during the uptake of TRITC-labeled yeast particles. F-actin was stained with Atto 488-phalloidin., thus strongly resembling the actin-driven rocketing of intracellular bacterial pathogens such as Listeria or propelling beads in reconstituted motility assays. Coexpression of Lifeact-mRFP and YFP-ForB-N in WT cells confirmed colocalization of ForB in these actin comet tails and additionally excluded the possibility that localization was caused by excessive formin-driven actin assembly. Conversely, overexpression of active ForBΔDAD in WT cells led to a substantial increase in traveled distance and maximal speed of rocketing endosomes, whereas overexpression of active ForG did not cause similar effects. Finally, we analyzed rocketing parameters in the forB − / forG − double mutant. The combined loss of both formins led to a decrease in distance and maximal speed, but notably, the decrease in distance could be fully rescued by reexpression of active ForB but interestingly not by expression of active ForG. Reexpression of active ForB also increased maximal speed by more than 30% from 0.19 ± 0.09 µm/s in the double KO to 0.25 ± 0.11 µm/s in reconstituted cells, although statistically insignificant. Taken together, these data show that in spite of the overlapping functions of ForG and ForB in macroendocytosis, only ForB contributes to and promotes the rocketing of internalized phagosomes. Fig. 5. ForB promotes the rocketing of internalized phagosomes. Still images from a confocal time-lapse movie of a WT cell expressing YFP-ForBΔDAD during and after internalization of a TRITC-labeled yeast particle. Constitutively... Discussion In the present study, we assessed the specific contribution of ForB to macroendocytosis in D. discoideum cells. Despite the clear localization of active ForB in macroendocytic cups and a moderately reduced F-actin content in the cup base upon its loss, unexpectedly, ForB-deficient single-mutant cells were not noticeably impaired in either particle nor fluid uptake. However, this is consistent with its rather weak in vitro actin assembly activity and is moreover apparently due to the presence of the more potent formin ForG, which has been previously shown to be required for efficient macroendocytosis in D. discoideum cells. Thus, in accordance with their overlapping functions, both formins have to be eliminated simultaneously to almost completely suppress phagocytosis. Functional redundancy is a characteristic feature of many biological systems and is instrumental in safeguarding fundamental cellular processes. In line with this notion, functional networks allowing mutual complementation of certain actin-binding proteins have already been observed for the actin cross-linking proteins α-actinin and filamin and cortexillin I and II and for cortical formins ForA, ForE, and ForH in Dictyostelium or mDia1 and mDia3 in B16-F1 mouse melanoma cells. Although ForB and ForG act synergistically in actin filament assembly in macroendocytic cups, it is likely that they also exhibit specific roles. Notably, the actin system of macrophages and Dictyostelium cells has the capacity to self-organize into waves that propagate on the planar, substrate-attached membrane of a cell. In a recent analysis of these actin waves, which resemble 2D projections of frustrated phagocytic cups, active ForB showed a prominent localization to the transition area of the actin wave that is assumed to correspond to the tip of phagocytic cups, while it is only weakly associated with the inner territory, which corresponds to the base of phagocytic cups and where active ForG was found. Thus, in accordance with the proposed homology between waves and phagocytic cups, ForB would have been expected to be localized more at the protrusive edge of phagocytic cups rather than the base. Interestingly, observed fluctuations of active ForB in the wave were not noticeably matched by an actin response, which is consistent with the weak actin assembly function for ForB found in this study. Instead these fluctuations appeared to be more related to deciding whether the wave should continue to propagate. This could also apply to phagocytic cup formation and is supported by the finding that cells lacking ForB and ForG not only exhibit aberrant cup morphology but also appear to be impaired in the initiation of cup formation. DRFs necessitate interaction with the active forms of small Rho family GTPases with their GBD to release autoinhibition and mediate activation and subcellular targeting. While ForG is regulated by active Ras, ForB, as shown here, is regulated by Rac. Our Y2H analysis revealed that at intermediate stringency, the ForB-GBD can interact with the active variants of the five Rac GTPases Rac1a-c, RacB, and RacF1, all belonging to the subset of the classical Rac proteins exhibiting the highest degree of sequence conservation with human Rac1. Notably, Rac1a-c were all shown to regulate macroendocytosis. RacF1 was also shown to associate with sites of macroendocytosis, although its individual loss did not impair uptake. Interestingly, the GBD of ForB exhibited the strongest interaction with active RacB which has been previously identified a regulator of various cytoskeletal functions including macroendocytosis, chemotaxis, and morphogenesis. Active RacB was additionally found to interact with the IQGAP-related protein GAPA and p21-activated kinase family members. A fluorescent reporter for active Rac based on the CRIB domain of PakB was also found to faithfully accumulate in macroendocytic cups including the tip, suggesting that besides activating ForB in the nonprotrusive cup base, RacB may also contribute to actin assembly driven by the Arp2/3 complex downstream of SCAR/WAVE regulatory complex activation at the protrusive front of the cups. Thus, RacB is likely to be simultaneously involved in the activation of different downstream actin assembly factors in these intertwined signaling cascades, which would also explain why loss of RacB does not fully phenocopy the loss of ForB. On the other hand, it is meaningful to converge Ras- and Rac-regulated pathways controlling ForG and ForB to optimally coordinate actin assembly at the nonprotrusive base of the cup. This raises the interesting question of how this coordination could be spatially achieved. Recently, the multidomain protein RGBARG, containing lipid-binding, RhoGEF, and RasGAP domains, was shown to be critical for the internalization of geometrically distinct bacteria. RGBARG localizes prominently to the tips of macropinocytic and phagocytic cups and was proposed to restrict Ras activity mainly to the base of the cup and amplify Rac activity at the tip. Yet, another RasGAP referred to as IqgC accumulates in the entire cup and was shown to suppress Ras signaling during macroendocytosis, adding an additional layer of complexity. Nevertheless, active Ras and Rac are both found in the base of the cups as evidenced by localization of respective probes. One potential candidate specifically activating RacB in the base is RacGEF1 not only because it has been shown to reside in the cell cortex and activate RacB but also due to the fact that loss of either protein is accompanied with a similar defect in development. Yet, the question arises as to why the cells specifically utilize formins for the generation of the nonprotrusive cup base while they use the Arp2/3 complex to nucleate the dendritic filament network of the protrusive tip. Interesting clues have emerged from the analysis of the actin-rich cell cortex which constitutes a thin viscoelastic sheet of bundled or cross-linked actin filaments, nonmuscle myosin II, and associated proteins beneath the plasma membrane. Even though both Arp2/3 complex and the formin mDia1 were shown to generate the bulk of cortical actin filaments in HeLa cells, atomic force microscopy measurements revealed that the short and more dynamic Arp2/3-nucleated filaments do not play an important role in cortical mechanics despite their much higher abundance. In contrast, the considerably longer, formin-nucleated filaments are effective in distributing mechanical stress over several micrometers, thus ensuring integrity to the cell cortex. Based on these findings, we hypothesize that the formin-generated cup base is critical in providing the mechanical support of the cup structure to balance protrusive forces at the tip and enable efficient pseudopod extension. Thus, due to the absence of these long filaments, the forB − / forG − double mutant is apparently unable to generate the required mechanic support of the structure and therefore mostly fails to form cups. This seems to be of particular importance for the internalization of large particles, as confirmed here by the massively impaired uptake of yeast cells in the double mutant. As yet, phagosome rocketing in Dictyostelium cells and macrophages was thought to be driven by asymmetric assembly of a branched filament network initiated by the Arp2/3 complex as evidenced by its specific accumulation at the comet tail. Efficient elongation of the filaments was further found to require the actin polymerase VASP and profilin. Our live cell imaging and analysis of mutants internalizing yeast particles extend this repertoire of actin assembly factors with a formin promoting the nucleation and elongation of linear filaments as demonstrated by the condensation of active ForB at the distal side of the phagosome. Comparable to VASP, ForB is not essential for rocketing but affects traveled distance and speed of propelling phagosomes. Intriguingly, even though ForB and ForG synergize in the formation of phagocytic cups and phagocytosis, it was surprising to find that the function in rocketing is conferred only by ForB. The molecular cause is currently unclear, but a domain-swapping approach combined with quantitative analyses of phagosome rocketing in reconstituted forB − / forG − double-mutant cells expressing formin chimeras might prove helpful in identifying the relevant region in ForB in future work. Materials and Methods Constructs. The constructs were pDM334-GFP-ForB-FL, pDM304-YFP-ForB-FL, pDM304-YFP-ForB-FL-3A, pDM304-YFP-ForBΔDAD, pDM304-YFP-ForB-N, pDM304-YFP-ForG-FL, pDM304-YFP-ForGΔDAD, pDM304-VC-ForBΔDAD, pDM344-VN-RacB WT, pDM344-VN-RacB Q61L, pDM344-VN-RacB N17T, pDM344-mRFP-Lifeact, pLPBLP-ForB-KO, pLPBLP-RacB-KO, pGEX-6P-1 ForB 2P, pGEX-6P-1 ForG 3P, and pET-15b-PFNI. Detailed information is described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods. Cell Culture, Transfection, and Gene Disruption. Cell culture, transfection, and gene disruption were performed as previously described. Detailed information is described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods. Protein Purification. GST fusion proteins were expressed in E. coli strain Rossetta 2 and purified by affinity chromatography according to the instructions of the manufacturers. The tag was cleaved off by PreScission protease, and the proteins were further purified by size-exclusion chromatography using an Äkta purifier system. The purification of actin and PFNI has been described. Detailed information is described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods. Pyrene Actin Polymerization Assays. Pyrene actin polymerization assays were performed as previously described. Data were acquired with a Synergy 4 microplate reader. Detailed information is described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods. TIRF Microscopy. TIRF assays were performed as previously described. Images were acquired with a Nikon Eclipse TI-E inverted microscope equipped with a TIRF Apo 60× objective. Detailed information is described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods. Immunoblotting. Immunoblotting was performed according to the standard protocol using undiluted hybridoma supernatants of contact site A-specific mAb 33-294-17, porin-specific mAb 70-100-1, or polyclonal ForB or ForG antibodies. Quantification of Macroendocytosis. Quantitative assessment of macropinocytosis and phagocytosis and preparation of fluorescently labeled yeast particles were performed as recently described. The clearance of bacteria from shaken suspension by Dictyostelium cells was quantified as described. Fluorescence Microscopy and Imaging. Fluorescence microscopy and imaging were performed essentially as described. Detailed information is described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods. Quantification of F-Actin Distribution in Phagocytic Cups. Quantification of F-actin distribution in phagocytic cups was performed essentially as described. Detailed information is described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods. Quantification of Phagosome Rocketing. Quantification of phagosome rocketing was performed essentially as described. Detailed information is described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods. Analyses of Cytokinesis. Analyses of cytokinesis were performed essentially as described. Detailed information is described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods. Analyses of Cell Migration. Analyses of cell migration were performed essentially as described. Detailed information is described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods. Y2H Assay. Yeast two-hybrid analyses were performed with the MATCHMAKER GAL4 Two-Hybrid System 3 essentially as described. Detailed information is described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods. Statistical Analyses. Statistical analyses were performed using Origin. Statistical significance of normally distributed data was determined with the two-tailed, unpaired Student’s t test, and in case of multiple comparisons, ANOVA was used. In case of nonnormal distribution, the Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post hoc test was used. Statistical significances are reported as * P < 0.5, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001, and n.s. as nonsignificant. Supplementary Material Appendix 01 Click here for additional data file. Movie S1. ForB co-localizes with F-actin at sites of macropinocytosis. Confocal time-lapse imaging of a WT cell expressing YFP-ForBΔDAD and mRFP-LifeAct. Still images from this movie are shown in Fig. 1C. Time is in min:s. Scale bar, 5 μm. Click here to view. Movie S2. ForB localizes prominently to phagocytic cups. Confocal time-lapse imaging of a WT cell expressing YFP-ForBΔDAD during internalization of a TRITC-labelled yeast particle. Still images from this movie are shown in Fig. 1F. Time is in min:s. Scale bar, 5 μm. Click here to view. Movie S3. ForB interacts with active RacB interact in vivo and localizes to sites of phagocytosis. Confocal timelapse imaging of a WT cell expressing VC-ForBΔDAD and VN-RacB Q61L, during internalization of a TRITC-labelled yeast particle. Still images from this movie are shown in Fig. 3C. Time is in min:s. Scale bar, 5 μm. Click here to view. Movie S4. ForB and active RacB interact in vivo and co-localize to macropinocytic cups. Confocal, time-lapse imaging of a WT cell expressing VC-ForBΔDAD and VN-RacB Q61L. Still images from this movie are shown in Fig. 3D. Time is in min:s. Scale bar, 5 μm. Click here to view. Movie S5. Overexpression of active ForB promotes the rocketing of internalized phagosomes. Confocal, time-lapse imaging of a WT cell expressing YFP-ForBΔDAD during and after internalization of a TRITC-labelled yeast particle. Still images from this movie are shown in Fig. 5A. Time is in min:s. Scale bar, 5 μm. Click here to view. Movie S6. Confocal, time-lapse imaging of a WT cell expressing YFP-ForB-N and mRFP-LifeAct during internalization of an Atto633-labelled yeast particle. Still images from this movie are shown in Fig. 5B. Time is in min:s. Scale bar, 5 μm. Click here to view. 