 GskA, the Dictyostelium GSK-3 orthologue, is modified and activated by the dual-specificity tyrosine kinase Zak1, and the two kinases form part of a signaling pathway that responds to extracellular cyclic AMP. We identify potential cellular effectors for the two kinases by analyzing the corresponding null mutants. There are proteins and mRNAs that are altered in abundance in only one or the other of the two mutants, indicating that each kinase has some unique functions. However, proteomic and microarray analyses identified a number of proteins and genes, respectively, that are similarly misregulated in both mutant strains. The positive correlation between the array data and the proteomic data is consistent with the Zak1-GskA signaling pathway's functioning by directly or indirectly regulating gene expression. The discoidin 1 genes are positively regulated by the pathway, while the abundance of the H5 protein is negatively regulated. Two of the targets, H5 and discoidin 1, are well-characterized markers for early development, indicating that the Zak1-GskA pathway plays a role in development earlier than previously observed. GSK-3 is a multifunctional serine/threonine protein kinase that regulates a large number of key eukaryotic cellular processes, including intermediate metabolism, cytoskeleton maintenance, and development. A significant question is how GSK-3 can be active in a broad range of signal pathways yet retain pathway specificity. For example, in the same cell, insulin can control glycogen synthesis and Wnt can control β-catenin protein levels, both in a GSK-3-dependent manner but without crossover between the two pathways. This specificity appears to arise through a number of mechanisms. Phosphorylation by GSK-3 generally requires prior phosphorylation of a substrate by another kinase at a priming site four residues toward the C terminus from the phosphoacceptor site. As a consequence, in most instances, GSK-3 operates in combination with other kinases. Substrate specificity can be determined by the identity and activation profile of the priming kinase, such as in the case of CRMP-2 and CRMP-4. Both are substrates for GSK-3 but can be phosphorylated by GSK-3 at different times, as phosphorylation is dependent on different priming kinases which are not coordinately regulated. In addition, GSK-3 and its priming kinases may be brought into close contact with its substrate through the action of scaffold proteins, such as Axin, a protein which brings together the kinases CK1 and GSK-3 with their substrate β-catenin. Wnt signaling can disrupt this protein complex to block β-catenin phosphorylation in a manner that is distinct from the regulation via serine phosphorylation at the N terminus of GSK-3 seen in response to signals such as insulin. A third, but less understood, regulatory mechanism is tyrosine phosphorylation at residue 216. This phosphorylation event is not required for kinase activity but may influence substrate interaction with the active site. Although in most cases, phospho-Tyr216 does not change during GSK-3 regulation, there are a number of situations where it does regulate GSK-3 function. A well-characterized example of phosphotyrosine regulation of GSK-3 during the multicellular development of Dictyostelium has been observed. Dictyostelium amoebae exist in a unicellular state while feeding on bacteria, but starvation triggers the formation of a multicellular organism. The aggregation of single cells into a mound is coordinated by the pulsatile release of cyclic AMP. cAMP acts as a chemoattractant and as a regulator of the developmental gene expression program, acting through high-affinity cAMP receptors cAR1 and cAR3. In the mound, extracellular rises to millimolar levels, stimulating the low-affinity cAMP receptors cAR2 and cAR4. The process eventually leads to the generation of a terminal structure consisting of a ball of spores supported on a stalk composed of vacuolated cells. Deletion of the gene encoding GskA, the Dictyostelium homologue of GSK-3, leads to ectopic expression of a marker of stalk cell differentiation, ecmB, suggesting that GskA forms part of the repressive signaling pathway that prevents premature stalk cell differentiation. Both ecmB expression and stalk cell formation are repressed by extracellular cAMP, whereas the formation of the spore precursor cells requires cAMP and the loss of GskA or cAR3 can disrupt these effects during the multicellular stages of development. A dual-specificity kinase, Zak1, acts downstream of cAR3 and directly phosphorylates GskA on Tyr214. The activation profile of Zak1 coincides with that of GskA, and the peak of GskA activation normally seen around the mound stage of development is lost in a zak1 − strain. The balance between Zak1 kinase activity and an unidentified phosphatase activity has been proposed to cause the differential activation of GskA in different cell types, thus regulating the expression of cell type-specific markers. Despite the importance of GskA, only one substrate for this kinase has been identified. The transcription factor STATa is phosphorylated by GskA, and this event leads to its enhanced nuclear export. In order to establish the prevalence of the Zak1-GskA regulatory mode, we set out to identify other cellular effectors of the two kinases by searching for changes in the proteomes and the transcriptomes of cells bearing null mutations in the genes encoding Zak1 or GskA. We identify a number of features that are coordinately altered in the two mutant strains, providing potential targets in a unified Zak1-GskA pathway. Some targets identified are genes or proteins whose expression is regulated during the early stages of development, suggesting that the Zak1-GskA pathway has a role at a much earlier stage than previously thought. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture and development. Axenic Dictyostelium Ax2 cells were grown at 22°C in HL5 medium. The Ax2/ gskA -null and statA -null cells have been described previously. For development, exponentially growing cells were resuspended in KK2 at 2 × 10 7 cells/ml and shaken at 120 rpm and 22°C for 5 h, being pulsed with 5 nM cAMP every 5 min. Construction of the zak1 null strain in an Ax2 background. The gene encoding Zak1 was disrupted by an in vitro transposition technique using an artificial transposon carrying a blasticidin S resistance cassette for selection in Dictyostelium. The integration position of the transposon was determined by sequencing, and the transposon disrupts the coding sequence corresponding to the second, or DI,kinase domain of Zak1 after amino acid 574. The original zak1 − strain also contains a disruption corresponding to this second kinase domain, predicted to be a tyrosine kinase. Transcription could not be detected by real-time -PCR, but we cannot rule out the possibility that a truncated Zak1 containing a functional N-terminal serine/threonine kinase domain is expressed. Four independent clones showed identical phenotypes, so one was chosen for further analysis and called zak1 − Ax2 to distinguish it from the original zak1 − strain. When developed on nutrient-free filters, most aggregates arrested at the tipped-mound stage. A few aggregates developed further into slugs, and a small number of multitipped structures were apparent after 48 h of development, while the development of control strains into fruiting bodies was complete after 24 h. The observed aberrant development is consistent with the previously described zak1 − phenotype, produced in a different genetic background. Western blotting and immunoprecipitation. Whole-cell extracts were prepared by lysing 1.5 × 10 7 cells in 500 μl of ice-cold buffer and cleared by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 10 min. Thirty micrograms was run on a NuPAGE bis-Tris 4 to 12% gel. Following transfer, membranes were incubated with 4G10 anti-pTyr antibody and visualized by chemiluminescence. Nuclear cell extracts were prepared by filtering 3 × 10 7 cells in 2 ml of ice-cold modified buffer through Nuclepore Track-Etch membranes. Nuclei were collected by centrifugation at 3,000 × g for 2 min and lysed in 750 μl of nuclear lysis buffer. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Aliquots containing 100 μg of soluble whole-cell extracts were acetone precipitated and resuspended in 125 μl of sample buffer. The samples were loaded onto nonlinear immobilized pH gradient strips, and isoelectric focusing was performed on a MULTIPHOR II apparatus as recommended by the manufacturer. Equilibration of isoelectric focusing strips was performed for 10 min in equilibration buffer. The second dimension was performed by standard gel electrophoresis on NuPAGE bis-Tris 4 to 12% ZOOM gels. The gels were subsequently stained using colloidal blue. Spots were analyzed using ImageMaster 2-DGE Platinum software. Protein identification. Protein mass fingerprint data were obtained by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-tandem time of flight analysis performed at the University of Dundee “Fingerprints” Proteomics Facility using an Applied Biosystems 4700 proteomic analyzer. Excised protein spots from two-dimensional electrophoresis analysis were prepared and in-gel digested by trypsin as previously described. One-tenth of each digest was then applied to a 192-well matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization sample plate, allowed to air dry, and then supplemented with 0.5 μl of a 5-mg/ml solution of α-cyano-4-hydroxy- trans -cinnamic acid matrix plus 10 mM ammonium dihydrogen phosphate in 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, mixed and allowed to air dry prior to analysis. The mass spectrometer was internally calibrated using the AB 4700 proteomic analyzer calibration mix. Using the 4000 series Explorer software, MS spectral data were acquired from the samples and an MS-MS list was automatically generated for further analysis based on the top five most intense ions present. The MS and MS-MS spectral data obtained were exported from the 4700 proteomic analyzer by using the global proteome server Explorer software. The data were then submitted to a local Mascot search engine for comparison against entries in the NCBInr and Dictyostelium databases for identification. Methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamidomethylation modifications were allowed for with a peptide mass tolerance of 50 ppm and one missed cleavage. Northern transfer analyses. Total RNA was extracted from approximately 10 7 cells by using a TRIzol RNA extraction kit according to the manufacturer's protocol. Samples of total RNA were separated on a 1% formaldehyde-containing gel, blotted, and probed by using standard methods. QRT-PCR. Total RNA was treated with 2 U/μg DNase I, which was subsequently deactivated by heating at 75°C for 10 min. Quantitative RT-PCR was performed in two steps using an ABsolute MAX QRT-PCR kit according to the manufacturer's protocol. Extensive Western blotting and Northern analysis had revealed that cadA expression levels were not altered in the zak1 − Ax2 and gskA − cells, which was confirmed by the analysis of microarray data. Therefore, levels of cadA were used as an internal control. Genome-wide expression profiling. Total RNA was extracted from three independent samples of control, zak1 − Ax2, and gskA − cells which had been developed in shaken suspensions for 5 h with nanomolar pulses of cAMP. Each sample was primed with oligo and separately labeled with Cy3 and Cy5 by using Superscript III reverse transcriptase. Each set of labeled mutant cDNA was paired with the control cDNA labeled with the complementary fluorophore, and the mixture was hybridized to a DNA microarray. Two pairs of replicate samples of the two mutants were also compared directly. Hybridization and data analysis with three biological replicates were carried out as previously described. Arrays were scanned using an Axon Instruments GenePix 4000B scanner, and fluorescence was quantified using the GenePix 3.0 software. Subsequent data processing steps were carried out using the limma package, part of the Bioconductor project, using the R statistical environment. Background fluorescence was subtracted using the method of Kooperberg et al., and data were then normalized using the print-tip loess algorithm. Differences in the levels of gene expression, and their significance, among strains were assessed using linear models and empirical Bayes methods. After adjusting to correct for multiple comparisons by using the method of Benjamini and Hochberg, and after ranking, genes with a P value of less than 0.05 were provisionally accepted as having altered expression in the mutant cell lines. Microarray data accession numbers. The microarray data have been deposited in Array Express with the following accession numbers: array, A-SGRP-3; experiment, E-SGRP-4. RESULTS Tyrosine phosphorylation events induced by cAMP in gskA − and zak1 − Ax2 strains. We first disrupted the zak1 gene in Ax2 cells in order to allow comparison with an existing gskA − strain that was generated in the Ax2 background. The resulting zak1 -null mutants in the Ax2 background have a phenotype similar to that reported for a different genetic background. The Zak1 and GskA kinases are regulated by millimolar concentrations of extracellular cAMP at the mound stage of development, and consistent with this pattern, the two mutants develop relatively normally until mound formation. We therefore chose to study cells at a nominally earlier stage than the mound stage: by starving cells in shaking suspensions for 5 h. In a further attempt to ensure that comparisons were made when the strains were at similar developmental stages, we chose to drive the developmental program by pulsing with exogenous nanomolar cAMP. We first analyzed the known components of the signaling system. After 5 h of pulsing with low-level cAMP, cells were exposed to 5 mM cAMP for 1 min, conditions expected to induce tyrosine phosphorylation of STATa. For the control strain and both the mutant strains, there was an increase after 1 min in the phosphotyrosine content of a band migrating at the position predicted for STATa. 1A ). The use of an antibody specific for the tyrosine-phosphorylated form of STATa and the loss of this band in the STATa-null cells 1B ) confirmed the identity of the band as STATa. Thus, all three strains were competent to respond to cAMP by activating STATa. FIG. 1. Tyrosine phosphorylation in response to extracellular cAMP. Exponentially growing parental control, zak1 − Ax2, and gskA − cells were harvested, washed twice, and resuspended in KK2 at 2 × 10 7 cells/ml. Cells were developed for... A tyrosine-phosphorylated band of approximately 52 kDa was missing from gskA − cells, and this is the molecular mass expected for GskA. There was no apparent increase in the level of tyrosine phosphorylation of this protein following treatment with 5 mM cAMP in control cells, presumably because the pulsing-shaking conditions led to the activation of tyrosine kinases that modify GskA. Zak1 appears not to be the only kinase responsible for the tyrosine phosphorylation of the band we hypothesize to be GskA because it was tyrosine phosphorylated in the zak1 − Ax2 null mutant. Interestingly, a close homologue of Zak1 is present in the genome. This other kinase, known as DPYK4, could be responsible for the phosphorylation of GskA during these earlier stages of development. In Western analysis of zak1 − Ax2 cells, there was no obvious loss of a tyrosine-phosphorylated protein with the molecular mass predicted for Zak1. However, this reflects the low abundance of Zak1 because, upon enrichment with phosphotyrosine-containing protein by immunoprecipitation from nuclear extracts with an anti-phosphotyrosine antibody, a difference between the control and zak1 − Ax2 cells was apparent. One phosphotyrosine-containing band was missing in the zak1 − Ax2 cells, 1C ), and the molecular mass of this band was consistent with its being a tyrosine-phosphorylated form of Zak1. The total level of tyrosine phosphorylation of this nuclear band was also unchanged upon treatment of control and gskA − cells with 5 mM cAMP. Changes in the proteome induced by loss of Zak1 and GskA function. In order to identify transcriptionally and nontranscriptionally regulated, high- to medium-abundance targets in the Zak1 and GskA signaling pathway, we first performed proteomic analysis. We compared the patterns of features detectable on two-dimensional gels bearing whole-cell extracts from control, zak1 − Ax2, and gskA − cells. Samples were harvested following 5 h of development in shaken suspensions with exposure to pulses of cAMP. Representative pairs of two-dimensional gels are shown in Fig. ​ Fig.2A. 2A. The majority of features show equal staining intensities in all three strains, and a number of these constant spots were used for normalization. Several features were reproducibly altered in one or both of the mutant strains,and 1 ),and their identities were determined by mass spectrometry. FIG. 2. Two-dimensional gel analysis of zak1 − Ax2 and gskA − cells, developed for 5 h. Whole-cell extracts of control, gskA −, and zak1 − Ax2 cells, developed in shaken suspensions for 5 h with 5 nM pulses of cAMP, were resolved... FIG. 3. Representative features. Noncoordinate regulation. Cropped images showing a control and two representative gels from mutant strains showing features which are not coordinately regulated in the two mutant strains. AlrA is up-regulated in zak1 −... TABLE 1. Features showing changes upon two-dimensional gel analysis of gskA − and zak1 − Ax2 cells relative to control cells Noncoordinately regulated proteins. A number of proteins were misregulated in only one or the other of the two mutants, e.g., the metabolic enzyme aldoketo reductase was underrepresented in the gskA − samples and overrepresented in the zak1 − Ax2 samples. Coordinately regulated proteins. The metabolic enzyme transketolase was down-regulated in the two mutants, as was the product of the DD7-1 gene, which encodes a homologue of the discoidin 1 proteins. 3B ). In contrast, vegetative protein H5 was up-regulated in both zak1 − Ax2 and gskA − cells. 3B ). Changes in spot intensities observed on protein gels could be the result of transcriptional or posttranscriptional events. Quantitative real-time PCR showed that the message encoding H5 was always present at higher levels in both mutant strains than in control cells, although there was considerable variation in the level of increase among biological samples. These data are consistent with the idea that the alteration in H5 protein levels is due at least in part to transcriptional changes. Interestingly, although the AlrA protein level was significantly reduced in the gskA − cells, quantitative PCR revealed that the alrA mRNA level was not reduced and, if anything, may have actually been higher in both mutant strains. 3C ). This finding suggests that GskA alone is responsible for a posttranscriptional event that leads to an overall reduction of the amount of AlrA protein in the spot in its absence. Transcriptional targets regulated by Zak1 and GskA. In order to extend the analysis down to lower abundance limits, and also to investigate regulation at the RNA level, expression profiles of zak1 − Ax2 and gskA − cells were compared with those of control cells. The microarray bears PCR products from approximately 8,600 genes, identified from the complete Dictyostelium genome sequence. Only genes for which unique PCR primer sets could be predicted were included. Gene prediction suggests that the genome contains around 12,000 genes. Subsequent detailed analysis has reduced the predicted number by around 1,500 genes by removing those derived from retrotransposons, pseudogenes, and those coding for very small predicted proteins. The array therefore likely represents around 80% of the total number of Dictyostelium genes. The great majority of genes showed no difference between control and mutant strains. However, a number of genes were aberrantly expressed in similar ways in both zak1 − Ax2 and gskA − cells 2 ) and are candidates for transcriptional or posttranscriptional regulation in response to a GskA-Zak1 signaling pathway. The majority of genes coordinately altered in their expression in the two mutant strains were down-regulated, suggesting that, in general, the Zak1-GskA signaling pathway has a positive effect on specific gene transcription events. FIG. 4. Microarray analysis of zak1 − Ax2 and gskA − cells after 5 h of development in shaking suspensions. Heatmap showing relative levels of expression of genes differentially regulated in zak1 − Ax2 and gskA − cells relative to... TABLE 2. Numbers of genes misregulated in zak1 − Ax2 and gskA − cells after 5 h of development in a shaken suspension A total of 24 of the coordinately altered genes have functions that are known or can be reliably inferred. The genes that were differentially expressed in both mutant strains, whether they were up-regulated or down-regulated, encode proteins with a range of cellular functions. 3 ). Nine of the 24 are involved in metabolism, and six of the others have developmental functions. The microarray data were used to investigate the levels of mRNA encoding each of the proteins identified as being altered in the mutant strains in the proteomic analysis. 4B ). There is, for most of the gene products, qualitative agreement between the microarray data and the proteomic data, but the mutant expression level/control expression level ratio is generally lower with the array data. If we take a standard cutoff unadjusted P value of 0.05 for the array data, then there is significant agreement between the results of the proteomic and array analyses for H5, tkt, and DDB0187880 in gskA − and alrA in zak1 −. In most other cases, there is qualitative agreement but the P value for the three experiments is greater than 0.05. In only one case is there significant disagreement between the proteomic and the array data. In the zak1 − Ax2 strain, DDB0187880 was underexpressed according to the array data but was not seen to change on two-dimensional gels. Apart from this case, the fact that there is a good correlation between the changes in protein and mRNA levels is consistent with transcription being the major target of the Zak1-GskA pathway at this stage in development. TABLE 3. Functional analysis of genes showing coordinate alteration in gene expression in zak1 − Ax2 and gskA − cells a The microarray analysis identified the family of discoidin 1 genes as being coordinately altered in zak1 − Ax2 and gskA − cells. We confirmed this array result by Northern transfer, using conditions that detect all three discoidin 1 genes. 5 ). As predicted by the microarray analysis, the discoidin 1 genes were underexpressed in both the mutant strains during the first 6 h of development. FIG. 5. Northern analysis of discoidin gene expression in zak1 − Ax2 and gskA − cells. Control, zak1 − Ax2, and gskA − cells were harvested, washed, and plated for development on filters. Cells were harvested at the times shown, and... The expression levels of the genes encoding both H5 and discoidin 1 are commonly used markers of early development in Dictyostelium. We therefore used existing microarray data to examine the expression profiles of all the genes identified by both analyses to see if any of the other potential targets also showed major changes in gene expression during early development. Data were available for all of the targets identified proteomically, and the expression of 8 out of 10 targets was altered by at least twofold during the first 4 h of development. 1 ). Expression profile data were not available for all of the targets identified by the microarray, but among the 21 genes for which data were available, 10 showed at least a twofold change in expression levels during this early stage of development. 3 ). Taken together, these findings support the conclusion that the unified Zak1-GskA pathway plays a role in regulating gene expression during the early stages of development, prior to the mound stage as previously thought. DISCUSSION Common and distinct targets for GskA and Zak1. The proteomic and the array analyses identified common targets of the two kinases GskA and Zak1, the common targets being defined as mRNAs or protein features which showed qualitatively similar patterns of misregulation in both mutants. It is not possible to determine whether the changes seen were direct or indirect effects of the loss of Zak1 or GskA. The relatively small number of changes identified and the fact that the analysis was carried out with cells prior to overt phenotypic alterations of the mutant strains might mean that this analysis may include direct targets. However, elucidation of the pathway linking Zak1-GskA to a single target would be necessary to demonstrate a direct link. This identification of a number of coregulated proteins and mRNAs significantly strengthens the case for a common pathway. However, both methods also identified targets specific to one or the other kinase. These two observations are entirely reconcilable with published data on the two mutant phenotypes. There are similarities between zak1 − and gskA − cells, most notably in the loss of stalk cell repression by cAMP, but the developmental phenotypes of the null strains are not identical. Thus, in an Ax2 background zak1 − Ax2 strains fail to complete development on filters, whereas gskA − cells culminate. Conversely, gskA − cells show a slightly increased rate of aggregation while zak1 − cells aggregate normally. The independent effects of GskA suggest either that constitutive GskA activity plays a role in early development or that GskA activation can be regulated by other means. The small increase in GskA activity detected during the development of zak1 − cells and the residual GskA tyrosine phosphorylation still detected in zak1 − cells would support the latter conclusion. Zak1 and GskA are required for correct regulation of transcription of many genes. The proteomic changes could, in principle, be due to transcriptional or posttranscriptional regulation, but the array data confirm that there are changes at the RNA level. The quantitative PCR data and the behavior of the genes encoding the targets identified on two-dimensional gels in the microarray analysis suggest that the majority of changes identified proteomically are transcriptional. In the microarray analysis, a total of 168 changes were apparent in zak1 − Ax2 cells, suggesting that Zak1 is active during the early stage of development. All the phenotypic changes described for zak1 − cells were postaggregation, but the changes discovered here raise the possibility that these later phenotypic changes could be a consequence of earlier alterations in gene activity, rather than direct effects on late targets. We identified around 150 genes whose expression at the RNA level is either up-regulated or down-regulated in gskA − cells. Again, these differences occur at an early stage of development, prior to overt cell type differentiation. A previous array analysis of gskA − cells, at the slug stage of development, identified a much smaller number of changes. However, this study utilized fewer genes, the mutant's developmental aberration made it possible to identify only transcripts which were under-expressed in the mutant, and the study imposed a threshold cutoff rather than employing a probabilistic analysis. The array analysis identified 37 common targets for GskA and Zak1. Interestingly, most of the common targets of the Zak1-GskA pathway are down-regulated rather than up-regulated, suggesting that the pathway normally plays a positive role in controlling gene expression. However, as many of the targets identified may be indirect, this remains to be verified. The transcription factor responsible has yet to be identified, but the above data suggest that, in most cases, an activator of transcription is turned on or an inhibitor is switched off. The only known target for GskA in Dictyostelium is STATa, and it is known to function as both a transcriptional repressor of ecmB and an activator of cudA expression. Thus, the enhanced nuclear export of STATa, following its phosphorylation by GskA, could in principle facilitate the up- or down-regulation of some of the genes discovered here. Although the cAMP receptors cAR3 and cAR4 have been implicated in GskA regulation later in development, it is not known which extracellular factors may be responsible for Zak1 or GSK-3 regulation at earlier stages. In this regard, it is of interest that the AlrA protein is misregulated in both mutant strains. AlrA has been previously identified on two-dimensional gels as a protein misregulated in cells with mutants of counting factor, a factor involved in regulating aggregate size in early development. Disruption of alrA causes development to arrest at the tipped-mound stage, similar to the zak1 − phenotype, consistent with a link between Zak1 and AlrA. The common pathway regulates gene expression in early development. H5 is an esterase/lipase/thioesterase domain-containing protein used as a marker for growth as the abundance of its mRNA decreases as cells arrest growth and enter development. The proteomic analysis showed that the abundance of H5 was higher in both mutants than in controls, and the array and quantitative PCR analysis suggested that this difference was at the level of gene expression. In contrast, the discoidin 1 genes were underexpressed in the two mutants. These observations can be accommodated into the model of a unitary signaling pathway because the discoidin 1 genes, in contrast to the H5 gene, are activated rather than repressed during early development. The discoidin 1 family is one of the best-characterized gene families, first expressed as cells grow to a high density in axenic medium and then further activated during early development. Discoidin 1 expression is induced in response to two density-sensing factors, conditioned medium factor and prestarvation factor, and is later repressed by pulses of extracellular cAMP during aggregation. The promoter of the discoidin 1c gene has been dissected into separate regions that are needed for prestarvation factor-inducible expression and cAMP repression. In summary, the targets H5 and discoidin 1 both indicate that Zak1 and GskA have a role in transcriptional regulation at a much earlier stage in development than was previously thought. The discoidin 1 genes are a particularly attractive entry point for dissecting the pathway further because there is a very considerable body of information on their regulation. 