 The conserved switch 1 loop of P-loop NTPases is implicated as a central element that transmits information between the nucleotide-binding pocket and the binding site of the partner proteins. Recent structural studies have identified two states of switch 1 in G-proteins and myosin, but their role in the transduction mechanism has yet to be clarified. Single tryptophan residues were introduced into the switch 1 region of myosin II motor domain and studied by rapid reaction methods. We found that in the presence of MgADP, two states of switch 1 exist in dynamic equilibrium. Actin binding shifts the equilibrium towards one of the MgADP states, whereas ATP strongly favors the other. In the light of electron cryo-microscopic and X-ray crystallographic results, these findings lead to a specific structural model in which the equilibrium constant between the two states of switch 1 is coupled to the strength of the actin–myosin interaction. This has implications for the enzymatic mechanism of G-proteins and possibly P-loop NTPases in general. Keywords: actomyosin interaction, G-proteins, Mg-binding, nucleotide binding, tryptophan fluorescence Introduction The family of P-loop proteins, which includes G-proteins and the motor proteins myosin and kinesin, is able to sense the difference between NTP and NDP bound in the nucleotide pocket through the P-loop itself and two additional loops known as switch 1 and 2. The conformation of the loops can then influence the interactions with partner proteins, particularly the exchange factors. The switch 1 loop is thought to be the region primarily responsible for the communication between the nucleotide-binding pocket and the binding region of the nucleotide exchange factor. How switch 1 can transmit information about the type of nucleotide towards the partner binding region and regulate the binding strength of the partner protein remains to be understood. As actin binding to myosin strongly depends on whether ADP or ATP is in the nucleotide - binding pocket, this system is very suitable to study the role of switch 1 in this mechanism. Myosins are ATP-driven molecular motors that generate force and move along actin filaments. During the ATPase cycle of myosin, its binding strength with actin changes cyclically. Nucleotide and actin binding are generally antagonistic, although the actual dissociation constant for actomyosin depends on the type of the nucleotide bound to myosin and the myosin isoform. In the case of myosin II, actin and myosin interact weakly in the presence of ATP, but more strongly in the presence of ADP. Recently, Holmes et al showed that the actin-binding cleft of myosin II is closed in the rigor state and cleft closure is induced by the actin-binding process. The recent apo atomic structures of myosin II and V suggested that switch 1 opening is accompanied by closure of the actin-binding cleft to give the strongly actin-bound form of myosin. The ADP-bound state is regarded as a strong actin-bound form, although two different conformations of the switch 1 loop were found. Nevertheless, switch 1 movements have not been investigated directly and several questions arise: If two ADP states of switch 1 exist, what is the equilibrium constant between them? How is the putative equilibrium of two states of switch 1 affected by different nucleotides and by Mg 2+ ? What is the relationship between actin and nucleotide binding to myosin and switch 1 movement? What is the role of this equilibrium in the chemo-mechanical cycle of myosin? To answer these questions we introduced single tryptophan residues into the switch 1 region of the Dictyostelium discoideum myosin II motor domain as fluorescence probes to follow conformational transitions. Tryptophan residues were engineered into position F239 or F242, which are conservative substitutions to minimize structural perturbation by the mutations. F239 is the neighboring amino acid of the R238–E459 salt bridge, which connects switch 1 to switch 2 loop, and therefore this fluorophore is likely to sense conformational changes related to the structural coupling of these loops. F242 is located along the β-strand that extends from the switch 1 loop. Here, we show that M W239+ and M W242+ mutants respond to nucleotide and actin binding with large fluorescence changes. Based on transient kinetic experiments on these mutants, we conclude that the actin-binding cleft movement is kinetically coupled with the movement of switch 1 but they do not move together as a rigid body. We confirm structural data that indicates that switch 1 exists in two states in the presence of MgADP and find that there is a dynamic equilibrium between them. This equilibrium is pushed by ATP and actin to the switch 1 closed and open states, respectively. Based on these effects, we construct a model that explains the different actin affinities of ATP and ADP complexes of myosin. Figure 1 Ribbon model of MgADP complex of Dd myosin II motor domain. F239 and F242 and MgADP are highlighted by spacefill modeling. Subdomains are color-labeled: N-terminal subdomain is shown in green, lower 50-kDa subdomain in... Results Steady-state fluorescence of M W239+ and M W242+ in the presence of different nucleotides We monitored the effect of different nucleotides on the fluorescence emission spectra of M W239+ and M W242+. Nucleotides caused a large fluorescence quench in both constructs. All of the nucleotides and nucleotide analogs in the presence and absence of Mg 2+ had the same effect on M W242+ fluorescence, an approximately 20% quench. In contrast, with the M W239+ construct at 20°C, MgATP induced a 37% quench and 10 nm blue shift, whereas MgADP gave a 20% quench and 3 nm blue shift. All of the studied nucleotide analogs, which occupy the γ-phosphate site in the nucleotide-binding pocket, generated the same fluorescence spectra as MgATP with M W239+. This indicates that the fluorescence of W239 is not sensitive to the open–closed transition of switch 2 in different nucleotide-bound forms. In summary, the large fluorescence change of M W239+ and M W242+ upon adding nucleotides offered good experimental systems for investigations of switch 1 movements. Nucleotide-binding kinetics of M W239+ and M W242+ The large nucleotide-induced intrinsic fluorescence quench allows us to follow the kinetics of nucleotide binding using a stopped-flow device. At 20°C, the signal change of W239 induced by mixing the construct with MgATP or MgADP under pseudo-first-order conditions could be fitted with a single exponential function. From the concentration dependence of the observed rate constant, both the MgATP and MgADP binding of M W239+ follow two-step binding kinetics indicative of an induced-fit mechanism. Nevertheless, at 5 and 12°C, the records for M W239+ upon MgADP binding show intriguing features. The fast quenching phase corresponding to the MgADP binding was followed by a slower enhancement phase, with rate constants of k iso,observed =32 and 55 s −1 at 5 and 12°C, respectively. This slower phase indicates a novel equilibration step after the binding step. Interestingly, this conformational equilibrium appears to be associated only with the middle of the switch 1 loop, because this transition was not detected in M W242+, as it showed simple two-step binding kinetics for ATP and ADP. Figure 2 Time course of the fluorescence intensity signals for the reaction of 2 μM M W239+ with 0, 12.5, 25, 50 and 500 μM of MgADP in stopped flow at 12°C. The dead time of the stopped-flow measurements was 1.5 ms. The ligand binding... The two MgADP states in M W239+ are denoted as † M.ADP and * M.ADP for the quenched and enhanced states, respectively. Note that these differ from the nomenclature used previously for different switch 2 states, that is M †.Nu and M *.Nu. We further investigated the possible equilibrium of ADP states sensed by W239 using temperature and pressure perturbations. Characterization of the isomerisation of myosin–MgADP complex The temperature dependence of the steady-state fluorescence intensity of M W239+ was monitored in the absence and presence of different nucleotides. Figure 3 shows that the temperature dependencies of the fluorescence of apo, MgATP and MgAMP.PNP forms are very similar. In contrast, the temperature dependence of the fluorescence differs when M W239+ was complexed with MgADP above 8°C, whereas at lower temperatures, its fluorescence was similar to that of the ATP form. This indicates that M W239+.MgADP complex exists in at least two states in equilibrium above 8°C. This agrees with the observation at 5°C, where the fluorescence spectrum of M W239+. MgADP complex is the same as that in the presence of MgATP and MgAMP.PNP. A multiple ATPase turnover experiment carried out at 5°C also confirmed this finding. These data indicate that the low-fluorescence MgADP state has the same state of switch 1 as the MgATP-bound form. However, the fluorescence level of * M state cannot be uniquely determined from these experiments because of its fractional occupancy at all accessible temperatures. Nevertheless, the results indicate that the two MgADP states are in equilibrium at room temperature and are perturbable by temperature. In the case of M W242+ the temperature dependence of the MgADP-bound form was identical to the other forms, and hence only one MgADP state was detected. Figure 3 Temperature dependence of M W239+ fluorescence in the absence of nucleotide and in the presence of MgATP and MgADP. At low temperature, the fluorescence intensities in the presence... As the equilibrium of † M.MgADP and * M.MgADP is temperature dependent, a temperature-jump experiment is appropriate to characterize this transition. Figure 4A shows temperature-jump records of M W239+ in the presence of saturating MgADP or MgAMP.PNP. In the presence of MgADP a relatively large fluorescence increase 4.7% occurs with a rate constant of 70 s −1 induced by a 6°C temperature jump to 20°C. In the apo and rigor states and in the presence of MgAMP.PNP and Mg 2+ -free ADP, no significant fluorescence change was detected. Actin also locks the M W239+.MgADP complex into a single state because no transition was detected in the presence of actin at saturating concentration of MgADP. Figure 4 Temperature-jump and pressure-jump rapid perturbation experiments with M W239+ in the presence of MgADP and AMP.PNP at 20°C. Tryptophan fluorescence was followed within 100 μs of a 6°C temperature jump... Pressure-jump experiments confirmed these findings. A similar fluorescence transition of M W239+. MgADP complex was detected, which was absent in all of the other conditions studied. Note that the pressure-jump records of M W239+.MgADP had two phases. At 20°C, the fast phase was 143 s −1 and the slow phase was 29 s −1. A careful evaluation of temperature-jump records confirmed this finding. However, it is difficult resolve the phases because of the lower signal to noise ratio of the latter method. In the pressure-jump experiments in the case of apo, MgAMP.PNP, Mg 2+ -free ADP, rigor and acto-M W239+. MgADP states, extremely fast phases were found. These extremely fast phases are probably not related with the isomerization found in the presence of MgADP. Further investigations are required to characterize these fast transitions. In summary, temperature-jump and pressure-jump experiments demonstrate that there are at least two MgADP states in equilibrium, whereas the absence of Mg 2+, presence of actin or γ-phosphate site occupation locks the system into a single state with respect to the environment around W239. Mg 2+ binding to M W239+.ADP and determination of the equilibrium constant of myosin-MgADP states Previous studies showed that Mg 2+ and nucleotide binding and dissociation are related processes. We compared the fluorescence intensity of apo M W239+ and its complexes with ADP, AMP.PNP, ATP and actin in the presence and absence of Mg 2+. We found that removing Mg 2+ from M W239+ caused a significant fluorescence change only in the presence of ADP and absence of actin. Therefore, we explored the mechanism of Mg 2+ -free ADP binding to M W239+ and Mg 2+ binding to M W239+.ADP. The addition of ADP to M W239+ in the absence of Mg 2+ gave a 45% quench in tryptophan fluorescence. Stopped-flow measurements showed that Mg 2+ -free ADP equilibrium dissociation constant is similar to that of MgADP; however, the binding and dissociation of the former are faster. The Mg 2+ -free M W239+ ADP complex is likely to be a single state because neither temperature nor pressure perturbed the fluorescence. This fluorescent state is different from the ATP-bound state because the emission maximum is 9 nm red-shifted compared which that of the † M state. Figure When Mg 2+ was removed quickly from the M W239+. MgADP complex by rapid mixing with excess EDTA, the fluorescence intensity dropped in two phases. The observed rate constants of the two phases were 89 and 18 s −1 at 11°C. The concentration of ADP was 1 mM in both syringes to ensure that the M W239+ was saturated with ADP throughout. Figure 5 Stopped-flow records on Mg 2+ dissociation from the M.MgADP complex and Mg 2+ binding to the M.ADP complex monitored by tryptophan fluorescence at 11°C. Mg-off: 2 μM M W239+ and 1 mM ADP were mixed with 5 mM EDTA and... When a saturating concentration of Mg 2+ was mixed rapidly with M W239+ ADP, the profile of the fluorescence record was dramatically different from that of the Mg 2+ dissociation from M W239+. MgADP: a rapid enhancement phase was followed by a slow quench phase at 11°C. According to these data, a two-step Mg 2+ -binding model is required, in which Mg 2+ exchange occurs predominantly with the * M state and the slow phase represents the equilibration of * M and † M states ). The rate constants of the quenching phase at different temperatures were in line with the rate constants calculated from the temperature-jump and the pressure-jump experiments. Because the fast Mg 2+ binding phase is significantly faster than the quenching phase, the extrapolated end point of the enhancement phase determines the fluorescence intensity of the * M state. The fluorescence level of the Mg 2+ -free †† M state relative to the † M state fluorescence is known from the spectra of Mg 2+ -free ADP complex and ATP. Consequently, the equilibrium constants of the isomerization between the * M and † M MgADP forms can be determined from the relative fluorescence intensities of the end points of the records measured at different temperatures. We applied a global fit method to these experimental data using the binding mechanism described in Scheme 1 to deduce the elementary rate constants and the precise values of the relative fluorescence intensities of the states. The relative intensities of * M and † M states are 1.13 and 0.63, respectively, taking the apo state as unity. Similar values for the elementary constants were obtained when stopped-flow records of MgADP binding experiments were fitted. The equilibrium constant of K iso =/ equilibrium is 0.7 at 20°C and the calculated thermodynamic parameters are: Δ G 0 =0.9, Δ H 0 =44 kJ/mol and Δ S 0 =0.15 kJ/mol K. These results are consistent with the results of the temperature dependence of fluorescence intensities of AMP.PNP and MgADP complexes. That experiment also shows that below 8°C, the fluorescence intensity of the M W239+. MgADP complex reaches the fluorescence of the † M state because the lower the temperature, the smaller the equilibrium constant of K iso =/. Table 1 Elementary rate constants of the equilibrium of † M W239+.MgADP and * M W239+.MgADP states The mechanism of MgADP binding to M W239+ The results of stopped-flow experiments of MgADP binding are consistent with the calculated rate constant values obtained from the Mg 2+ association and dissociation experiments as presented above. A general mechanism for MgADP binding to M W239+ is summarized in Scheme 2. Figure In this scheme, both the † M and * M states are capable of binding MgADP, but under some conditions, the flux through one route may dominate. At high temperature, MgADP binding stopped-flow records have a single phase, but at 5 and 12°C, the rapid quenching phase is followed by a small increasing phase. The relative equilibrium constants of the † M and * M states for MgADP binding are determined by the equilibrium constant of the * M to † M transition because these states form a thermodynamic box. At low temperature, the predominant form of M.MgADP is † M; therefore the affinity of MgADP to † M is higher than that to * M. The relative population of * M increases with increasing temperature. At 12°C, † M.MgADP binding is still dominant, but the subsequent isomerization to * M.MgADP now gives the slower enhancement phase with a larger amplitude. However, at higher temperatures, this second phase is lost, indicating that MgADP now binds directly to the * M state. Scheme 2 might be made more general by considering the M apo state to be an equilibrium mixture of † M and * M to give an intermediate fluorescence level. However, this is inconsistent with the lack of perturbation of the putative equilibrium by temperature. This suggests that the W239 residue of the apo state is in a different environment to either † M or * M. Actin induced fluorescence change of M W239+ and M W242+ An important question is whether actin binding induces a change in the switch 1 region as implied from structural data. To test this hypothesis, actin was mixed with M W239+ under different conditions in stopped-flow, and the fluorescence change of W239 tryptophan was followed in parallel with the light scattering change. We were careful to avoid stray light and auto-fluorescence of the emission filter by using a selected interference filter because during the actomyosin association, light scattering of the solution can give an artifactual signal in the fluorescence channel. When M W239+ and actin were mixed in stopped-flow, a 4.3% increase in protein fluorescence was observed, which paralleled the light scattering profile. This corresponds to an approximately 15% fluorescence change relative to the fluorescence of W239, assuming there is no change in actin fluorescence or light scattering artifact. This change is similar to the difference in fluorescence intensities of the * M state and apo state. The actin-induced fluorescence change of the M W242+ construct was less than 1.5%. These results indicate that the conformation of the switch 1 loop or the environment of W239 changes upon actin binding. In order to characterize how actin binding and switch 1 movement are coupled, we studied the ATP- and ATPγS-induced actin dissociation reactions. Acto-M W239+ was mixed with ATP under pseudo-first-order conditions. The rate constant of ATP binding to the myosin motor domain as determined from the tryptophan fluorescence change was slower in the presence of actin than in its absence. The rate constants for tryptophan fluorescence change were similar to those deduced from the light scattering change. However, the fluorescence signal always slightly preceded the light scattering signal change. A similar effect was observed when a fluorescent probe was located in the actin-binding cleft of myosin. The expected lag phase of the light scattering signal is difficult to detect because of the fast actin dissociation and the low signal-to-noise ratio at the beginning of the records. As actin dissociation is slow in the presence of ATPγS, it is a potentially useful substrate analog to study the coupling of actin dissociation and switch 1 movement. Acto-M W239+ was mixed with 100 μM ATPγS and tryptophan fluorescence was measured in parallel with light scattering. The triphasic fluorescence change yielded rate constants of k obs,fluor1 =68 s −1, k obs,fluor2 =4.3 s −1, k obs,fluor3 =0.10 s −1, with the slow phases corresponding to the two phases of the light scattering change. The light scattering change is also similar to previous measurements of the ATPγS-induced dissociation rate constant for myosin using pyrene-actin as a probe. The fast phase of the fluorescence signal change was 53% of the total change. These results indicate that a conformational change in switch 1 could initiate actin dissociation, but these movements do not occur in synchrony, as might be expected for rigid-body coupling via the upper 50 K domain. A model is shown in Scheme 3 in which acto- * M.ATPγS and acto- † M.ATPγS equilibrate before significant actin dissociation occurs. As this equilibrium is much faster than the actin dissociation steps, the fluorescence levels at the start and the end represent the * M and † M populations, respectively, and the relative amplitudes of the phases of the fluorescence signal change determine the equilibrium constant, K A iso-ATP γ S= /=/ A fluor 1 =0.87. Figure 6 Time course of the fluorescence intensity and light scattering signal for the reaction of 2 μM M W239+ with 100 μM of MgATPγS in the stopped-flow apparatus at 20°C. The light scattering record is normalized to the... Figure Relations of fluorescence and enzymatic states of M W239+ Figure 7 shows stopped-flow records, which allow comparison of the amplitudes of the actin-induced fluorescence intensity changes of M W239+ in the presence and absence of MgADP and the amplitudes of nucleotide-induced fluorescence signal changes of M W239+ in the presence and absence of actin. The fluorescence intensity of actin is subtracted from the records where actin was present. We found that at 20°C, the amplitude of the actin-induced fluorescence change was much higher in the presence of MgADP than in its absence; however, the observed rate constants were similar. There was no significant fluorescence change when actoM W239+ was mixed with MgADP, and the actin dissociation was less than 10% based on the light scattering signal. At 20°C, MgADP binding is fast and its signal change was lost in dead time so that the horizontal record shows the end-point fluorescence intensity of the M W239+.MgADP complex. The fluorescence level at the end of the reaction represents a mixture of * M and † M populations in equilibrium. Altogether, the results suggest that the W239 residue in switch 1 in acto-M W239+.MgADP is in the same environment as in the rigor state, and is distinctly different from that in the apo M W239+ state. Consequently, in the presence of Mg 2+, three structural states can be distinguished: † M, * M and apo. Myosin complexed with MgATP or substrate analogs having γ-phosphate and low-fluorescence MgADP states represent the † M state. Rigor, MgADP high-fluorescence state and acto-M.MgADP ternary complex represent the * M state. Figure 7 Stopped-flow records of the reactions of M W239+ with actin in the presence and absence of MgADP, the reaction of acto-M W239+ with MgADP and M W239+... Discussion Based on structural data, the switch 1 loop of myosin is presumed to play a central role in information transmission between the nucleotide- and the actin-binding regions. Recent structural data show that switch 1 can exist in different conformational states. Solution experiments are now required to explore the role of switch 1 and to elucidate the mechanism of its action; therefore, we have investigated the movement of switch 1 upon nucleotide and actin binding. In a broader context, switch 1 is of interest because it is a common structural element in the family of P-loop NTPases, and its members may share an analogous mechanism. The nucleotide exchange in these systems occurs in similar ways: G-proteins and their GEFs are analog proteins of the motor enzymes and the partners protein, respectively. These data provide a good basis for the comparison of the detailed mechanisms of nucleotide exchange in G-proteins and myosin. Tryptophans F239W and F242W were introduced into the switch 1 region of Dd myosin II motor domain, whereas native tryptophans were substituted with phenylalanine residues to reduce background fluorescence. These single fluorophores provide specific signals for conformational changes of switch 1 during the ATPase cycle of actomyosin, nucleotide binding and actin interaction of the motor domain. The MgADP equilibrium binding constants are practically unchanged for M W239+ ; however, MgADP binding of M W239+ was slightly faster. Also actin binding into the ternary acto-M.MgADP complex is slightly stronger than was the case with the wild type construct ; however, the rigor complexes are similar to each other. The main perturbation caused by F239W mutation is the large reduction in the rate constant of the hydrolysis step, which becomes the rate-limiting step. Consequently, the ATPase activation by actin is also limited in M W239+. However, hydrolysis is not directly coupled to the interactions of actin and myosin ; so these constructs are suitable preparations for investigations of the relationship between switch 1 movements and actin binding. Three fluorescent states of W239 were distinguished in the presence of Mg 2+ and a fourth state is the Mg 2+ -free ADP state. In the presence of MgADP, two states are in equilibrium. One of these states in the presence of MgADP could be the same state as the ATP state and the other state is different from the myosin apo state. Actin also induces a structural change in switch 1. As the fluorescence level of the acto.M rigor complex is the same as * M in the presence of MgADP and MgADP does not induce a fluorescence change in acto-M W239+, the rigor complex could have the same switch 1 state as the acto-M W239+. MgADP ternary complex and * M states. Table 2 Summary of the relationship of the fluorescence intensity levels of W239, the nucleotide states and the structural states In G-proteins, single trypthophans have also been introduced into the switch 1 loop. Y32W and Y40W mutants were produced in p21 ras, which are homolog positions to the N234 and F242 in Dd myosin II, respectively. Interestingly, a similar tendency can be seen in the fluorescence levels complexed with different nucleotide with p21 ras to our constructs. The Y32W construct shows large fluorescence intensity difference in the presence of GDP and GTP, or its analog, as in the case of M W239+ constructs with ADP and ATP. However, only a very small difference can be detected in the fluorescence of Y40W GDP and GTP analog complexes, as we found with the M W242+ construct. Unfortunately, no experimental data are available as to whether Y32W or Y40W p21 ras constructs show fluorescence changes upon binding to GEF proteins. Nevertheless, based on fluorescence and NMR studies on p21 ras in the presence of nucleotides, two states can be distinguished. Nucleotide binding and GEF binding are strongly negatively coupled and the coupling with GTP is not very different from GDP. The Dd myosin II motor domain switch 1 exists in two states with MgADP and the two states bind MgADP differently. The relative binding constants and the rate constants define the fluxes of MgADP binding of † M and * M. As MgADP binding and the equilibrium of MgADP complexes of † M and * M form a thermodynamic triangle, the latter equilibrium defines the ratio of the MgADP binding constants. This equilibrium is highly temperature-sensitive and at low temperature, the predominant form is † M; therefore this state binds MgADP much tighter than * M. At room temperature, the ratio of † M.MgADP to * M.MgADP is 2:1; consequently, the ratio of the binding constants becomes smaller. Nevertheless, we can define † M as a strong MgADP-bound form, whereas * M is the weak MgADP-bound form. Mg 2+ binding of the two forms of ADP complex is also different. Mg 2+ exchange occurs practically via * M state, whereas † M.Mg.ADP is formed and looses Mg 2+ through the * M.Mg.ADP form. Using a structure-specific signal, our Mg 2+ and ADP binding model is in line with the models described by Rosenfeld et al and Hannemann et al in which they proposed a two-ADP-state model, based on mant-ADP binding kinetics to myosin V. In contrast to their model, we propose that for Dd myosin II motor domain, only one of the states exchanges Mg 2+, but both exchange MgADP at room temperature. It is controversial whether the Mg 2+ -free state is predominantly a single state, as Hannemann et al suggest, or remains a two-state equilibrium, as proposed by Rosenfeld et al. Our results suggest that the Mg 2+ -free ADP state is a single state of switch 1 region, which is different from both MgADP states. The difference between these results could reflect differences between myosin II and myosin V, or be a consequence of the structure-specific probe used in our studies compared with the mant-ADP used in the studies cited above. The equilibrium between † M and * M is strongly affected by actin and ATP. ATP and analogs with a γ-P i group push the equilibrium towards the † M state, whereas actin, either in the presence or absence of MgADP, pushes it towards the * M conformation of switch 1. This finding is similar to the Hannemann et al model for myosin V in which the isomerization of the MgADP states is pushed predominantly to a single state; however, Rosenfeld et al did not find this effect with myosin V. Two ADP states of actomyosin II have been supposed for many years and is key to the load-dependent ADP release in muscle. Strain-dependent ADP release also plays an important role in the mechanism of processivity of myosin V. One of the MgADP states is favored when mechanical strain is developed in the head by an internal load. Structural implications of † M, * M and apo states in myosin Before the determination of the structure of apo state of Dd myosin II motor domain, all of the Dd myosin motor atomic structures showed switch 1 in the closed state. The Dd myosin II motor domain structure of Reubold et al was significant because switch 1 was proposed to be in an open state in the absence of nucleotide. Coureux et al published myosin V structures in which the switch 1 loop was in an open state in the apo and MgADP-bound forms. They also found that the structures with an open switch 1 had a closed actin-binding cleft. It was proposed that switch 1 closure opens the actin binding-cleft and vice versa, which results in weak and strong actin-binding states, respectively. Nevertheless, our results with ATPγS show that switch 1 closure does not occur at the same time as actin-dissociation. Consequently, switch 1 loop and actin binding cleft do not move together as a rigid body, but the open–closed equilibrium between the states in one of the regions is coupled to the closed–open equilibrium of the other region. There is evidence for two structural states of switch 1 in the presence of MgADP. Coureux et al suggested that in the ADP form with open switch 1, Mg 2+ and ADP are bound more weakly than in the state with a closed switch 1. We found that the high-fluorescence * M state binds MgADP more weakly than † M, especially at low temperature. We suggest that the * M state can be assigned to the switch 1 open structural state, whereas the † M is the switch 1 closed form. Coureux et al found switch 1 in the same position in the weak ADP-bound and apo states, whereas the P-loop is positioned slightly differently. This structural difference might explain the small difference in the fluorescence of * M and apo states. Strong and weak actin binding according to the nucleotide binding states The strength of actomyosin binding depends on the nature of the bound nucleotide. ATP and ATP-like nucleotide analogs result in weak actomyosin complexes, whereas the ADP-bound form results in a strong binding complex. It is supposed, based on structural information, that the switch 1 open state binds actin much tighter than the closed form. For illustration, we suppose that the strong binding state has a K d of about 0.1 μM, whereas the weak binding state has a K d of about 50 μM. We show here that actin pushes the equilibrium of the switch 1 states towards the open state. A thermodynamic box of these events indicates that the dominant state of the four states is the actomyosin switch 1 open form. Figure The scheme is consistent with the fact that MgADP–myosin complex binds actin strongly. In contrast, in the presence of ATP, the equilibrium of the switch 1 states is pushed strongly towards the closed form. Also, we found that the two states of switch 1 are in equilibrium in the ternary complex in the presence of ATPγS. What happens in the thermodynamic box if ATP or an ATP analog is bound? We assume that actin binding is dependent only on the state of switch 1 and not directly on the nature of the bound nucleotide. The consequence is that the predominant state of this thermodynamic box is the actin-free switch 1 closed myosin state, which correlates with the fact that a weak actomyosin complex is formed in the presence of ATP and ADP.P i. The conclusion is that the strength of actin binding to myosin is highly sensitive to the equilibrium constant of the switch 1 open–closed equilibrium. Consequently, the nature of the bound nucleotide, especially the occupation of the γ-phosphate site, adjusts the equilibrium of switch 1 open and closed states, which controls the actomyosin interaction. This model is an extension of the model of nucleotide exchange in P-loop NTPases as described by Goody and Hofmann-Goody. They compared the kinetics of nucleotide exchanges in G-proteins, myosins and kinesins. They pointed out that nucleotide exchange occurs by negative coupling between the binding of exchange factor and the nucleotides in an allosteric way. Here, we extend this model with a specific structural element having two states where the equilibrium constant between these states of switch 1 determines the coupling ratio of nucleotide and exchange factor binding constants. As we discussed above, this model is probably also valid for G-proteins; however, further experiments are required to establish this. Materials and methods Protein engineering, expression and purification W239F or W242F were introduced into the tryptophan-less Dd M761 motor domain cDNA fragment, and the mutant recombinant proteins were expressed in Dd AX2-ORF+ cells and isolated by using His-tagged affinity chromatography as described previously. The motor domain preparation so obtained was dialyzed against an assay buffer containing 40 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1 mM MgCl 2 and 2 mM mercaptoethanol. All experiments were performed in this buffer, unless otherwise indicated. Fluorescence measurements Steady-state measurements were carried out with Spex320 Fluoromax fluorimeter equipped with 150 W Xe lamp using 10 mm path-length cell. Tryptophan was excited at 296 nm using 2-nm excitation and emission slits. The temperature dependence of the fluorescence detected at 345 nm was measured by heating the sample from 6 to 26°C and the recorded fluorescence intensities were assigned to discrete temperature values. Transient kinetics Stopped-flow experiments were conducted using a KinTek SF-2004 Stopped-Flow fluorimeter equipped with a 150 W Hg–Xe Super-quiet lamp. Tryptophan was excited at 297 nm; the slit was 4 nm. The detection setup of the tryptophan fluorescence was improved by using a 340-nm interference filter in the emission channel rather than a WG335 cutoff filter and UG11 bandpass filter combination. The interference filter showed a hundred times less UV-induced fluorescence, and the sum of the intensity of fluorescence and transmitted light at 297 nm was much smaller than the filter combination. The interference filter allowed small changes in tryptophan fluorescence to be measured in reactions accompanied by significant changes in light scattering during actomyosin complex formation and dissociation. The different profiles of the light scattering and fluorescence records measured in parallel proved that light scattering did not dominate the fluorescence measurement. Light scattering was recorded simultaneously with a second photomultiplier, where no filter was used. The dead time of the instrument was determined as 1.5 ms at the flow rate of 14 ml/s. The transients were analyzed by Origin 7.5. Temperature-jump experiments were carried out with a TJ-64 System as described previously, but the emitted light was measured through the 340-nm interference filter. Pressure-jump experiments were performed on a custom-built apparatus. Each measurement was the result of at least 500 repeats. Pressure step sizes of 15 MPa were routinely used, as it represented the upper limit to the linear response of amplitude to pressure step size. Tryptophan was excited at 295 nm with a bandwidth of 1.8 nm and emitted light was collected through a WG320 cutoff filter. Supplementary Material Supplementary data Click here to view. 