 Cell migration is essential in species ranging from bacteria to humans. In the amoebae Dictyostelium discoideum, cell migration is involved in chemotaxis toward food sources and in aggregation. In higher vertebrates, cell migration plays crucial roles in multiple physiological and pathological processes. During embryonic and neonatal development, cell migration is crucial in morphogenetic processes such as gastrulation, cardiogenesis, and the formation of the nervous system. In adult animals, cell migration is required for leukocyte trafficking and inflammatory responses. In tumoriogenesis, tumor-induced angiogenesis and tumor metastasis both involve cell migration. Although it is well known that cell migration is necessary for all these processes, our understanding of mechanisms controlling cell migration is still limited. Here we briefly review the significance of neuronal migration and focus on recent studies on the directional guidance of neuronal migration, discussing the possibility that guidance mechanisms for neurons are conserved with those for other somatic cells. Ontogenetic and phylogenetic significance of neuronal migration Although the idea of neuronal migration was proposed in the late 1800s through the observations of Kolliker, His, Vignal, and Ramon y Cajal, there was a long-standing debate as to whether there is active neuronal migration or only passive neuronal displacement. A large amount of work based on histology, autoradiography, retroviral tracing, dye labeling, and modern imaging have now established that the majority of, if not all, neurons actively migrate in the developing CNS. Neuronal migration is essential for the formation and normal functioning of the nervous system. Many human diseases are caused by defects in neuronal positioning. Although some diseases such as lissencephaly are easily explained by developmental abnormalities, others, such as epilepsy and autism, are not immediately obvious and are most likely indirect consequences of abnormal neuronal positioning. In addition, migration is also important for metastasis or invasion of neuroblastoma and glioma. Genetic studies of defects affecting neuronal positioning in humans and mice have helped further our understanding of neuronal migration. For example, an interesting pathway that has emerged from these studies consists of the secreted protein Reelin, the ApoE receptor, the very low density lipoprotein receptor, and the cytoplasmic protein Disabled, and has been revealed to play a role in neuronal positioning, a topic that has been recently reviewed by Rice and Curran. In addition to playing a critical role in early development and disease, neuronal migration is also important for changes in the adult brain. In birds, neuronal migration is required for postnatal behavior changes. Findings of neurogenesis and adult neural stem cells suggest that neuronal migration is also important in the brains of adult mammals, including humans. Because neuronal stem cells give rise to neurons during neural plasticity, neuronal migration can be essential for neural plasticity, although it is unknown whether neuronal migration is regulated in neural plasticity. An additional role for neuronal migration in brain evolution has been proposed by Rakic and colleagues. Comparative studies of neuronal migration between humans and monkeys have led to the suggestion that establishment of new routes of neuronal migration might contribute to the evolution of the human brain. Regions connected to each other anatomically and functionally are thought to coevolve during the evolution of the mammalian brain. The establishment of a new migratory pathway between two functionally connected regions may contribute to the coevolution of the frontal cortex and the thalamic nuclei. Radial and tangential modes of migration According to the direction of neuronal migration relative to the surface of the CNS, neuronal migration can be classified into radial and tangential modes. A cellular model for radial migration based on reconstruction of sections examined by electron microscopy proposes that neurons migrate along radially aligned glial fibers. This model is supported by later observations using retroviral tracing, immunohistochemistry, and in vitro studies of live granule cells from the cerebellum. Further in vitro studies have shown that granule cells can also migrate along glass fibers coated with extracellular matrix proteins such as laminin or fibronectin, suggesting that extracellular matrix proteins could provide substrate along which neurons can migrate. Recent studies have indicated that there are two modes of radial migration : somal translocation and locomotion. Locomotion is the classical radial glia-dependent neuronal migration involving the migration of an entire cell, including its processes and the cell body. Somal translocation involves a neuron whose process is attached to the pia and its cell body translocates as the process becomes shorter. The same neuron can have both modes of migration, first moving by locomotion and later by somal translocation once its leading process touches the pia. Figure 1 Routes of neuronal migration. A diagram of an embryonic rodent brain is shown on the left. Two examples of tangential migration are colored in red and green. MGE, medial ganglionic eminence; LGE, lateral ganglionic eminence. A diagram of the coronal section... Tangential migration of neurons occurs along pathways parallel to the surface of the CNS. Although tangential migration was observed in the 1960s, its importance is better appreciated after findings of tangential migration in multiple regions of the CNS including the telencephalon, the cerebellum, and the spinal cord. Table 1 Examples of tangential migratory pathways in the brain Unlike radial migration, tangential migration does not rely on glial fibers. In some structures such as the pontine nuclei, migration depends on interactions with axonal pathways. In other structures, such as the adult rostral migratory stream, tangential migration relies on astrocytes, which have been implicated in forming tubular structures through which chains of neurons migrate. In vitro, tangential migration of some cell types is independent of other cells. For example, neuronal precursor cells from the medial ganglionic eminence in the postnatal forebrain or the embryonic lateral ganglionic eminence and the medial ganglionic eminence can migrate individually in a three-dimensional collagen matrix without relying on other cells. Thus, the roles of axonal or glial fibers in tangential migration are not clear. Some cells can undergo both tangential and radial migration. For example, cells in the external germinal layer of the cerebellum migrate tangentially before they change the migration mode to that of classic radial migration. After EGL cells radially migrate into the internal granular layer, these new granule cells can detach from the radial glial cells and migrate farther in a radial direction but in a manner independent of the Bergmann glial fibers. It is unclear what determines the migratory mode taken by a neuronal precursor cell or the transition between different modes of migration. Cell adhesion and neuronal migration Cell adhesion is important for both radial and tangential migration. Antibody perturbation studies have suggested roles for several cell adhesion molecules in radial migration. For example, antibodies against the cell adhesion molecules astrotactin, tenascin, and thrombospondin, or those against α 3 β 1 integrin can inhibit the migration of glial cells. Antibodies against astrotactin and α 3 β 1 integrin inhibit neuronal association with glial fibers, suggesting that the migratory defects may be a result of reduced association with glial fibers. Adhesion molecules have also been shown to be important in tangential migration. For example, the polysialylated form of the neural cell adhesion molecule, the cell adhesion molecule TAG-1, and the Ng-CAM binding protein DM-GRASP have been implicated to play important roles in the tangential migration of different cell types. Although gene targeting studies have confirmed the importance of astrotactin in granule cell association with glial fibers, it has been observed that mice lacking the β 1 integrin gene do not show defects in cortical migration. Thus, additional studies will be needed to determine the biological roles of the different adhesion molecules in neuronal migration. It will also be interesting to investigate the relationship between cell adhesion and directional guidance. Directional guidance of neuronal migration: slit as a guidance cue Although the previously mentioned adhesion molecules, glial fibers, and neuronal axons are important for neuronal migration and may limit the dimension in which neurons can move, they do not provide sufficient information to guide the direction of neuronal migration. Instead, secreted molecular cues have been shown to play important roles in guiding neuronal migration. A general principle from recent studies is that guidance cues for neuronal migration are shared with those for axon projection. There are four families of axon guidance cues known. We will use the Slit family as a primary example, before discussing other axonal guidance cues and their roles in neuronal migration. The Slit gene was first discovered in a genetic screen for defects in embryonic pattern formation in Drosophila. Slit genes have now been found in a wide range of species from Caenorhabditis elegans to humans. The Drosophila Slit protein contains an N-terminal signal peptide, four leucine-rich repeats, seven EGF repeats, a laminin G domain, and a C-terminal cysteine-rich motif. Vertebrate Slit proteins are similar to Drosophila Slit except that they contain nine EGF repeats. Initial characterizations of Drosophila slit mutants led to the conclusion that Slit was involved in midline cell differentiation, whereas its phenotype of the apparent fusion of longitudinal axons was thought to be secondary to cell differentiation defects. In 1999, work by three labs on Drosophila and vertebrates independently demonstrated that Slit was a diffusible chemorepellent for axons in Drosophila and mammals. Thus, Slit acts directly on axons to direct their projection. Since then, Slit proteins have been shown to be potent repellents for axons in a variety of regions. In addition to its role in axonal guidance, Slit plays a role in the directional guidance of neuronal migration. Such a role for Slit was first demonstrated in the RMS from the SVZa to the olfactory bulb, which relays information from the olfactory epithelium to the olfactory cortex. Coculture experiments indicated that the septum at the midline of the telencephalon was repulsive to the SVZa neurons. Two of the three mammalian Slit genes are expressed in the septum. When SVZa explants are cocultured in vitro with an aggregate of Slit-expressing cells or with purified Slit proteins, Slit is able to repel SVZa neurons. Thus, these data suggest that the repulsive activity in the septum is due to the expression of the Slit genes. Slit also repels other cell types, including GABAergic neurons containing that migrate tangentially from the ganglionic eminence to the neocortex in the embryo and cells that migrate radially from the ventricular zone of the neocortex. Figure 2 Directional guidance of neuronal migration by slit. This image shows how lateral ganglionic eminence neurons behave in the presence of the repellent molecule Slit. An aggregate of human embryonic kidney cells transfected with Slit cDNA was... The concentration gradient of Slit is important for its function as a repellent in vitro. When SVZa explants are cocultured with the septum in the presence of the extracellular domain of the Slit receptor Roundabout, the repulsive effect of the septum on SVZa neurons is reduced, suggesting that that Slit contributes to the repulsive activity in the septum. Although these results indicate that Slit can repel SVZa neurons, it should be noted that the role of endogenous Slits in SVZa migration has not been demonstrated, and, although Slit can repel neurons within the radius of 1 mm in vitro, the effective distance of endogenous Slit is unknown. The idea that the same molecule can function in neuronal migration and axon guidance is supported not only by the roles of Slit on both axon guidance and neuronal migration, but also by the finding that the same motifs in the Slit protein are involved in both activities. The N-terminal LRRs of Slit are sufficient to repel both projecting axons and migrating neurons. A recent paper reports that Slit functions only as an inhibitor to reduce the speed of neuronal migration but not as a repellent to change the direction of neuronal migration, and that Slit acts as a repellent only in the presence of a glial-derived migration-inducing activity. Further work is needed to determine whether Slit functions as a repellent or an inhibitor. Multiple molecular cues guide neuronal migration Four families of axon guidance cues are known: netrins, semaphorins, ephrins, and Slits. Netrins usually function as attractants, whereas the others are often repellents. Ephrins are membrane bound, whereas the others are diffusible. They all function by binding to their transmembrane receptors. There is now evidence that they are not only involved in axon guidance, but all four families are also involved in neuronal migration. Neurons from the dorsal rhombencephlic neuroepithelium migrate ventrally and rostrally, eventually residing in several nuclei including the basilar pontine nuclei and the inferior olivary nuclei. Neurons in the pontine migratory stream end up in the basilar pons, which are located near the ventral midline. Netrin is expressed in the floor plate, whereas the migrating neurons express their receptor Deleted-in-Colorectal-Cancer. Netrin attracts neurons migrating toward the basilar pons. Netrin may also serve as a stop signal for neurons migrating circumferentially from the dorsal rhombencephlic neuroepithelium to the inferior olivary nucleus. Netrins may also play a role in establishing or maintaining the rostral boundary of the cerebellum. Netrin-1 is expressed in the pontine area and it has been demonstrated that a loss of function mutation in its receptor, Unc5h3, causes the embryonic EGL cells and Purkinje cell precursors to migrate across the normal rostral boundary into the midbrain. Although netrin-1 repels cerebellar precursor cells postnatally, direct tests of netrin-1 did not show any effect of netrin-1 on EGL cells of the appropriate embryonic stages, suggesting that perhaps other netrins may function through Unc5h3. In addition to its roles in the cerebellum, netrin repels cells in the MGE and LGE of the telencephalon. Precursor cells from the MGE can migrate either into the striatum or the neocortex to become interneurons. Repulsion by Semas is important for directing some interneurons into the neocortex and others into the striatum. Sema 3A and Sema 3F are expressed in the striatum, whereas its neuropilin receptors are expressed in interneurons migrating from the MGE to the neocortex, but not in interneurons migrating into the striatum. Sema 3A and its receptor neuropilin-1 may function in repelling or inhibiting the migration of neural crest cells from the trunk and hindbrain. Sema 3C may promote the migration of neural crest cells into the proximal cardiac outflow tract. Ephrins and their Eph receptors are involved in delineating the migratory pathway of neural crest cells in the peripheral nervous system. Because ephrins are not diffusible, they function by creating regions that are nonpermissive to migrating neural crest cells. In the CNS, ephrins and Eph are expressed in the SVZa and the RMS. Injection of extracellular domains of Eph receptors can disrupt SVZa migration, although the precise roles of ephrins in the RMS remain to be defined. Conservation of guidance cues for neurons and leukocytes Since its discovery in the late 1800s, migration has been well known to be a basic feature of cells ranging from leukocytes in adult animals to neuronal precursor cells in embryos. Only recently, however, has it become apparent that mechanisms guiding neuronal migration also seem to be shared with those for leukocytes, suggesting a fundamental conservation of directional control of cell migration among distinct cell types. Leukocyte chemotaxis was first described by Leber in 1888 and is one of the best-characterized models of cell migration in adult mammals. Work in the last 20 years has demonstrated the importance of the chemokine family in leukocyte chemotaxis. The first chemokine was isolated in 1977 and functional studies of the chemokines began in 1987 with the identification of interleukin-8. There are presently more than 40 chemokines, which are small and structurally related proteins containing 70–100 amino acid residues that promote leukocyte motility and attract leukocytes. There are multiple differences between neurons and leukocytes, including: different migratory environments; specialized morphologies ; the speed of neuronal migration is significantly slower than that of leukocyte chemotaxis; and all guidance cues for neurons function through single transmembrane proteins, whereas all leukocyte chemotactic factors function through seven transmembrane proteins coupled to a heterotrimeric G protein. It is thus possible that different mechanisms have evolved to guide the migration of different cell types. However, recent studies indicate that, despite these differences, the guidance cues and receptors for neurons and leukocytes are used in both systems, supporting a conservation of guidance mechanisms for cells of distinct types. Figure 3 Morphological comparison of a migrating neuron and a chemotactic leukocyte. A neuronal precursor cell from the medial ganglionic eminence is shown on the left and a migrating neutrophil is shown on the right. Pictures were taken under the same microscope... Recently, Slit has been found to control leukocyte chemotaxis. Two mammalian Slit genes and three Slit receptors are expressed in adult tissues outside the nervous system. Slit could inhibit the migration of monocytes, lymphocytes, and neutrophils induced by multiple types of chemokines and nonchemokine type of chemotactic factors. The effect of Slit on leukocyte chemotaxis is inhibited by a soluble form of the extracellular domain of Robo, which was shown earlier to inhibit Slit repulsion of neurons. These results support the idea that the same receptor is used in both neurons and leukocytes. In addition to providing evidence for conserved mechanisms of cell migration, these results also suggest a strategy to control unwanted leukocyte chemotaxis. Thus, the inhibitory effect of Slit could be used to attenuate leukocyte infiltration during inflammation. Ongoing research indicates that down-regulation of endogenous Slit expression may contribute to inflammation, suggesting that the endogenous Slit and Robo may play roles in leukocyte chemotaxis. A role for leukocyte guidance cues in neuronal migration has been studied in the case of the chemokine stromal derived factor -1. SDF-1 was originally found in the immune system, where it functions as a chemoattractant for leukocytes through its CXCR4 receptor. When SDF-1 and CXCR4 genes were knocked out, a surprising finding was that cerebellar granule cells were found in the internal layers prematurely in the embryo, suggesting that SDF-1 may either directly or indirectly play a role in preventing the EGL cells from premature migration. However, the precise role of SDF-1 in EGL migration was not known. Based on the premature neuronal migration phenotype of the SDF-1 knockout mice, one suggestion was that SDF-1 inhibits neuronal differentiation and thus reduces migration. Another was that SDF-1 increases cell adhesion and thus immobilizes the EGL cells. Recent work indicates that SDF-1 is expressed in the meninges and can attract cerebellar granule cells. SDF can attract embryonic but not postnatal EGL cells, resulting in the anchoring of embryonic EGL cells. This switch of cellular responsiveness occurs through the inhibition of SDF-CXCR4 signaling by Eph and ephrins, which are expressed in the postnatal EGL cells. Further studies with the hippocampus also indicate a role for SDF-1 and CXCR4 in the migration of dentate granule cells. Thus, the chemokine SDF-1 and its receptor CXCR4 are used both in leukocytes and in neurons. Similar to neuronal response to guidance cues, the attractive responses of leukocytes to SDF-1 can also be reversed by changes in cyclic nucleotide levels, further supporting the idea that guidance mechanisms are conserved between neurons and leukocytes. Studies of CD100/Sema4D suggest that a ligand similar to those functioning as guidance cues in the nervous system may be used by a different receptor in leukocytes. CD100/Sema4D is a transmembrane Sema similar to human Sema 3A that can be cleaved into a diffusible form. Although it has not been shown to guide neuronal migration, CD100 is the first member of the Sema family of neuronal guidance cues detected in the immune system. CD100 has multiple functions in lymphocytes including T-cell adhesion, B-cell aggregation and survival, lymphocyte activation, and monocyte migration. Neuropilins and plexins are the Sema receptors in the nervous system. It has been demonstrated that the inhibitory effect of CD100 on monocyte migration is not through either neuropilin-1 or neuropilin-2. Instead, CD100 acts on lymphocytes by binding to CD72, a lectin-related transmembrane receptor. Furthermore, the effect of CD100 on monocyte migration is not regulated by intracellular cyclic nucleotide levels, whereas neuronal responses to Semas are. Therefore, although CD100/Sema4D regulates lymphocyte function and migration, the underlying mechanisms are different from those used to mediate Sema guidance of axons and neurons. Signal transduction mechanisms guiding neuronal migration Signaling transduction mechanisms in axon guidance have been reviewed recently. We will focus here on the previously mentioned Slit-Robo pathway because it is the only pathway that has been directly studied in neuronal migration. It remains to be investigated whether the same pathway is used in both neurons and leukocytes. Although Slit was discovered over a decade ago, it was only recently that the receptor for Slit was found to be the transmembrane protein Robo. Robo was first discovered for its role in commissural axon guidance in Drosophila. Studies in Drosophila indicate that slit and robo mutations interact genetically. Biochemical studies of mammalian Slit and Robo proteins provide direct evidences that Slit binds Robo, and functional studies indicate that the extracellular part of Robo blocks neuronal responses to Slit. Robo is a single-pass transmembrane protein with five immunoglobulin domains and three fibronectin type III repeats in its extracellular part. Biochemical experiments showed that the Ig domains in Robo are sufficient to interact with the LRR in Slit. The large intracellular region of Drosophila Robo and the three mammalian Robos contains four identifiable conserved motifs designated CC0, CC1, CC2, and CC3. The cytoplasmic domain of Robo is important in mediating repulsion in response to Slit. In transgenic flies, neurons expressing a chimeric receptor containing the ectodomain of Frazzled, a receptor for netrin, and the cytoplasmic domain of Robo avoided the netrin-expressing midline, indicating that the cytoplasmic domain of Robo determines the repulsive response. Deletion of each of the CC motifs leads to a partial robo phenotype, suggesting an additive effect of these motifs. The CC2 motif is a consensus binding site for Ena-VASP-homology domain of Enabled, and in vitro binding experiments suggested that Ena interacted with Robo through CC2 and CC1. The Abelson kinase can phosphorylate Robo in vitro and Abl seems to antagonize the activity of Robo in Drosophila. It is unknown whether Slit can regulate the activities of Abl and Ena. In Drosophila, genetic interaction between ena and slit and that between abl and robo have been detected, suggesting functional roles of Ena and Abl in the Slit-Robo pathway, at least for commissural axon guidance. Work in Drosophila has suggested the involvement of protein tyrosine phosphatases in the Slit-Robo pathway. Mutations in two receptor PTPase genes, PTP10D and PTP69D, interact genetically with slit and robo. Phenotypic analyses suggest that PTPases increase the sensitivity of commissural axons to Slit. The roles of Ena, Abl, and PTPases in neuronal migration remain to be determined. The CC3 motif of Robo1 interacts with srGAPs, a novel subfamily of GTPase-activating proteins. srGAPs 1 and 2 are expressed in regions responsive to Slit and in patterns similar to that of Robo1. Extracellular interaction between Slit and Robo increases the intracellular interaction between the CC3 motif of Robo and the SH3 motif of the srGAPs. Slit treatment of either a mammalian cell line or the primary SVZa cells reduces the amount of the active form of the Rho GTPase Cdc42. The functional role of Cdc42 in neuronal migration has been demonstrated by the observation that the repulsive effect of Slit on migrating SVZa cells was blocked by a constitutively active mutant of Cdc42. Whether and how Slit regulates the activities of the other Rho GTPases depends on the cell type, and the functional significance of RhoA and Rac1 in Slit-Robo signaling is presently unknown. Because the active form of Cdc42 activates N-WASP, which promotes actin polymerization, a working hypothesis for Slit-mediated repulsion of migrating neurons has been proposed. This pathway begins with the extracellular interaction of Slit with Robo, and the signal is transduced through the increased intracellular interaction of Robo with srGAPs, resulting in the inactivation of Cdc42. The relatively lower level of Cdc42 activity on the side of the cell proximal to a higher concentration of Slit leads to relatively lower activities of N-WASP and Arp2/3 complex on the proximal side. Eventually, there will be polarized actin polymerization with less actin polymerization on the proximal side and more actin polymerization on the distal side of the cell. This model remains to be tested biochemically and functionally. It is unclear whether the Abl, Ena, and the PTPases are intrinsic components of the intracellular pathway for Slit-Robo signaling, or whether some components are only specifically involved in some, but not all, responses. For example, because Drosophila abl and ena mutants do not have all the phenotypes of slit and robo mutants, it is possible that Abl and Ena are required for commissural axon guidance in Drosophila, but not necessarily for neuronal migration in mammals. It is not known whether Ena and Abl mediate completely different pathways or whether they interact with srGAPs functionally. Similar to other guidance cues, Slit response can be regulated by intracellular concentration of cGMP. It is unknown whether and how cGMP regulates the hypothetical srGAP-N-WASP-Arp2/3 pathway. Genetic studies in Drosophila suggested that Slit promotes the asymmetric division of neural precursor cells by down-regulating specific proteins. One tempting possibility is that Slit can regulate the polarized activity or localization of some component that are used both in guiding cell migration and in establishing cell polarity. Concluding remarks The importance of neuronal migration is now clearly established, although the full spectrum of functional roles of neuronal migration in evolution, development, and adult life remains to be clarified. Studies of guidance cues that are shared among migrating neurons, projecting axons, and chemotactic leukocytes are advancing our understanding of the spatial control of migration. The potential link between cell adhesion signaling and directional guidance cues remains to be studied at the molecular level. In addition, because the mechanisms involved in polarized neuronal movement are largely unknown and little is known about temporal regulation of neuronal migration, additional exploration of these areas will be required. Multiple approaches will thus be required to gain a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms of neuronal migration and fundamentally conserved mechanisms underlying cell motility and its regulation. Article information Genes Dev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 Nov 6. Published in final edited form as: Genes Dev. 2002 Dec 1; 16: 2973–2984. doi: 10.1101/gad.1005802 PMCID: PMC2064004 NIHMSID: NIHMS32408 PMID: 12464628 Yi Rao, 1, 3 Kit Wong, 1 Michael Ward, 1 Claudia Jurgensen, 1 and Jane Y. Wu 2 Yi Rao 1 Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA Find articles by Yi Rao Kit Wong 1 Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA Find articles by Kit Wong Michael Ward 1 Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA Find articles by Michael Ward Claudia Jurgensen 1 Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA Find articles by Claudia Jurgensen Jane Y. Wu 2 Department of Pediatrics and Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA Find articles by Jane Y. Wu 1 Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA 2 Department of Pediatrics and Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA 3 Corresponding author. E-MAIL ude.ltsuw.sumalaht@iyoar ; Fax 362-3446. PMC Copyright notice The publisher's final edited version of this article is available free at Genes Dev 