 Bacterial virulence can only be assessed by confronting bacteria with a host. Here, we present a new simple assay to evaluate Aeromonas virulence, making use of Dictyostelium amoebae as an alternative host model. This assay can be modulated to assess virulence of very different Aeromonas species. Bacterial virulence designates the complex array of bacterial traits that allow pathogenic bacteria to cause a disease in an infected host. Virulence factors include, for example, secreted bacterial toxins or the ability to escape the host immune system. By definition, the virulence of a given bacterial strain can only be measured by confronting it with a host. To assess the virulence of bacterial pathogens, mice are often used, based on the premise that their immune defenses are similar to those of the human body. These experiments are, however, difficult to carry out, expensive, and ethically problematic, since they inflict significant suffering on infected animals. In addition, mice are not appropriate hosts for certain pathogens such as Aeromonas salmonicida that normally infect cold-blooded vertebrates living at low temperatures. These considerations have led to the development of nonmammalian host models to study the pathogenic potential of bacteria. Alternative hosts such as the nematode Caenorhabitis elegans and the insect Drosophila melanogaster or even unicellular Acanthamoeba castellanii or Dictyostelium discoideum ameobae have proven useful to study bacteria virulence. The relevance of these models is based on the observation that many pathogens have a low species specificity, due to the universality of virulence factors implicated in the infectious process. It is also likely that these alternative hosts are naturally confronted with the same pathogens in their natural environment and that many of the bacterial virulence factors were developed to fight these natural predators. The use of unicellular amoebae allows a very simple assessment of bacterial virulence in many different pathogens. In a typical experiment, Dictyostelium cells form a phagocytosis plaque on a lawn of nonpathogenic bacteria 1A ) but not on a lawn of pathogenic bacteria. The virulence of bacteria can thus be extrapolated from their ability to sustain Dictyostelium growth, as shown previously for Klebsiella pneumoniae or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. These previous studies also reported an excellent correlation between virulence as evaluated in a Dictyostelium host model and in a mouse infection model. FIG. 1. Virulence of Aeromonas salmonicida against Dictyostelium. The ability of Dictyostelium to grow on a bacterial lawn was assessed as described previously by depositing 1,000 wild-type Dictyostelium DH1-10 cells on a lawn of bacteria grown on... Assessing virulence of Aeromonas bacteria is challenging since different Aeromonas species infect different hosts, have different growth requirements, and cause very different diseases. In addition, some strains of A. salmonicida lose their virulence at temperatures above 21°C, due to the thermolability of a large pVirA virulence plasmid. Fish can be used as hosts to evaluate virulence of A. salmonicida at low temperature, but this requires specific installations and poses significant practical problems, such as disposal of contaminated water. In order to assess the virulence of A. salmonicida against Dictyostelium, we tested the ability of 1,000 Dictyostelium cells to grow at 17°C on a lawn of A. salmonicida grown on an HL-5 agar medium. This pathogenic strain was isolated from an arctic char with typical furunculosis and was able to establish a systemic and lethal infection in rainbow trout. This virulent strain 1 ) did not allow growth of Dictyostelium amoebae. 1B ). On the contrary, the JF2397 strain has lost its large pVirA virulence plasmid, is incapable of synthesizing type III secretion system components, and was permissive for Dictyostelium growth. 1B ). Similarly, the mutant strain JF2747 was shown previously to be nonvirulent for trout, due to the deletion of the ascV gene encoding an inner membrane component of the T3SS. This deletion renders that bacterium incapable of secreting T3SS toxins and effector molecules. This strain was also permissive for Dictyostelium growth. 1B ). The virulence against Dictyostelium was restored by complementation with a plasmid expressing AscV, which restores secretion of T3SS proteins. 1B ). Together, these results indicate that the T3SS-dependent virulence of A. salmonicida can be evaluated in a Dictyostelium host model. TABLE 1. Bacterial strains used in this study We next tried to use the same assay to test the virulence of the mesophilic Aeromonas hydrophila strain serotype O34. Under the conditions described above, the wild-type A. hydrophila strain AH-3 was not permissive for Dictyostelium growth. However, the ascV T3SS mutant, which was shown to be avirulent in rainbow trout and mice, was nonpermissive for Dictyostelium. We then reasoned that slowing down the growth of bacteria might change the threshold at which a bacterial strain is permissive for Dictyostelium growth. To test this hypothesis, we reduced gradually the richness of the growth medium by diluting it. We observed that, at lower nutrient concentrations, the AH-3 wild-type strain remained nonpermissive, while the avirulent ascV mutant was permissive for Dictyostelium growth. This appears to be an empirical manner of adjusting the threshold at which virulence of a bacterial strain is detected. FIG. 2. Virulence of Aeromonas hydrophila against Dictyostelium can be modulated. The ability of wild-type A. hydrophila and the isogenic T3SS-negative Δ ascV mutant was tested on HL-5 agar, pure or diluted, as described in the legend to... In order to test whether under these newly defined conditions other virulence factors would also be in play, we tested a few other well-characterized A. hydrophila mutants in which potential virulence mechanisms distinct from the T3SS were affected. There are several very conserved pathways regulating virulence in many bacteria, in particular the quorum-sensing and the PhoP/PhoQ regulatory systems. Quorum sensing is a mechanism controlling gene expression in response to an expanding bacterial population and is essential for virulence of many gram-negative pathogens. In A. hydrophila, quorum sensing was shown in particular to control the production of exoproteases and biofilm formation. The corresponding ahyI and ahyR mutants were permissive for growth of Dictyostelium. 2C ). The two-component regulatory system involving PhoP and PhoQ transcriptionally controls some of the virulence determinants and is essential for virulence of Yersinia pestis and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Interestingly, an A. hydrophila phoP mutant also exhibited a loss of virulence against Dictyostelium. 2C ). These results suggest that the Dictyostelium host model provides a meaningful assessment of bacterial virulence not restricted to T3SS-dependent cytotoxicity. More experiments will, however, be necessary to determine extensively which virulence traits can be assessed accurately in this Dictyostelium host model. This study demonstrates that Dictyostelium can be used as a simple host model to assess the virulence of distinct Aeromonas species. It also describes an empirical method to adjust conditions in order to set the threshold of this assay for strains with very different growth requirements. This system could allow in the future a systematic analysis of Aeromonas virulence factors. Since Dictyostelium is amenable to genetic analysis, this system might also allow analysis of host resistance mechanisms. 