 Little is known about how the sizes of specific organs and tissues are regulated. To try to understand these mechanisms, we have been using a combination of modelling and experiments to study the simple system Dictyostelium discoideum, which forms approximately 20 000 cell groups. We found that cells secrete a factor, and as the number of cells increases, the concentration of the factor increases. Diffusion calculations indicated that this lets cells sense the local cell density. Computer simulations predicted, and experiments then showed, that this factor decreases cell–cell adhesion and increases random cell motility. In a group, adhesion forces keep cells together, while random motility forces cause cells to pull apart and separate from each other. As the group size increases above a threshold, the factor concentration goes above a threshold and the cells switch from an adhered state to a separated state. This causes excessively large groups to break apart and/or dissipate, creating an upper limit to group size. In this review, we focus on how computer simulations made testable predictions that led the way to understanding the size regulation mechanism mediated by this factor. Keywords: biological clocks, Dictyostelium, size regulation 1. Size regulation The regulation of size is a major issue in developmental and evolutionary biology. Generally, there are two different ways to affect the size of an animal, organ or appendage. One is by controlling the number and size of the cells it contains and the other is by controlling the amount of extracellular matrix and fluid. Recent studies show that size regulation in higher eukaryotes, including Drosophila, mice, cows and Arabidopsis, primarily depends on the control of cell growth and division. In most cases, an increase or reduction in body or organ size is achieved by modifying the levels of growth hormones, growth factors, their receptors or by interfering with their signal transduction pathways. In an extreme case, a mutation in a member of the transforming growth factor-β superfamily results in a 100–200% increase of muscle mass in mice. In mice and Drosophila, mutants with increased size usually contain more cells, not necessarily bigger cells; mutants with a reduction in size contain fewer cells, with or without decreases in cell size. The numerous factors autonomously regulating the size of an organism make it extremely difficult to study size determination mechanisms in complex higher eukaryotes. Therefore, a relatively simple organism such as Dictyostelium discoideum is useful as a model system for this type of study. 2. Dictyostelium discoideum as a model system for size regulation The social amoeba D. discoideum provides an excellent model system to study size regulation. Dictyostelium is a haploid unicellular eukaryote that grows on soil and feeds on bacteria. Upon starvation, a developmental programme is initiated that results in the formation of a multicellular structure that contains, for the laboratory strains that we use, approximately 20 000 cells. Dictyostelium cells use a variety of signals to coordinate development. Even in a small area of soil, some cells will starve before nearby cells starve. It appears to be advantageous for the cells to wait and form a multicellular structure when most of the cells in the area have starved, and to coordinate this the cells signal that they are starving by secreting a glycoprotein called conditioned medium factor. As more and more cells starve, the local CMF concentration passes a threshold level. This allows cells to aggregate using relayed pulses of secreted cAMP as a chemoattractant. First, some cells start emitting cAMP pulses, and when a pulse of cAMP reaches a starving cell, it triggers the cell to relay the signal by emitting a pulse of cAMP. The cAMP waves generated by the cells act as a chemoattractant, and the cells move towards the cAMP signal, forming dendritic aggregation streams. Starving cells also secrete phosphodiesterase, which degrades the extracellular cAMP to bring its concentration back to a basal level in the interval between pulses. The cAMP pulses also regulate the expression of many genes specifically expressed during early development. A rapid cGMP pulse is also generated in response to a cAMP pulse. Figure 1 Aggregation and fruiting bodies of D. discoideum cells. For, the cells were spread on a non-nutrient agar plate, and video microscopy was used to observe the starvation-induced development. For, the cells were grown on an agar plate... After the formation of a hemispherical mound of approximately 2×10 4 cells, the aggregate forms a migrating slug that, if necessary, can crawl towards the soil surface. The slug forms an approximately 1–2 mm tall fruiting body consisting of a spore mass held up off the soil by a thin column of stalk cells. The spores can then be dispersed by the wind, and when a spore lands in a moist environment it cracks open, an amoeba crawls out and hopefully finds bacteria and can start dividing to form a new colony of cells. The purpose of fruiting bodies is thus to disperse spores. When a fruiting body is too small, the spore mass will be too close to the ground for optimal spore dispersal. On the other hand, if a spore mass is too big, it will slide down the stalk or the fruiting body will fall over. Therefore, the formation of a spore mass and stalk of the proper size is of utmost importance. Even though multicellularity in Dictyostelium results from aggregation of a large number of cells rather than division and growth as in metazoans, size regulation mechanisms in all multicellular organisms must address similar conceptual problems: tissue size must be measured, compared with a critical value and adjusted properly. 3. General mechanisms of fruiting body size regulation There seem to be three mechanisms that determine the size of the D. discoideum fruiting body. In a large lawn of starving cells, the lawn will break up into aggregation territories where all the cells in a territory are streaming in towards a common centre. The first mechanism regulates the size of the aggregation territory by regulating the range of the relayed cAMP signals. Changes in aggregation territory size can be observed when the cAMP pulse size is altered. One of the ways to alter the cAMP pulse size is by altering the PDE level. There are two different types of cAMP-specific PDEs in D. discoideum : secreted and membrane-bound forms. High levels of secreted PDE decrease cAMP pulse size, which decreases the signal relay, and the cells then form small aggregation territories and aggregates. Mutants with a defect in a secreted PDE inhibitor also have small cAMP pulses and form small aggregates. The second mechanism that regulates fruiting body size can be observed when cells are forming aggregation streams. If the cell density is high, as aggregation streams flow into an aggregation centre, the streams break into groups, with each group then forming a fruiting body. The stream breakup prevents the formation of excessively large fruiting bodies. Two mutants, smlA − and countin −, provide an insight into how stream breakup is regulated in D. discoideum. Although the aggregation territories formed by these cell lines are essentially the same, a major difference between the parental strain Ax2, smlA − and countin − cells is observed in stream breakup. We found a mutant, which we named smlA because it formed very small fruiting bodies. We found that a factor secreted by smlA − cells could cause parental Ax2 cells to form small fruiting bodies. We purified the factor and found that it was a complex of proteins. The protein complex, named ‘counting factor’, is secreted by parental Ax2 cells at a low to moderate concentration. When the countin gene is disrupted, CF appears to lose bioactivity, and aggregation streams seldom break, and coalesce into huge fruiting bodies. The size of the spore mass of the countin − fruiting body is so large that it often slides down or falls over. The development of this mutant is otherwise normal. The third mechanism acts after groups are formed. Even after CF-mediated stream breakup, if the groups are above a threshold size, they will break into smaller subgroups. This phenomenon is occasionally observed in countin − cells, which suggests that the group breakup mechanism does not require countin and by inference CF. Together, the data suggest the existence of three distinct fruiting body size regulation mechanisms in D. discoideum. 4. Diffusion calculations verified that CF can be used to sense cell number Our working model of how CF regulates stream breakup is that as the number of cells in a stream increases, the concentration of CF will increase, and if there are too many cells in a stream, the associated high levels of CF will signal this fact to the cells. We had observed that cells appear to secrete CF continuously, and a puzzling aspect of this model was the idea that CF concentrations would simply increase with time, so that for a given group or stream size the CF concentration would be different at different times. To help understand this, we did diffusion calculations for cells in a group or stream secreting CF. To our surprise, the diffusion calculations predicted that the CF concentration in the vicinity of cells quickly reaches a steady state, with the amount added by secretion being balanced by the amount diffusing away from the group or stream. In addition, the calculated concentration of CF that is reached when a stream contains more than 2×10 4 cells matched the observed concentration of CF that causes stream breakup. 5. Computer simulations led the way in understanding how CF regulates group size In the phenomenon of stream breakup, a stream of closely packed cells appears to relatively quickly break across the stream, forming a cell-free gap running across the stream. We were baffled by this and could not conceive of a mechanism that could cause this. To investigate what properties of individual cells could determine whether a stream breaks up, and the size of the groups it breaks up into, we wrote a simple computer simulation of cells moving in a stream. The stream was approximately 10 cells wide and several hundred cells long. The individual cells were modelled as points on a grid and could move onto an adjacent grid point if the point was unoccupied. We could then change a variety of cell properties to see if this could cause the model stream to break. The key insight for us came when we started playing with the model and examined the effect of motility and adhesion forces. In the simulation, if the ratio of the random cell motility force F M to the cell–cell adhesion force F A was low, the stream stayed intact. If, however, this ratio was high, the random motility of the cells overcame the cell–cell adhesion and as a result cells would begin to pull away from the stream for a while before returning to the stream by chemotaxis. This effectively caused the stream to dissipate. If the F M / F A ratio then decreased, the dispersed cells would condense. If the stream was sufficiently dissipated, the cells in the simulation did not condense back into an even stream but rather condensed into groups. Altering the timing or extent of the changes in the F M / F A ratio strongly affected the size of the groups that a stream breaks up into. In the simulations, a F M / F A ratio that simply increased with time caused streams to break into groups, but thick streams broke into large groups while thin streams broke into smaller groups. If, however, in the simulations a secreted diffusible factor slightly decreased cell–cell adhesion and/or increased cell motility, thick and thin streams broke into groups of the same size. Our simulation generated groups using a mechanism that is different from the classic Turing mechanism or models that involve different cell types separating from one another. The key testable prediction from our simulations was that CF might regulate cell–cell adhesion and/or cell motility. Figure 2 General outline of computer simulation algorithm, and computer simulation results showing stream breakup. Simulation algorithm for one cell. The first column shows a model of cells in a stream, with each cell represented as a dot. With... The computer simulations suggested that motility and cell–cell adhesion forces play major roles in the breakup of aggregation streams during development, when all the conditions are the same. The cell–cell adhesion of D. discoideum cells increases gradually over time during development. Using the observed increase in cell–cell adhesion during development and the observed probability distribution of the random cell motility, we found that if the initial adhesion force is greater than the motility force, aggregation streams do not fragment and thus form large fruiting bodies. We also found that the timing of the increase of cell–cell adhesion significantly affects group size, and that changing the patterns of cell motility by shifting the cell motility distribution affects group size. More sophisticated models where the cells were not on a grid, and were aggregating using relayed pulses of cAMP, also showed that varying the motility force to adhesion force ratio can cause streams to break up or remain intact. The computer simulations showed that when the ratio of motility force to adhesion force is simply a function of time, thick streams break into large groups and thin streams break into small groups. However, in this model, having the concentration of a diffusible factor secreted by cells regulate cell–cell adhesion and/or cell motility successfully caused both thick and thin streams to break up into similar-sized groups. This result suggested that D. discoideum cells secrete CF to modulate cell–cell adhesion and motility for a more precise regulation of group size. In addition, the simulations predicted that the ratio of cell–cell adhesion and cell motility determines the group size, not cell–cell adhesion or cell motility per se. Finally, a virtual mutant created in simulations which changes the direction of cell motility predicted that D. discoideum cells can regulate group size not only by modulating cell–cell adhesion and cell motility, but also by changing the direction of cell motility. 6. Experiments suggested by the computer simulations verified the predictions of the model In higher eukaryotes, adhesion is required to connect cells together and plays an essential role in overall tissue organization and proper physiological function of the tissue and organ. In addition, regulating adhesion is thought to be an important suppressor of epithelial tumour cell invasiveness and metastasis. In order to form a multicellular structure, proper cell–cell adhesion is required in D. discoideum. Two major types of adhesions can be observed during the development of D. discoideum : EDTA-sensitive and EDTA-resistant adhesion. Early in development, aggregation of D. discoideum can be prevented by adding EDTA. Later, the cells will agglutinate even in the presence of EDTA. EDTA-sensitive adhesion is mediated by glycoprotein24 and EDTA-resistant adhesion by glycoprotein80. The gp80 expression is induced by cAMP pulses and cell–cell contact. The computer simulations predicted that CF might regulate stream breakup. To our surprise and delight, we found that CF indeed regulates stream breakup and group size by regulating adhesion. A high adhesion observed in countin − cells is due to the high expression level of gp24 early in the development. The gp24 expression in smlA − cells is delayed and, moreover, the level of expression is significantly lower. Exogenous administration of CF also reduces cell–cell adhesion significantly, showing that the decreased level of adhesion is, indeed, caused by CF. The smlA − cells also show a delayed pattern in gp80 expression. The gp80 expression level is not significantly altered in countin − compared to Ax2, but blocking gp80 adhesion by adding anti-gp80 antibodies to cells results in the formation of smaller groups. We found that adding anti-gp24 antibodies to streaming cells also causes the formation of smaller groups. These results show that cell–cell adhesion is regulated by CF, and can regulate group size in D. discoideum. The computer simulations also predicted that another way to regulate stream breakup is to regulate the random motility of cells. Dictyostelium discoideum cells depend on myosin and actin for motility. Dictyostelium discoideum cells move by extending a pseudopod, and actin is present in the protruding pseudopod. Normally, myosin II is uniformly distributed throughout the cytoplasm and also forms a cortical ring of polymerized myosin. Upon cAMP stimulation, it depolymerizes at the front of the cell and localizes in the posterior end of migrating cells and in the tip of retracting pseudopods. We found that CF decreases group size by increasing the amount of polymerized actin and decreasing the amount of assembled myosin II, which in turn increases the motility of cells. 7. CF signal transduction We also found that cAMP and cGMP signalling pathways are implicated in the CF-mediated size regulation mechanism. cAMP is known to control motility and regulate the expression of adhesion proteins. cAMP signals are used as chemoattractants, morphogens, hormones and as intracellular messengers. In Dictyostelium, the synthesis of cGMP is triggered by cAMP stimulation. cGMP regulates a wide variety of processes in D. discoideum as a secondary messenger, such as cell motility and cell–cell adhesion. We found that CF upregulates the cAMP-induced cAMP signal while at the same time downregulating the cAMP-induced cGMP signal. In addition, we observed saturable cell surface binding of recombinant countin and CF50, suggesting that there exist cell surface receptors for CF. It thus appears that after binding to its receptor, CF regulates intracellular signalling processes that subsequently regulate key components of the cAMP and cGMP signal transduction pathways. During Dictyostelium aggregation, each pulse of cAMP causes a transient translocation of Akt/protein kinase B to the leading edge of the plasma membrane and a concomitant activation of the kinase activity, which in turn stimulates motility by phosphorylating and activating a kinase that regulates myosin II assembly. The countin − cells, as well as Ax2 cells starved in the presence of anti-countin antibodies, showed a decreased level of cAMP-stimulated Akt/PKB membrane translocation and kinase activity compared with control cells. A one-minute exposure of cells to recombinant countin increased Akt/PKB translocation to membranes and Akt/PKB activity without affecting the total level of Akt/PKB. Together, the data indicated that CF potentiates cAMP-stimulated activation and translocation of Akt/PKB, which then activates PAKa to regulate myosin II heavy chain phosphorylation and assembly, thereby increasing the motility of D. discoideum cells. Garrod & Ashworth showed that Dictyostelium cells grown with a high concentration of glucose formed larger fruiting bodies than control cells. To our surprise, we found that transformants lacking bioactive CF and Ax2 cells with extracellular CF depleted by antibodies have high glucose levels, while transformants oversecreting CF have low glucose levels. The addition of glucose does not change CF secretion, and there is not a significant amount of glucose secreted into conditioned media. Adding as little as 1 mM exogenous glucose negates the effect of high levels of extracellular CF on group size and mimics the effect of depleting CF on glucose levels, cell–cell adhesion, cAMP pulse size, actin polymerization, myosin assembly and motility. The addition of beef heart cAMP-specific PDE to cells, or pulsing cells with cAMP, did not have any effect on internal glucose levels, suggesting that glucose is upstream of cAMP with respect to group size. CF represses internal glucose levels by increasing the K of glucose-6-phosphatase, an enzyme that is associated with microsomes. 8. CF and its components CF is an approximately 450 kDa protein complex that contains prominent bands at approximately 40, 45, 50 and 60 kDa. Countin, CF45, CF50, and CF60, the 40, 45, 50, and 60 kDa components, respectively, regulate group size by breaking up aggregation streams. Disrupting the genes encoding countin, CF45 and CF50 causes cells to secrete almost no detectable CF activity. The streams formed by countin −, cf45-1 − or cf50 − cells do not break up thereby forming huge but few aggregates. Consistent with our model that breakup is determined by the balance of cell–cell adhesion and cell motility, each component of the CF complex modulates cell–cell adhesion and cell motility in different ways to regulate group size. Our current working model on how CF regulates group size is illustrated in figure 3. Figure 3 Our current model showing how CF may regulate glucose-6-phosphatase, glucose, cell–cell adhesion, cell motility and group size. Our working hypothesis is that CF binds to its surface receptor and the signal inhibits an unknown cytosolic protein.... 9. Countin and its homologues Countin is the most well-studied component of the CF complex. The countin gene encodes a 40 kDa protein. Countin has some similarity to amoebapores, polypeptides that form pores in target cell membranes. Recombinant countin has some amoebapore activity at low pH, but no amoebapore activity in the extracellular buffer where it affects group size. Transformants with a disruption of the countin gene cause a decrease in the cAMP-induced cAMP pulse, and a decrease in cAMP-stimulated Akt/PKB membrane translocation and kinase activity, which in turn decrease cell motility. The countin − cells also have increased cell–cell adhesion and myosin polymerization. These cause a net effect of increasing group size in countin − cells. The direct addition of recombinant countin to developing Ax2 cells causes an increase in F-actin polymerization and myosin phosphorylation and a decrease in myosin polymerization. We also found that the effect of countin is partly mediated by repressing internal glucose levels. Dictyostelium discoideum has two proteins, countin2 and countin3, which have sequence similarity to countin. The countin2 shares 40% identity and countin3 has 49% identity to countin. Both countin2 and countin3 seem to be secreted proteins and have peak expression during aggregation and mid-developmental stages, respectively. The countin2 − cells have low levels of gp24 and gp80, and thus have low cell–cell adhesion compared with parental Ax2, whereas countin − cells have higher adhesion due to the increased expression of gp24. Like countin2 − cells, countin3 − cells also have a decreased cell–cell adhesion compared with the parental Ax2 strain, but it is not yet known whether these cells have altered patterns of adhesion proteins. The loss of countin2 or countin3 results in decreased group size. The increased group size of countin − cells was restored close to Ax2 levels when countin − cells were starved with an equal number of countin2 − cells. Together, the data suggest that countin2 and countin3 also play a role in group size regulation by antagonizing countin function, and that both countin2 and countin3 may serve to fine-tune the process of group size regulation. 10. CF50 CF50 is the 50 kDa component of the semi-purified CF complex. CF50 shows some similarity to Entamoeba histolytica lysozyme II precursor, but has a very low lysozyme activity. The cf50 mRNA and CF50 protein are present in both vegetative growth and development, with an increase in the early development stage. Like countin − cells, disruption of the cf50 gene causes large groups to form. However, the developing structures formed by cf50 − cells are more aberrant than those formed by countin − cells. Disruption of the cf50 gene also causes some degradation of secreted countin in the conditioned media, suggesting the role of CF50 may be to protect countin. Like countin − cells, the cf50 − cells also have increased cell–cell adhesion and internal glucose levels and decreased cell motility. Disrupting CF50 affects the differentiation of cells into spores and stalk cells, whereas disrupting countin does not affect this process. While the addition of either recombinant countin or recombinant CF50 to Ax2 cells decreased cAMP-induced cGMP pulses, they had an opposing effect on cAMP-induced cAMP pulses. The addition of recombinant countin potentiates the cAMP-induced cAMP pulse, whereas the addition of recombinant CF50 decreases cAMP pulses. Although countin and CF50 both appear to negatively regulate group size, it seems that countin and CF50 have overlapping but different functions during development. 11. CF45-1 Another component of the CF complex, CF45-1, shares some similarity to E. histolytica lysozyme, although recombinant CF45-1 has no detectable lysozyme activity. CF45-1 shares approximately 67% identity with CF50. Transformants with a disrupted cf45-1 gene form huge groups when cells are grown with bacteria on agar plates. Unlike other transformants with disrupted components of CF complex, cf45-1 − cells sometimes form smaller groups than Ax2 cells when cells are starved on filter pads. At this time, we do not have an explanation for this behaviour. The countin − cells and cf50 − cells accumulate a large amount of extracellular CF45-1 during development. Recombinant CF45-1 reduces group size when added to Ax2 or cf45-1 − cells, but has a very slight effect on cf50 − or countin − cells at the concentration effective on Ax2 or cf45-1 − cells. This indicates that countin and CF50 are necessary for CF45-1 to affect group size. Like countin − and cf50 − cells, cf45-1 − cells also have increased internal glucose levels, slightly increased cell–cell adhesion and significantly decreased cell motility. 12. CF60 CF60 is the fourth component of CF. CF60 has some similarity to acid phosphatases, but recombinant CF60 has a very little or no phosphatase activity. When the cf60 gene was disrupted, no viable transformants were obtained, suggesting that CF60 may have a crucial role in early development. Therefore, attempts were made to knock down cf60 expression using an antisense construct. The introduction of the cf60 antisense vector diminished CF60 levels very slightly, whereas the same vector with different antisense inserts successfully decreased the levels of countin or SmlA, respectively. Transformants oversecreting CF60 formed large numbers of abnormally small groups, suggesting that CF60 plays a role in aggregation stream breakup and group size. Adding recombinant CF60 to Ax2, cf45-1 − and countin − cells decreased group size, while adding recombinant CF60 to cf50 − cells caused no significant effect on group size, indicating that the effect of CF60 on group size requires the presence of CF50. 13. How did CF evolve? Two components of the CF complex have similarities to lysozyme, but they have minimal lysozyme activities. CF60 has similarity to various types of acid phosphatase but the enzyme activity is not readily detectable. Countin has some amoebapore activity, but this activity is not detectable at a normal extracellular pH. The CF complex is thus made up of polypeptides with similarities to proteins that could be toxic to other cells. This then suggests the possibility that the CF complex may have evolved from a secreted defensive mechanism, and that at some point the cells were able to use the fact that sensing the concentration of the complex allowed them to sense the density and thus number of cells in a stream. There exists a factor in mammals which acts analogously to CF. Leptin molecules are expressed and secreted by white adipose tissues in proportion to their triglyceride stores and are detected by the hypothalamus and/or choroid plexus in the brain. When there is more than a threshold value of leptin, the brain sends a signal to reduce food intake and thus fat storage. Mutations in the signal domain of the leptin receptor result in ‘leptin resistance’ and obesity in mice and humans. Even though there is no sequence homology between CF and leptin, it seems as if their function is quite analogous. Both proteins function as secreted signal molecules to detect size, with their levels increasing or decreasing in accordance with body size. In addition, exogenous administration of the proteins seems to affect body size. Together, the data strongly suggest that there may exist a CF-like mechanism in mammals. Combining diffusion calculations, computer simulations and experiments will hopefully provide an insight into how higher eukaryotes regulate tissue and organ size. 