Ammosamides A and B Target Myosin You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Ammosamides A and B Target Myosin ** Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2009; 48: 728. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Angewandte Chemie Author Manuscript HHS Public Access Ammosamides A and B Target Myosin ** Chambers C. Hughes, John B. MacMillan,, and James J. La Clair Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials ammos biol suppl. NIHMS171672-supplement-ammos_biol_suppl.pdf GUID: 10F23F22-4748-4B56-AF9F-45B16FAD7E22 Cytoskeletal proteins, including microfilaments, microtubules, and intermediate filaments, play a pivotal role in the treatment of cancer, as their regulation by small molecules arrests progression through the cell cycle. Marine natural products contain a diversity of molecules that target the cytoskeleton. For instance, the cyclic peptide jasplakinolide induces assembly and stabilization of actin microfilaments. The cytoskeleton is also accessed by other classes of natural products. Several polyketides, including halichondrin B and spongistatin, target microtubule stabilization, while phor-boxazole B employs cytokeratin as a foundation to recruit critical cycle regulators. Our interest focused on deep-sea actinomycetes in an effort to identify metabolites that target other components of the cytoskeleton. The uptake and localization of the previously described ammosamides A and B was first investigated. Though brightly colored, the metabolites lacked sufficient fluorescence to be evaluated at physiologically relevant levels. Using methods developed through collaborative studies, we prepared an affinity probe to investigate these cellular events. Specifically, a highly fluorescent 7-dimethylaminocoumarin-4-acetic acid derivative was chosen, since it lacked toxicity, offered synthetic flexibility, and served both as a fluorescent label and an epitope to a monoclonal antibody. This duality, referred to herein as an immunoaffinity fluorescence probe, was viewed as advantageous by allowing both molecular and cellular studies to be conducted with the same probe. To prepare the IAF probe, ammosamide B was coupled with acid 3 to afford adduct 4 in 10% yield after rigorous HPLC purification. Adduct 4 was the only product obtained in this reaction, and attempts at optimization proved unsuccessful, suggesting that the congested environment of the aromatic amines at C-6 and C-8 in 2 made efficient coupling difficult. As anticipated, adduct 4 contained 1 H and 13 C NMR spectroscopy resonances in accordance with the coupling of fragments 2 and 3. Mass spectral analysis of 4 provided the molecular formula C 25 H 21 ClN 6 O 5. The position of the label at C-8-N was determined by inspection of the NOESY spectrum of 4, as a key NOE correlation between the C-8 amide NH and the C-1a methyl group could be discerned. Scheme 1 Structures of ammosamide A, ammosamide B, 7-dimethylaminocoumarin-4-acetic acid, ammosamide B probe 4 and control dye 5. Probe 4 was prepared by coupling 2 and 3. ROESY and NOESY correlations used in the elucidation... Synthetic alkaloid 4 displayed properties desirable of an ammosamide B probe as it was cytotoxic, fluorescent, and selectively recognized by a monoclonal antibody. Cytotoxicity data collected with HCT-116 cells indicated that 4 maintained an essential proportion of the activity of 1 and 2. The probe contained three absorptions at λ max = 293, 353, 606 nm and fluoresced with an emission at λ max = 461 nm when excited at λ = 353 nm. The affinity of 4 to an antibody was also established, as microequilibrium dialysis indicated that 4 bound to mouse immunoglobulin G, XRI-TF35, with a K d of 1.1 ± 0.2 n m. We then turned to evaluate the uptake of probe 4 in live mammalian cells using fluorescence microscopy. Upon addition of 1 mL of a 50 μ m solution, probe 4 concentrated into HeLa, HCT-116, and PC-3 cells within minutes. Remarkably, the entire fluorescence from this aliquot was taken up from solution and localized within the cell. Titration studies indicated that the limit of this uptake was 0.24 ± 0.03 pmolcell −1, 0.21 ±0.02 pmolcell −1, and 0.27 ± 0.04 pmol cell −1 for HCT-116, HeLa, and PC-3 cells, respectively. Figure 1 Cellular phenotype. a–c) Images from 10 6 cells incubated with 1 mL of 50 μ m probe 4 in DMEM for 15 min. a) HeLa cells. b) HCT-116 cells. c) PC-3 cells. d) HeLa cells in after incubation at 37°C with 5% CO 2 for 12 h. e) Three-colored... Fluorescence microscopy was again employed to detail the intracellular localization of probe 4. In HeLa cells, the probe was observed throughout the cytosol with modest localization apparent within small vesicles. Comparable uptake was observed in HCT-116 cells. In PC-3 cells, the localization of probe 4 appeared less specific, appearing throughout the cytosol. After treatment for 15 min, the fluorescence from probe 4 was retained in cells even after repetitive washing with media, though control dye 5 was completely washed from all three cell lines and remained indistinguishable from untreated cells. Pretreatment of cells with 1 mL of 10 μ m ammosamide A or 10 μ m ammosamide B in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium reduced the uptake of probe 4, leading to images with approximately 10 % of the fluorescence intensity as those observed in Figure 1a–c, thereby supporting the conclusion that 4 is a reliable mimetic of the ammosamides. Attempts to elute 4 from the cells in Figure 1a–c by the addition of 10–100 μ m 1 or 2 failed, leaving cells with at least 90 % retention of their original fluorescence. Finally, the blue fluorescent stain in Figure 1a–c remained after formalin fixation and washing with 95% ethanol. The combination of these observations suggests that the uptake of probe 4 was accompanied by either a very strong noncovalent or covalent interaction. After 12 h of incubation at 37 °C under a 5 % CO 2 atmosphere, the blue fluorescence from probe 4 was vesiculated. This response occurred after a 15 min treatment with probe 4, followed immediately by washing and incubation of the cells in fresh media for 12 h. Confocal microscopy of cells costained with a panel of organelle stains indicated that that the localization occurred in the lysosomes. In particular, the overlap of red fluorescence from the red lysosome stain, LysoTracker Red DND-99, and the blue fluorescence from probe 4 provided compelling evidence in support of this observation. The effect of probe 4 on the cell cycle was next evaluated using fluorescence activated cell sorting analysis. Unsynchronized cells were halted at G1, G2, and during mitosis. Cells synchronized with l -mimosine and treated at G1-phase with probe 4 were halted at the G1/S progression. Cells synchronized with thymidine and treated with probe 4 during S-phase were inhibited during G2 and mitosis. Comparable cell cycle data was also obtained from studies on ammosamide A, indicating that probe 4 provided an accurate representation of the bioactivity. The complexity of this inhibition suggested the involvement of either multiple cell cycle regulators or a regulator that was involved in multiple stages of the cell cycle. Figure 2 Cell cycle response. HCT-116 cells were treated with either 50 μ m control dye 5, probe 4 or ammosamide A in DMEM per 10 6 cells. a) Unsynchronized HCT-116 cells. b) HCT-116 cells synchronized and treated at G0 and... Taking advantage of the IAF tag's dual functionality, probe 4 was also applied to screen lysates of HCT-116 cells for protein targets. Co-immunoprecipitation was conducted from the lysate of 10 8 cells treated with 5 μ m 4 for 12 h. The cells were scraped from the plate, concentrated by centrifugation at 300 rpm at 4°C for 5 min, washed three times with PBS pH 7.2, and lysed in PBS pH 7.2 containing protease inhibitor cocktail by agitation through a 30 gauge needle. The crude lysate was centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C to remove insoluble matter and subjected to spin dialysis on a 9 kDa spin filter to concentrate the lysate to approximately 1 mgmL −1 total protein content. Samples of the resulting lysate were precipitated with Affigel Hz containing 12.5 mgmL −1 of the anti-dye XRI-TF35 mAb. After binding, the resin was washed repetitively with PBS pH 7.2 at 4 °C, and protein was then eluted by treatment with 0.1 m Tris-Cl pH 6.8 containing 5 μ m or 50 μ m 3. Over five repetitions, a band at approximately 220 kDa appeared after eluting the resin with media containing 3 as a vehicle to release bound protein. Western blot analysis with an alkaline phosphatase conjugated anti-mouse polyclonal antibody indicated that this band did not contain fragments of the XRI-TF35 mAb. The band in lane L3 was excised and submitted to LC/MS/MS protein ID analysis, which revealed a protein most similar to those in the myosin family, with 22–28% coverage of the amino acid residues. Figure 3 Co-immunoprecipitation studies. a) A 3–8% Trisacetate SDS-PAGE gel depicting fluorescent bands arising from the co-IP of lysate from 10 8 HCT-116 cells treated with probe 4 and Affigel Hz resin containing 12.5 mg mL −1 of XRI-TF35... The immunoprecipitation experiment was repeated using rabbit skeletal muscle myosin. A fluorescent band at approximately 200 kDa corresponding to the heavy chain of myosin was co-immunoprecipitated from these solutions, employing the same methods used to isolate myosin from HCT-116 cells. In fact, probe 4 was effective at fluorescently labeling this protein with an yield of 35 ± 5% and 82 ± 3% following treatment with 100 μL of 10 μ m 4 and 100 μL of 50 μ m 4 in DMEM for 2 h at room temperature. The yield of this labeling remained within 5% deviation after spin dialysis on a 5 kDa molecular-weight cutoff filter or by microequilibrium dialysis, indicating that probe 4 did not diffuse from the protein. Furthermore, control experimentation with 5 did not return myosin, as determined by fluorescent gel analysis. The fluorescence from 4 was retained in the myosin band after SDS-PAGE gel analysis. Probe 4 appeared to have attached to myosin. Ammosamide A and ammosamide B also stained rabbit muscle myosin as determined by the uptake of absorption at λ max = 580 nm for protein treated with 1 and λ max = 520 nm for protein treated with 2. Combined with the fact that neither dye 3 nor control dye 5 yielded a myosin conjugate, these data suggest that functionality within the ammosamide structure alone was responsible for targeting myosin. Given the role of myosin in cytoskeletal structuring, the effect of 4 on actin and microtubule assembly was explored. HCT-116 cells treated with probe 4 were fibrotic and contained greater than a ten-fold increase in actin filaments near their plasma membrane. Marked microtubule depolymerization, apparent from the formation of aggregates throughout the cell, was observed as well. The combination of these effects could arise from a lack in geometrical assembly of both actin and/or microtubule fragments resulting from the modification of myosin. Histological studies were pursued to evaluate whether binding of probe 4 was restricted to myosin II in skeletal muscle. A procedure was developed that allowed mouse tissue to be stained with 4 under conditions in which unbound materials, such as control 5, could be washed from the tissue. Muscle was indeed a primary target, as evidenced by staining of smooth muscle, skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, and smooth muscle in blood vessels. However, muscle cells were not the only cell type that was stained with 4. High concentrations of 4 were found in epithelial cells, erythro-blasts, adipocytes, nerve cells, dermal cells, as well as in the lamina propria, villi, intestinal crypts, connecting tubules, bronchioles and islets of Langerhans. Figure 4 Histological analysis. A microarray containing select Mus musculus tissues was treated for 4 h with 2 mL of 1 μ m probe 4 in PBS pH 7.2. Images from each tissue section were collected using an identical exposure, thereby allowing the intensity... To summarize, a dual affinity-fluorescent label was used to prepare a single analogue of ammosamide B. This IAF-labeled analogue 4 was used to identify cell uptake and localization of its conjugated natural product, as verified by blocking and control experimentation. Subsequent cell cycle studies and activity assays indicated that probe 4 and the parent ammosamides display comparable bioactivity. A 220 kDa protein from HCT-116 cell lysates was identified by means of co-immunoprecipitation. LC/MS/MS protein analysis suggested that this protein arose from myosin, which was subsequently confirmed by in vitro labeling of an authentic sample of myosin II with probe 4. Further confocal microscopic studies showed that exposure to 4 delivered hyperfragmented actin fibers and unassembled clusters of microtubules. These observations, as well as the translation of 4 over time into lysosomes, were consistent with a loss of myosin function. Histological analyses demonstrated that 4 was not limited to skeletal muscle, indicating that it likely interacts with several of the myosin families. This work has revealed a novel means in which a marine natural product interacts with the cytoskeleton by targeting the motor protein myosin. Recent studies have shown that screening of small-molecule libraries can identify synthetic materials, such as blebbistatin, that display high affinity to select isoforms of myosin II. Using a cocrystal structure of --blebbistatin bound to myosin II, ammosamide A, ammosamide B, and probe 4 docked into the blebbistatin binding pocket. Probe 4 was capable of forming interactions with key residues Tyr261, Ser456, and Gln634 within the --blebbistatin binding pocket. The pendant coumarin label adopted a position comparable to the phenyl residue in --blebbistatin, extending into a channel with the potential to form hydrogen-bonding interactions with Lys 265 and Asp 590. Though probe 4 may fit within the --blebbistatin binding pocket, detailed studies are required to determine the actual mechanism by which the probe binds to and labels myosin. Figure 5 Docking studies. a) A depiction of ammosamide probe 4 docked in Dictyostelium discoideum myosin II. b) The binding of --blebbistatin within the same pocket of Dictyostelium discoideum myosin II. Docking was conducted with... Studies are underway to evaluate the role that the ammosamides play in cell cycle regulation, cytokinesis, and cell migration. Like blebbistatin and its analogues, the ammosamides may serve as tools to probe a variety of processes regulated by myosin. Fluorescent probe 4 itself, which binds to myosin, could find use in certain physiological and chemical studies. In the context of cancer research, the ability to prepare an active fluorescent probe from the ammosamides offers a unique opportunity to visualize the downstream cytoskeletal regulatory events that arise from the modification of myosin. In this way, the suitability of members of the myosin family as chemotherapeutic targets can be further validated. Supplementary Material ammos biol suppl Click here to view. Footnotes Supporting information for this article is available on the WWW under. ** This work was the result of financial support from the US National Cancer Institute. S.P.G. is grateful to the Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia, Portugal, for a postdoc fellowship. The authors thank Sara Kelly for cell culturing, Timothy Foley and Michael D. Burkart for assistance with the production of the XRI-TF35 mAb resin, and Qishan Lin for protein ID analyses. Article information Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 Feb 12. Published in final edited form as: Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2009; 48: 728. doi: 10.1002/anie.200804107 PMCID: PMC2820877 NIHMSID: NIHMS171672 PMID: 19097126 Chambers C. Hughes, * John B. MacMillan, * Susana P. Gaudêncio, * William Fenical, * and James J. La Clair * Chambers C. Hughes * Center for Marine Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California at San Diego 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0204, Fax: 858-534-1318 Find articles by Chambers C. Hughes John B. MacMillan * Center for Marine Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California at San Diego 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0204, Fax: 858-534-1318 Find articles by John B. MacMillan Susana P. Gaudêncio * Center for Marine Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California at San Diego 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0204, Fax: 858-534-1318 Find articles by Susana P. Gaudêncio William Fenical * Center for Marine Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California at San Diego 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0204, Fax: 858-534-1318 Find articles by William Fenical James J. La Clair Xenobe Research Institute, 3371 Adams Avenue, San Diego, CA 92116, gro.ebonex@i Find articles by James J. La Clair * Center for Marine Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California at San Diego 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0204, Fax: 858-534-1318 Xenobe Research Institute, 3371 Adams Avenue, San Diego, CA 92116, gro.ebonex@i William Fenical: ude.dscu@lacinefw Keywords: actinomycetes, cell cycle inhibitors, mitosis, myosin, natural products PMC Copyright notice The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 