 The polyketide DIF-1 induces Dictyostelium amoebae to form stalk cells in culture. To better define its role in normal development, we examined the phenotype of a mutant blocking the first step of DIF-1 synthesis, which lacks both DIF-1 and its biosynthetic intermediate, dM-DIF-1. Slugs of this polyketide synthase mutant are long and thin and rapidly break up, leaving an immotile prespore mass. They have ∼ 30% fewer prestalk cells than their wild-type parent and lack a subset of anterior-like cells, which later form the outer basal disc. This structure is missing from the fruiting body, which perhaps in consequence initiates culmination along the substratum. The lower cup is rudimentary at best and the spore mass, lacking support, slips down the stalk. The dmtA − methyltransferase mutant, blocked in the last step of DIF-1 synthesis, resembles the stlB − mutant but has delayed tip formation and fewer prestalk-O cells. This difference may be due to accumulation of dM-DIF-1 in the dmtA − mutant, since dM-DIF-1 inhibits prestalk-O differentiation. Thus, DIF-1 is required for slug migration and specifies the anterior-like cells forming the basal disc and much of the lower cup; significantly the DIF-1 biosynthetic pathway may supply a second signal - dM-DIF-1. Keywords: Dictyostelium, DIF-1, Polyketide synthase, Basal disc, Lower cup, Slug migration Introduction Developing Dictyostelium cells become partitioned into the prestalk and prespore lineages toward the end of aggregation. There appears to be a single prespore lineage producing the spore cells of the mature fruiting body. But in contrast, several distinct prestalk lineages can be recognized, and prestalk cells produce four discrete structures in the fruiting body: the basal disc, the stalk proper, and the upper and lower cups that cradle the spores. Only the basal disc and stalk consist of mature stalk cells, the upper and lower cup cells remaining amoeboid even in the mature fruiting body. The specification of these diverse cell types involves both cell signaling and intrinsic biases present in the original growing cells and maintained through early development. Prestalk cells form the anterior region of the migrating slug, but are not confined to it: a population of scattered, non-prespore cells also exists in the posterior prespore zone. These anterior-like cells express at least some prestalk markers and stain with the vital dye neutral red. Their function is not well understood, but may include transmitting cyclic-AMP signals through the prespore zone and initiating culmination and, in the fruiting body, they form the lower cup and basal disc. Prestalk and stalk cells can be induced in suitable culture conditions by the chlorinated alkyl phenone DIF-1 hexan-1-one). DIF-1 accumulates in developing cells from the end of aggregation and is released into the medium, but its function in normal development was initially only inferred from its effects in culture. Here, most notably, DIF-1 rapidly induces the expression of a subset of prestalk genes and represses the expression of all tested prespore genes. More definitive information on its role in development would be provided by the phenotype of mutants in which DIF-1 synthesis is specifically blocked. Early work resulted in the isolation of several mutants that produced little DIF, but could still respond to it efficiently. Though these mutants were valuable, their basic lesion remains unknown and their phenotype – arrest at the mound stage of development – is now known to be misleading. A more directed approach to mutant isolation became possible once the biosynthetic pathway for DIF-1 was elucidated. DIF-1 is made from a 12-carbon polyketide, which is successively chlorinated and methylated to give the final molecule. The DmtA methyltransferase carrying out the last step in this pathway was identified and eliminated by gene disruption giving a mutant with little if any detectable DIF-1. This mutant produces aberrant fruiting bodies, but surprisingly these contain mature stalk cells. However, a reduced number of prestalk cells are made, with a specific deficit of the prestalk-O subtype. A serious uncertainty remains over the full ‘DIFless’ phenotype because subsequent work showed that the mutant retained significant amounts of the blocked intermediates in DIF-1 biosynthesis, desmethyl-DIF-1 hexan-1-one), and Cl-THPH hexan-1-one), which are known to have definite stalk-cell inducing activity and might therefore be responsible for inducing at least some of the residual prestalk and stalk cells that do differentiate in the dmtA − mutant. Fig. 1 DIF-1 biosynthetic pathway. The polyketide skeleton of DIF-1 is assembled by the StlB, ‘steely’, polyketide synthase, and then decorated by two successive chlorinations... A second set of mutants in the transcription factors DimA, DimB, and MybE are impaired in their response to DIF-1. All develop aberrantly and share phenotypic features with the dmtA − mutant. However, they differ in their detailed phenotypes, consistent with each gene having additional functions unrelated to DIF-1 signaling or only being responsible for part of the transcriptional response to DIF-1. To better define the role of DIF-1 in normal development, we therefore turned to the stlB polyketide synthase mutant in which DIF-1 biosynthesis is blocked at the start of the pathway, so that no intermediates can accumulate. The Dictyostelium genome contains around 40 PKS genes, each encoding a multi-domain protein of more than 2000 amino acids. StlB has the novel ‘steely’ domain organization, which it shares with only one other distantly related PKS. In these proteins, a chalcone synthase domain is fused to the C-terminus of a multi-domain PKS where, in the case of StlB, it makes the phenolic ring of DIF-1. The chalcone synthase domain of StlA has a different specificity, preferentially making pyrones. It is therefore very likely that StlB is the only source of DIF-1 in the cell and that stlB − cells – already known to make less than 5% of wild-type levels of DIF-1 – actually make none at all. We have analyzed the phenotype of stlB − and related mutants in more detail than previously, thus confirming that DIF-1 is required for slug migration and crucially for the formation of the lower cup and basal disc of the fruiting body. Materials and methods Dictyostelium cell culture and development Dictyostelium discoideum strain Ax2 was maintained in HL-5 medium. LacZ transformants of wild-type background were grown in HL-5 medium containing 10 μg/ml of G418, whereas the medium for the stlB knockout strain, HM1154, contained both blasticidin and G418, and that of the double knockout mutant of dmtA and stlB both blasticidin and hygromycin. Cells were developed on 1.5% agar either unbuffered or with phosphate buffer. The timing of tip formation was determined using cells plated at 1.5 × 10 6 cm − 2 on 1.8% L28 agar containing KK2, 2 mM MgSO 4, and 0.1 mM CaCl 2. Knockout strain and G418 transformants The stlB gene knockout construct was created by the in vitro transposition method as described. G418 transformants were generated by electroporation and selected at 10 μg/ml G418 in HL-5 medium. For the double knockout mutant of dmtA and stlB, a transposable hygromycin resistance cassette was used to create a stlB − knockout vector. Insertion of the transposable hygromycin resistance cassette was confirmed by Bam HI digestion and the insertion site mapped by sequencing. The knockout vector was linearized with Pvu II and transformed by electroporation into HM1030, dmtA null cells. The clones were selected and screened for the disruption of the locus by genomic PCR with various combinations of primers. Whole mount lacZ staining, prespore, and Neutral red staining Exponentially growing cells were harvested and washed with phosphate buffer. The cell suspension was allowed to develop on a sheet of filter paper or nitrocellulose filter placed on 1.5% non-nutrient agar with or without 100 nM DIF-1. LacZ staining was performed as described. Neutral red staining was performed as described with minor modification, that is the cells were stained with 50 μg/ml neutral red for 10 min. The stained cells were developed on non-nutrient agar plate or on filter. Prespore/prestalk cell proportions were determined by staining using an antibody prepared against D. mucoroides spores. Around 20 fully extended first fingers were picked with a micro-needle and disaggregated for 5 min at 22 °C using a pronase/2,3 dimercapto-propanol mix diluted 1:1 with KK2. Cells were then washed, fixed and stained using a fluorescent second antibody. Photographs were taken with a digital camera attached to a stereomicroscope or using a Zeiss photomicroscope. Results DIF-1 biosynthetic mutants The backbone of DIF-1 consists of a 12-carbon polyketide produced by the steely B PKS. Several independent stlB gene disruptants were isolated previously and shown not to produce any detectable DIF-1. Since they had identical phenotypes, one of them, HM1154, was selected for detailed study here. After synthesis by StlB, the DIF-1 polyketide is chlorinated and then methylated to produce DIF-1, with methylation catalyzed by the DmtA methyl transferase. Strains HM1030 and HM1031, the previously described null mutants of dmtA, and a newly created double mutant, in which stlB was disrupted in the HM1030 background, were compared as appropriate. All mutants are in the Ax2 background and all grow normally in axenic medium. The strains used in this study and their genotypes are summarized in Table 1. Table 1 Strains used in this work Morphology PKS null and methyltransferase null strains develop in a very similar way and the differences from wild-type strain give a common DIFless phenotype. Aggregation is similar to wild-type cells, except that methyltransferase null mutant is delayed in tip formation but clear differences are apparent from tip formation onward. The first fingers of both strains are noticeably long and thin and when these fall to the agar, the resulting slugs break up almost immediately, typically 1/3 of the way back. The anterior portion can migrate off at the same rate as a wild-type slug, whereas the posterior part forms a new tip and generally fruits on the spot, showing that slugs can still regulate in the absence of DIF-1. Fig. 2 Slugs formed without DIF-1 break up and regulate. Slugs of the PKS null strain were observed from soon after alighting on the agar surface. Note that though the posterior part of the slug does not move, it still regulates and makes a fruiting body. Scale... Table 2 Tip timing, prestalk cell proportioning and fate in DIF-1 biosynthetic mutants Fruiting is asynchronous and the final fruiting body is strikingly abnormal. Culmination often initiates along the agar surface, and only after some stalk has been laid down, does it turn upward. The spore mass, instead of being at the top of the stalk, frequently slips down it. These defects combined give a very untidy appearance that is also characteristic of the dimA − mutant, which is unable to respond to DIF-1. These gross developmental defects are corrected by developing either the methyltransferase null or PKS null mutants on agar containing 100 nM DIF-1, confirming that they are due to a lack of DIF-1 and not to an unrelated function of the StlB or DmtA proteins. The methyltransferase null strain was previously reported to develop more slowly than wild-type strain and we found a consistent 2 h delay in tip formation compared to wild-type or PKS null strains, which was not rescued by adding DIF-1 to the agar. This was confirmed with strain HM1031, an independent methyltransferase null clone. This might be explained in two ways: either DmtA has an additional function required in aggregation that is unrelated to DIF-1 synthesis, or the accumulation of intermediates in the DIF-1 biosynthetic pathway delays tip formation. To distinguish between these possibilities, we examined the double null mutant, which lacks the biosynthetic intermediates, and found that it forms tips with wild-type timing, suggesting that these intermediates delay tip formation. Prestalk/prespore ratio The expression kinetics of prestalk and spore marker genes ecmA, ecmB, and spiA were similar between wild-type and the PKS null mutant by RT-PCR. The proportion of prestalk cells in the mutants was assessed after disaggregation to single cells using the classical ‘Takeuchi’ antibody against prespore cells. Non-staining cells are defined as prestalk cells, and also include anterior-like cells, which are found in the prespore zone. Fully extended first fingers were hand picked with a micro-needle to ensure that all strains were at the same stage and to avoid complications due to the break up and regulation of slugs once they touched down on the agar. The wild-type strain had a lower proportion of prestalk cells than previously reported for slugs, which may be due to the stage selected or because previously cells that failed to enter developmental structures were also collected or to a strain difference. Both methyltransferase null and PKS null mutants produced only approximately 65% of the wild-type proportion of prestalk cells and did not differ significantly from each other. When the mutants are allowed to develop in a 1:1 mixture, DIF-1 biosynthesis is restored by cross-feeding and the wild-type number of prestalk cells recovered. Prestalk cell subtypes: des-methyl-DIF-1 is a repressor of prestalk-O differentiation To try and pin down a more specific defect in prestalk cell differentiation, reporters derived from the promoter of the prestalk ecmA gene were used. The intact promoter drives lacZ expression in the entire anterior prestalk region, as well as in scattered anterior-like cells in the prespore region. The prestalk region is slightly shorter in the PKS null mutant, consistent with the reduced proportion of prestalk cells and previous findings for the methyltransferase null mutant. This defect is corrected by developing the mutant on DIF-1 agar. Fig. 3 Prestalk subtypes in DIF-1 biosynthetic mutants. ecmAO reporter expressed in the PKS null strain; ecmAO reporter expressed in the PKS null strain with 100 nM DIF-1 added to the agar; ecmAO reporter expressed in the wild-type strain;... The prestalk zone can be divided into an anterior pstA and a posterior pstO region by the expression of lacZ driven by subfragments of the ecmA promotor. As expected from previous work, first fingers produced by PKS null cells have a normal pstA zone. In contrast, expression of the pstO marker is reduced, though some expression definitely remains. We find a slight expression of the pstO marker in a newly made reporter strain derived from the methyltransferase null, HM1030, differing from the original report, but this is clearly less than in the PKS null mutant. This unexpected difference in ecmO expression between the PKS and methyltransferase mutants could again be explained either by a build up of inhibitory biosynthetic intermediates in the methyltransferase mutant cells, or by a second function of DmtA in pstO cell differentiation. To discriminate between these possibilities, we examined the double null mutant, which lacks the biosynthetic intermediates. First fingers from this mutant were found to possess a pstO region resembling the PKS null mutant, suggesting that the blocked polyketide intermediates are actually inhibitory to pstO differentiation. We tested this idea further by developing the double null mutant on agar containing dM-DIF-1 and found that pstO differentiation is clearly inhibited, with an effect apparent at 50 nM dM-DIF-1 and complete inhibition by 100 nM dM-DIF-1. Fig. 4 Des-methyl-DIF-1 represses prestalk-O cell differentiation. Low magnification images of ecmO-lacZ staining of double null mutant cells developed to the early slug stage with additions to the support filter as follows: control, no additions; 10 nM... DIFless slugs lack a specific class of anterior-like cells Anterior-like cells are a heterogeneous class of prestalk cells that populate the prespore region of the slug and can be stained with the vital dye neutral red. Figs. 5 A and B show the typical side view of a wild-type slug stained with neutral red. The prestalk tip region is stained and there is also a notable aggregate of stained cells located in the prespore region adjacent to the substratum. These cells have been followed by time-lapse filming, and will later form the basal disc of the fruiting body. Although PKS null slugs clearly have anterior-like cells, the aggregate adjacent to the substratum is missing, though it can be restored when the cells are developed on 100 nM DIF-1. Furthermore, the mutant slugs are rather flat and the dorsal side is bent. Fig. 5 A class of anterior-like cells is lacking in the PKS null mutant. In the wild-type slugs, an aggregate of neutral red stained cells is located at the base of the prespore zone adjacent to the substratum. This aggregate... Fruiting body morphology: DIF-1 is required for basal disc formation and partially for lower cup formation As the defects already noted in the final PKS null fruiting body are not obviously explained by the reduced number of prestalk cells, we examined the morphology of the fruiting body in more detail. The basal disc supports the stalk and forms from a separate group of anterior-like cells that gather where the base of the stalk will form, and eventually vacuolate. The basal disc is almost entirely absent from the PKS null mutant fruiting bodies and the few that were scored as present were very defective, with the cells not necessarily vacuolated. A defect in basal disc formation was not previously reported in the methyltransferase null mutant fruiting bodies, but in fact it is quite apparent, although not as severe as in PKS null mutant fruiting bodies. Again it seems that this difference may be due to the presence of biosynthetic intermediates in methyltransferase null cells, as the double null mutant resembles the PKS null mutant in having essentially no basal discs. Fig. 6 The fruiting bodies of the PKS null and methyltransferase null mutants lack a basal disc. Whole fruiting body structure of wild-type strain; PKS null mutant; methyltransferase null mutant. The stalk of the PKS null mutant lies partially on... A more detailed examination showed that the PKS null mutant lacks the outer basal disc but retains the inner disc, which forms separately as a swelling from the base of the stalk. We also examined the fruiting bodies of the dimA − and mybE − DIF-insensitive mutants. Plates of mybE - fruiting bodies are very untidy, making them difficult to score, but we could not find any clear basal discs in this mutant. Only 4.5% of dimA − fruiting bodies had a basal disc, compared to 90.4% for the Ax4 parent. The spore mass is supported and capped by two cups of amoeboid cells, the upper and lower cups, which play a crucial role in raising and supporting the spores as they encapsulate and become immotile during culmination. The upper and lower cup cells can be stained with neutral red: the upper cup is clearly present in PKS null mutants, but the lower cup is usually missing, while methyltransferase null mutants show a similar, but less severe effect. We confirmed this using a lacZ marker driven by the ecmB promoter, which stains both the basal disc and lower cup in wild-type fruiting bodies but not in the PKS null mutant. Again DIF-1 restores these structures. Quantitating this for the lower cup, 99% wild-type fruiting bodies had a stained lower cup and this was lacking in 74.7% of PKS null mutant culminants, but only 34.0% of methyltransferase null mutant culminates. Fig. 7 The lower cup is frequently missing in PKS null mutant fruiting bodies. Typical staining pattern of ecmB -lacZ in culminants: PKS null mutant developed without DIF-1; PKS null mutant developed with 100 nM DIF-1 added to the support filter... Discussion The work described in this paper goes some way to describing the full complexity of the ‘DIFless’ mutant phenotype and hence the natural role of DIF-1 in development. It is centered on the phenotype of the PKS null mutant where the first step in DIF-1 biosynthesis is blocked, and supported by the methyltransferase null mutant phenotype, where the last step is blocked. The methyltransferase null mutant has been studied previously but may give a less than complete phenotype because DIF-1 biosynthetic intermediates accumulate, which are active in stalk cell induction assays, and could therefore provide residual DIF activity. DIF-1 and slug migration The lack of DIF-1 does not seem to affect the pacemaker region at the tip of the slug, which guides migration, but somehow prevents the prespore region from responding efficiently, so that slug breaks up almost immediately on contacting the agar. It is unlikely that this is due to a mechanical weakness of the slime sheath, because the extra-cellular matrix proteins ecmA and ecmB are well-expressed in the mutant. More likely, it is due to the reduced efficiency of transmission of cyclic-AMP signals through the prestalk-O or prespore regions of the slug: one might speculate that anterior-like cells are crucial for signal transmission in the prespore region. Since the isolated prespore regions reform a tip, it is also clear that prespore regulation does not depend on DIF-1. DIF-1 is required for proper basal disc and lower cup formation The most striking feature of the PKS null mutant fruiting body is the near complete absence of a basal disc. This is a common feature of DIF-1 signaling mutants also found in dmtA, dimA, and mybE strains. In both PKS and methyltransferase null mutants, the defect was corrected by adding DIF-1 to the agar or by mixing the two mutants together to restore DIF-1 production. The lower cup of cells supporting the spore mass is also reduced or lost in the PKS null mutant, and to a lesser extent in the methyltransferase null mutant fruiting bodies. Thus, formation of the basal disc, and to a considerable extent the lower cup, depends on DIF-1. The basal disc is a morphologically distinct part of the fruiting body, lending it stability. It forms from anterior-like cells in the prespore zone, not from the anterior prestalk zone but the proportion of basal disc cells is regulated in parallel to the stalk proper. Prebasal disc cells become immotile in a migrating slug at an early stage of culmination and act as a second signaling center, the tip being the first, which attracts anterior-like cells to the base of the aggregate. Some of these form the basal disc, and the remainder the lower cup indicating a close relationship between these two structures. In terms of prestalk gene expression, basal disc and lower cup cells strongly express ecmA and ecmB, which are both inducible by DIF-1. The lower cup also expresses a marker gene of unknown function, mrrA, and this is dependent on MybE, which in turn is DIF-1-responsive. In contrast, the cyclic-AMP receptor cAR2 and multi-drug resistance/serine protease homologue TagB, which are not inducible by DIF-1, are not expressed in the basal disc. TagB is expressed in the lower cup, suggesting that this tissue may be heterogeneous in origin. These marker experiments are therefore totally consistent with our finding that DIF-1 is required to induce the basal disc and partially for the lower cup. The PKS null mutant fruiting body often lies with the lower part of its stalk prone on the agar, and frequently the spore mass slips down from the top of the stalk. Culmination of the mutant usually starts horizontally along the agar, and only after some stalk has been laid down does it turn upward, perhaps under the repulsive guidance of ammonia gas. We hypothesize that this behavior is due to the lack of prebasal disc cells, which appear to play a key role in triggering and perhaps orientating culmination. The fallen spore mass is readily explained as due to the lack of an effective lower cup, which together with the upper cup supports the spore mass. Basal discs and related supporters are found in the fruiting bodies of only a minority of Dictyostelid species. So far, DIF-1 is known to be made and metabolized by D. mucoroides, which has a supporter rather than a basal disc, and it will be interesting to discover whether the presence of basal support in other species correlates with DIF-1 production or not. DIF-1, dM-DIF-1, and prestalk cell diversification The number of types of prestalk cell is still debatable: classic studies from the Williams laboratory argue for three types in the anterior of the slug, plus an unknown number of types of anterior-like cells in the posterior. The wealth of gene expression patterns revealed by the new markers produced from microarray and in situ hybridization experiments suggests a much more complex reality. What is certain is that DIF-1 is only required for the induction of a subset of these prestalk cells, and that without DIF-1 there are 30–40% fewer prestalk cells. Our results indicate a specific loss of one class of anterior-like cells and of at least some pstO cells, but we cannot exclude a deficit in other prestalk cell types. Our results unexpectedly suggest that desmethyl-DIF-1 has a role in cell-type proportioning. Genetically, the delayed tip formation by the methyltransferase null mutant and its reduced number of pstO cells compared to the PKS null mutant can be ascribed to a build up of dM-DIF-1, or possibly one of the other biosynthetic intermediates, and we find that dM-DIF-1 inhibits pstO cell differentiation in slugs. The same genetic argument also suggests that dM-DIF-1 can partially induce the anterior-like cells that form the basal disc. Earlier metabolic labeling experiments with 36 Cl − suggest that dM-DIF-1 is roughly equimolar with DIF-1 in pretip mounds, but then drops to barely detectable levels in slugs. It is thus possible that it plays a significant role at least in the mound stage of development. The logic of prestalk cell diversification remains unclear. At one extreme, it might be proposed that each prestalk cell type has its own inducer, and cell type proportions are regulated by a feedback interaction with prespore cells as seen with DIF-1. In this case, the lack of one inducer, such as DIF-1, would result in the lack of a specific cell type, leaving the others unscathed. Or a more limited set of inducers might act in combination to specify a greater number of prestalk cells. In this case, lack of a specific inducer would affect several cell types. It is clear from the present work that the inducer of pstA cells at least lies outside the orbit of DIF-1, its precursors and metabolites, all of which are absent in the PKS null mutant we have studied. The identification of this inducer, which also seems to be a polyketide, is therefore a necessary step toward understanding the patterning in Dictyostelium. 