 Molecular mechanisms ensuring cellular adhesion have been studied in detail in Dictyostelium amoebae, but little is known about the regulation of cellular adhesion in these cells. Here, we show that cellular adhesion is regulated in Dictyostelium, notably by the concentration of a cellular secreted factor accumulating in the medium. This constitutes a quorum-sensing mechanism allowing coordinated regulation of cellular adhesion in a Dictyostelium population. In order to understand the mechanism underlying this regulation, we analyzed the expression of recently identified Dictyostelium adhesion molecules that present features also found in mammalian integrins. sibA and sibC are both expressed in vegetative Dictyostelium cells, but the expression of sibC is repressed strongly in conditions where cellular adhesion decreases. Analysis of sibA and sibC mutant cells further suggests that variations in the expression levels of sibC account largely for changes in cellular adhesion in response to environmental cues. Adhesion of eukaryotic cells is essential for many cellular functions, such as attachment and migration on a substratum, phagocytosis, or establishment of intercellular contacts. It is involved in many complex biological processes, such as multicellular development, immune response, wound healing, or tumor spreading. Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae adhere to a wide range of substrates and can achieve very fast cellular migration and very efficient phagocytosis. They are also amenable to genetic analysis and thus represent a widely used system for analyzing cellular adhesion, migration, and phagocytosis. Many gene products essential for efficient adhesion of Dictyostelium cells to its substrate or to phagocytic particles have been identified by screening libraries of random mutants or by analyzing targeted knockout mutants. Several of these gene products are homologous to genes involved in integrin-dependent adhesion in mammalian cells. Thus, talin and a myosin exhibiting a FERM domain are involved in adhesion of Dictyostelium cells as well as in integrin-dependent adhesion of mammalian cells. More recently, SibA was identified as a transmembrane protein essential for efficient adhesion and present at the surface of Dictyostelium cells. SibA presents features also found in integrin β chains, interacts with talin, and likely represents the functional equivalent of mammalian integrins in Dictyostelium, although its phylogenetic relationship to mammalian integrins remains a matter of speculation. Four close homologs of SibA can be identified in the Dictyostelium genome, the functions of which are unknown. Since all Sib proteins are capable of interacting with talin, it seems likely that they could all play a role in cellular adhesion. Here, we report that cellular adhesion is tightly regulated by growth conditions in vegetative Dictyostelium cells, and we investigated the possibility that this could be the result of changes in the expression of Sib proteins. Our results suggest that variations in cellular adhesion can largely be accounted for by changes in the levels of expression of SibC. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture and cellular assays. Cells were cultured at 21°C in HL5 medium. Unless otherwise specified, they were not allowed to reach a density of more than 10 6 cells/ml. All mutants used here were derived from the parental DH1-10 strain, referred to herein as the wild type for simplicity. The sibA mutants were described previously. The ampA mutant cells, countin mutant cells, smlA mutant cells, cmf mutant cells, cf50 mutant cells, and aprA mutant cells were kind gifts of D. Blumberg and R. Gomer. To create a sibC knockout strain, we obtained from the DictyEnsembl genome server a vector created by recovering, after SpeI digestion of the genomic DNA, a DIV6 vector inserted at a DpnII site within the sibC coding sequence. This vector thus contains the flanking regions of its insertion site in sibC and can be used to create a specific knockout strain. The genomic sequence was excised from this vector by using KpnI and PvuII and subcloned in a blasticidin resistance vector. The resulting vector was linearized with SpeI and used to transfect DH1-10 cells. After blasticidin selection, individual clones were tested by PCR using the following pair of primers: TGTAAAGGTTGCACAAACAGTGG and GTCAGTGAGCGAGGAAGCGG. As described previously, a correct insertion results in a 1,300-bp PCR fragment. We tried repeatedly with no success to create a sibA sibC double knockout strain by using the DictyEnsembl vector described above and uracil selection. This failure may reflect the fact that the sibA sibC double deletion is not viable in Dictyostelium. Irrespective of the conditions under which cells were preincubated, unless otherwise specified, phagocytosis and fluid phase uptake were always measured by incubating a shaken suspension of cells for 20 min at 21°C in fresh HL5 medium containing 0.5 μm-diameter Fluoresbrite YG carboxylate microspheres or 10 μg/ml of Alexa647-labeled dextran. The internalized fluorescence was measured in a fluorescence-activated cell sorter after rinsing the cells twice at 4°C with HL5 medium containing 0.1% sodium azide. The number of internalized latex beads could be deduced from the internalized fluorescence by comparing it to the fluorescence of a single latex bead. To measure phagocytosis of beads in phosphate buffer, the cells were rinsed once with phosphate buffer, phagocytosis was performed in phosphate buffer containing fluorescent latex beads, and then the internalized fluorescence was determined as described above. To obtain conditioned HL5 medium, 2 × 10 6 wild-type cells were implanted in fresh HL5 medium and grown for 24 h. The medium was then collected and filtered. Freezing and storage at −20°C did not affect the properties of conditioned medium. In the experiments described in Fig. ​ Fig.5, 5, the CM was diluted 1:2 in fresh HL5 medium to induce a less stringent inhibition of cellular adhesion. In the recovery experiment presented in Fig. ​ Fig.6, 6, cells were plated in a petri dish in fresh HL5 medium and grown overnight before the experiment. The medium in this experiment was conditioned by the growing cells themselves. FIG. 5. sibA and sibC mutant cells adapt differently to culture conditions. Wild-type and sibA or sibC mutant cells were incubated for 4 h under conditions inducing optimal or nonoptimal adhesion, as described in the legend to Fig. ​ Fig.4, 4, before... FIG. 6. Kinetic analysis of cellular adhesion in wild-type and sibA and sibC mutant cells. Wild-type and sibA or sibC mutant cells were grown overnight in a petri dish, i.e., under nonoptimal conditions for adhesion; cells adhered to the plate and conditioned... To examine cell substrate adhesion, cells were first incubated for 4 h either in suspension in fresh HL5 medium or attached to plastic in a well filled with conditioned HL5 medium. They were then recovered, resuspended in fresh HL5 medium, allowed to attach to a glass coverslip for 10 min, and observed for 15 min by phase-contrast microscopy and interference reflection microscopy, using an Axiovert 100 microscope coupled to a Hamamatsu Photonics camera and Openlab 3.0.6 software. Contact surfaces were determined using the MetaMorph offline software. Real-time PCR. To assess the effect of cell culture conditions, 10 7 cells were incubated for 4 h either adherent to a petri dish in CM or in suspension in fresh HL5 medium. Under the latter condition, the medium was changed every hour to prevent cells from conditioning the medium. Cellular RNAs were extracted using the NucleoSpin RNA II kit. cDNA were synthesized from 1 μg of total RNA by using random hexamers and SuperScript II reverse transcriptase, following the supplier's instructions. Sybr green assays were designed using the program Primer Express version 2.0 with default parameters. Amplicon sequences were aligned against the Dictyostelium genome by BLAST to ensure that they were specific for each gene being tested. Oligonucleotides were obtained from Invitrogen. The efficiency of each design was tested with serial dilutions of cDNA. Oligonucleotide sequences are described in Table ​ Table1. 1. PCR mixtures contained diluted cDNA, 2× Power Sybr green master mix, and 300 nM of forward and reverse primers. PCRs were performed on an SDS 7900HT instrument with the following parameters: 50°C for 2 min, 95°C for 10 min, then 45 cycles of 95°C for 15 s and 60°C for 1 min. Each reaction was performed in three replicates on 384-well plates. Raw threshold cycle values obtained with SDS 2.2 software were imported in Excel and normalization factor and fold changes were calculated using the geNorm method. TABLE 1. Oligonucleotide sequences used for real-time PCR Two reference genes were used to normalize PCRs, with equivalent results : 1 ): the Ig7 gene and actin. RESULTS Regulation of cell adhesion in Dictyostelium. The ability of Dictyostelium cells to adhere to a substrate can be assessed simply by measuring their ability to phagocytose latex beads in a shaken suspension. This property has been instrumental in isolating mutant cells with defects in cellular adhesion, which do not efficiently bind latex beads and consequently fail to phagocytose them. Fluid phase uptake occurs essentially by macropinocytosis in Dictyostelium, a process that involves the actin cytoskeleton in a manner similar to phagocytosis but is independent of cell adhesion. Therefore, when cellular adhesion is specifically affected, uptake of fluid phase is unchanged relative to that of wild-type cells. A combined measurement of phagocytosis and of macropinocytosis is thus a simple and quantitative method to measure variations in cellular adhesion. We noticed repeatedly during our experiments that the efficiency with which Dictyostelium cells performed phagocytosis varied strongly depending on the conditions under which the cells were grown prior to the experiments. In particular, an increase in cellular density correlated with a decrease in phagocytosis. Similarly, we observed that cells that were grown adherent to a surface seemed to phagocytose less efficiently than cells grown in a shaken suspension. While these variations were avoided in previous studies by growing cells under standardized conditions, they suggested that cellular adhesion in Dictyostelium might be regulated by a series of environmental cues. In order to study the regulation of phagocytosis in Dictyostelium, we compared the abilities of wild-type Dictyostelium cells grown under different conditions to phagocytose latex beads. Note that, irrespective of the conditions to which the cells were exposed prior to the test, the phagocytosis test itself was always performed for 20 min in a shaken suspension in fresh HL5 medium. Thus, these experiments can only reveal relatively stable changes in cellular physiology and would not detect rapidly reversible changes. Phagocytosis was strongly decreased in a dense culture of wild-type cells compared to in cells grown under more diluted conditions, 1A ), while the ability to perform macropinocytosis did not diminish. 1B ). These results suggested that cells reaching a high density show a specific defect for adhesion to and phagocytosis of latex beads. In agreement with this interpretation, we observed that phagocytosis of beads performed in phosphate buffer, which relies on a different adhesion machinery, was not affected by growth conditions. FIG. 1. Cell density affects phagocytosis. Wild-type cells were plated at 6 × 10 3, 1.8 × 10 4, 6 × 10 4, or 1.8 × 10 5 cells/ml. Two days later, the cell densities were approximately 10 5, 4 × 10 5, 10... One possible effect of increasing cellular density is that cells might exhaust some nutrients and/or accumulate secreted cellular products in the medium. To examine this possibility, we assessed the effect of exposing cells to CM for 4 hours prior to assessing phagocytosis. Cells incubated in CM phagocytosed significantly less particles than cells incubated in fresh medium. 2A ). More detailed analysis revealed that this was due to the accumulation of an unidentified secreted cellular factor in the CM. We also observed in these experiments that cells grown attached to a substratum phagocytosed less efficiently than cells preincubated in a shaken suspension. 2A ). This effect was additive with the effect of the CM. 2A ). Under all these conditions, macropinocytosis remained essentially unchanged, suggesting that the phagocytosis defect observed reflected a specific decrease in cellular adhesion. 2B ). These results indicate that the ability of cells to perform phagocytosis can vary strongly between optimal conditions and nonoptimal conditions. FIG. 2. Environmental cues regulating Dictyostelium phagocytosis. Dictyostelium cells were incubated for 4 h in 1 ml of either FM or CM. During this period of time, cells were either allowed to attach to a substrate or kept in a... In order to ensure that changes in phagocytosis efficiency were caused by changes in cellular adhesion, we tested cellular adhesion directly on a substrate. For this, cells were preincubated under conditions promoting optimal or minimal phagocytosis; then, they were plated on a glass coverslip, and their adhesion to the substrate was visualized by IRM. Cells preincubated under conditions promoting efficient phagocytosis adhered more efficiently to the substrate than cells incubated under conditions inhibiting phagocytosis. 3 ). This result confirmed that the observed variations in phagocytosis efficiency reflected changes in cellular adhesion. FIG. 3. Changes in phagocytosis reflect modifications in cellular adhesion. Dictyostelium cells were preincubated for 4 h under conditions promoting efficient phagocytosis or under conditions inhibiting it. In order to assess the levels of sib mRNAs, we extracted cellular RNAs from cells preincubated under conditions promoting optimal cellular adhesion or under those inhibiting it, and we determined by quantitative reverse transcription -PCR the number of sib mRNAs. The relative abundance of individual transcripts can be estimated using the number of amplification cycles necessary to obtain half-maximal amplification. These estimated transcript quantities cannot be compared rigorously, since they can depend on the primers used for amplification, but they allow a rough evaluation of the relative abundance of various transcripts, information otherwise lost during the normalization process. In this instance, this comparison was facilitated by the fact that control genes were amplified with very similar efficacies under all conditions used. In cells incubated in FM, amplification of sibA and sibC was very efficient, while it was very inefficient for sibB and sibE, suggesting that only sibA and sibC were expressed abundantly in vegetative cells. 4 ). This was further suggested by analysis of gene expression during multicellular development of starved cells; levels of sibA and sibC mRNAs decreased in developing cells, while expression of sibB and sibE increased. No significant amplification of sibD was seen under any condition. Since both SibA and SibC are expressed in vegetative cells, SibC could, in principle, function as an alternative adhesion molecule, accounting for example for the residual cellular adhesion of sibA knockout cells. FIG. 4. sibC transcription is affected by culture conditions. Ten million cells were incubated for 4 h, either under conditions stimulating cellular adhesion or under conditions where cellular adhesion was inhibited... Only minor variations in the levels of expression of sibA, sibB and sibE were detected in cells incubated in CM. 4 ). On the contrary, the level of sibC mRNA was dramatically reduced under these conditions. 4 ). This observation suggested the possibility that changes in cellular adhesion could be caused by variations in the level of expression of sibC. Modulation of cellular adhesion in sibA and sibC mutant cells. If SibA and SibC both function as adhesion molecules at the surface of vegetative Dictyostelium cells and only SibC expression varies under our experimental conditions, then genetic inactivation of either sibA or sibC should alter cellular adhesion but in a different manner. In sibA knockout cells, cellular adhesion would rely exclusively on SibC and should thus be more strictly dependent on growth conditions. Conversely, in sibC knockout cells, since the levels of SibA are not altered by culture conditions, cellular adhesion should be less sensitive to culture conditions. FIG. 7. Defective adhesion in sibA and sibC mutant cells. Our experiments suggest that SibA and SibC act as redundant adhesion molecules at the cell surface and that the variable levels of expression of sibC participate in the regulation of cell adhesion. Under... To analyze this, we created a sibC knockout strain and compared it to wild-type and sibA knockout cells. We tested the ability of each strain to phagocytose beads after culture under conditions favoring optimal adhesion or nonoptimal adhesion. Note that in these experiments, the CM was diluted two times that used in Fig. ​ Fig.2, 2, accounting for the fact that wild-type cells were still capable of relatively efficient phagocytosis under nonoptimal conditions. These conditions were chosen to facilitate accurate measurement of phagocytosis under nonoptimal conditions and to allow meaningful comparisons between wild-type and mutant cells. We observed that under optimal conditions, sibA mutant cells did not present a strong defect relative to wild-type cells. 5 ). Under nonoptimal conditions, phagocytosis was much more affected in sibA mutant cells than in wild-type cells so that sibA cells phagocytosed 10 times less efficiently than wild-type cells. 5 ). On the contrary, under both conditions, sibC mutant cells phagocytosed approximately two times less efficiently than wild-type cells. The roles of SibA and SibC in adhesion and phagocytosis were also tested by analyzing changes in phagocytosis in cells switched from nonoptimal conditions to optimal conditions. 6 ). For this, cells were seeded in fresh HL5 medium and grown overnight in a petri dish. Under these conditions, the cells were adherent and the medium was conditioned by the growing cells. At time zero, cells were switched to conditions promoting optimal adhesion. We then recorded the adhesion efficiency at different times by testing on an aliquot of cells the phagocytosis of beads. Over a period of 2 hours, the phagocytic ability of wild-type cells increased slightly. sibA mutant cells initially showed a dramatic phagocytic defect, but it was gradually lost. On the contrary, the defect seen in sibC mutant cells was remarkably stable with time. Together, these results indicate that SibA is essential for efficient adhesion under nonoptimal conditions but dispensable under optimal conditions. On the contrary, SibC modulation mostly provides a means to rapidly regulate cellular adhesion. An interpretation of these results is proposed in Fig. ​ Fig.7 7. DISCUSSION In this study, we report that cellular adhesion of Dictyostelium cells is modulated by their growth conditions. Two parameters were shown to modify the ability of cells to adhere to phagocytic particles: cells adhering to a substrate down modulate their adhesion capacities, and a cellular factor secreted in the medium down modulates cellular adhesion. The two effects are additive and can account for huge variations in the adhesion efficiency of cells. Our results strongly suggest that modulation of cellular adhesion is linked largely to changes in the expression of SibC, as proposed in Fig. ​ Fig.7. 7. Accordingly, at high cellular densities, the concentration of the inhibitory secreted factor increases. This triggers a strong decrease in the expression of sibC in all cells, which presumably accounts for the decrease in cell adhesion and phagocytosis. Indeed, analysis of the phenotypes of sibA and sibC knockout strains strongly suggests that they act as redundant cell surface adhesion molecules and that variations of cellular adhesion in our experimental conditions are due largely to changes in the expression level of SibC. However, our results by no means exclude the possibility that other parameters contribute to variations in cellular adhesion. Indeed, a strict interpretation of the simple working model described in Fig. ​ Fig.7 7 would predict that sibC mutant cells should be completely nonresponsive to culture conditions, while our experiments show some variation of cellular adhesion in these cells. The secretion of an adhesion-inhibiting molecule in the medium represents a regulatory mechanism by which individual cells can adjust their physiology as a function of cellular density. Indeed, the concentration of the inhibitory factor in the medium would essentially reflect the concentration of cells. Several similar quorum-sensing mechanisms have previously been identified in Dictyostelium cells, and they coordinate notably the initiation of multicellular development. To our knowledge this is the first characterized mechanism allowing a coordinate regulation of cellular adhesion in vegetative Dictyostelium cells. Conceptually, it is reminiscent of AmpA, a secreted molecule with disintegrin and ornatin domains, which negatively regulates cell-cell interactions during Dictyostelium multicellular development but is not expressed in vegetative cells even at high cellular density. In order to determine if the inhibitor detected in our study could have been identified previously, we assessed its presence in the supernatants of various mutant cells. We still detected an adhesion-inhibiting activity in medium conditioned by ampA mutant cells, countin mutant cells, smlA mutant cells, cmf mutant cells, cf50 mutant cells, and apra mutant cells, suggesting that we have uncovered a new quorum-sensing molecule in Dictyostelium. Unfortunately, we could not purify this factor, and its identity remains to be established. One could envisage several physiological roles for the regulation of adhesion by amoebae in their natural environment. Firstly, enhancing cellular adhesion in cells that are in suspension would allow them to adhere to a substrate to colonize it. Conversely, cells adhering to a specific substrate might adjust the efficiency of adhesion to achieve efficient motility. The regulation of adhesion by the status of the cells described in this study would achieve precisely these effects. Secondly, when cells reach a high density in their natural habitat, it might be ecologically advantageous for at least some of them to detach from the substrate in an attempt to colonize new niches. This could be achieved by the quorum-sensing mechanism described in this study. From another viewpoint, variations in the efficacy of cellular adhesion could introduce a high degree of experimental variability. Our observations indeed suggest that the exact conditions under which cells are incubated in the hours preceding the experiments can modify significantly the results obtained. It would be advisable for all experiments assessing cellular adhesion or related events to ensure that the conditions under which the cells are grown are kept identical from one experiment to another, as well as from one batch of cells to another. When possible, a preincubation in fresh HL5 medium might also increase experimental reproducibility. It is worth noting that in our hands, a significant decrease in adhesion was observed in cells seeded at low density and grown overnight in fresh HL5 medium. 6 ). In other words, unless specific precautions are taken, the medium in which cells are growing contains a concentration of secreted cellular factor sufficient to repress cellular adhesion at least partially. Supplementary Material Click here to view. 