On the swimming of Dictyostelium amoebae You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF On the swimming of Dictyostelium amoebae Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 2; 107: E165–E166. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A v.107; 2010 Nov 2 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay On the swimming of Dictyostelium amoebae Albert J. Bae and Eberhard Bodenschatz Additional article information The conventional mode for amoeboid locomotion is crawling. Barry and Bretscher recently showed that Dictyostelium amoebae are also capable of swimming to chemoattractants. They hypothesized that the mechanism for swimming is intimately related to crawling. When crawling, the cell front bifurcates, and protrusions move backward, relative to the cell. The authors conjecture that floating cells executing these same motions will swim. In this letter, we show that, indeed, the shape changes of a crawling cell are sufficient for swimming. To obtain cell geometries, we flattened developed D. discoideum in an ∼4-μm-tall chamber. Cells were imaged using confocal microscopy for 500 ± 140 s. From these images, cell contours were retrieved. The contour curvature plot shows that, indeed, protrusions move from the cell front to the back. This behavior can also be seen in the 2D, low Reynolds number swimming model of Shapere and Wilczek. Therefore, the crawling motion seems consistent with swimming. Fig. 1. Curvature space-time plots for the contours of a typical crawling cell and the Shapere–Wilczek swimmer. To prevent a loss of detail at the edges, the curvature has been plotted over two contour lengths. Note the herringbone structure—regions... To more rigorously evaluate this claim, we solved the Stokes flow with no-slip boundary conditions at the cell and an open boundary, zero normal stress, at a distance 250 μm away. By calculating the appropriate counterflow, we were able to determine the translational and rotational velocities for the cell if the cell were attached to a substrate. We analyzed the virtual swimming velocity of n = 13 cells and found that, for all cells, the time-averaged component along the direction of polarization was positive. The average directed swimming speed was 1.0 ± 0.5 μm/min. The crawling speed was found to be 12 ± 7 μm/min. The correlation coefficient was r = 0.69, with P = 0.009. Therefore, cells that crawl faster are also faster swimmers. Fig. 2. The crawling and virtual swimming velocities along the direction of polarization. Constrained least squares regression shows that the cells crawl 12 times faster than they swim. In ref. 1, the cells swim at 4.2 μm/min and crawl at 3.8 μm/min. Our measured crawling speed is three times higher, and our virtual swimming speed is four times lower. The difference in speeds can be attributed to the vertical confinement of our cells, because flattened cells migrate faster and have a lower rate of pseudopod production. There may also be a contribution to swimming from a membrane flow, which has not been included here. We expect the result to hold for neutrophils by analog. Footnotes The authors declare no conflict of interest. Article information Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 2; 107: E165–E166. Published online 2010 Oct 4. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1011900107 PMCID: PMC2973909 PMID: 20921382 Albert J. Bae a, b, 1 and Eberhard Bodenschatz a, b, c Albert J. Bae a Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, 37077 Göttingen, Germany; b Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853; and Find articles by Albert J. Bae Eberhard Bodenschatz a Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, 37077 Göttingen, Germany; b Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853; and c Institute for Nonlinear Dynamics, University of Göttingen, 37077 Göttingen, Germany Find articles by Eberhard Bodenschatz a Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, 37077 Göttingen, Germany; b Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853; and c Institute for Nonlinear Dynamics, University of Göttingen, 37077 Göttingen, Germany 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: ude.llenroc@97bja. Author contributions: A.J.B. and E.B. designed research; A.J.B. performed research; and A.J.B. and E.B. wrote the paper. PMC Copyright notice Articles from Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America are provided here courtesy of National Academy of Sciences 