 A highly specific and sensitive mass assay for inositol hexakisphosphate was characterized. This centres around phosphorylating Ins P 6 with ATP using a recombinant Ins P 6 kinase from Giardia lambia, followed by HPLC of the 32 P-labelled products with an internal Ins P 7 standard. This assay was used to quantify Ins P 6 levels in a variety of biological samples. Concentrations of Ins P 6 in rat tissues varied from 10–20 μM, whereas using the same assumption axenic Dictyostelium discoideum cells contained 352±11 μM Ins P 6. HeLa cells were seeded at low density and grown to confluence, at which point they contained Ins P 6 levels per mg of protein similar to rat tissues. This amounted to 1.952±0.117 nmol Ins P 6 per culture dish, despite the cells being grown in serum shown to contain no detectable Ins P 6. These results demonstrate that mammalian cells synthesize all their own Ins P 6. Human blood was analysed, and although the white cell fraction contained Ins P 6 at a concentration comparable with other tissues, in serum and platelet-free plasma no Ins P 6 was detected. Human urine was also examined, and also contained no detectable Ins P 6. These results suggest that dietary studies purporting to measure Ins P 6 at micromolar concentrations in human plasma or urine may not have been quantifying this inositol phosphate. Therefore claims that administrating Ins P 6 in the diet or applying it topically can produce health benefits by increasing extracellular Ins P 6 levels may require reassessment. Keywords: dietary phytate, inositol hexakisphosphate, mass assay, phytate, phytic acid Abbreviations: d.p.m., disintegrations per min; Ipk2, inositol polyphosphate multikinase; TCA, trichloroacetic acid INTRODUCTION Ins P 6 was originally discovered as the major plant phosphate storage compound, hence its alternative name, phytic acid. It was generally assumed to be plant specific until the rekindled interest in inositol phosphates that followed the discovery of Ins P 3 as a second messenger led to the realization that Ins P 6 is also found in animal cells. In the intervening years, the route by which animals synthesize Ins P 6 was controversial, but further studies have led to a likely consensus. Unlike slime moulds and plants, which can synthesize Ins P 6 by stepwise phosphorylation directly from inositol, animals apparently incorporate the first three phosphates while the inositol is in its lipid form. That is, Ins P 3 is formed by phospholipase C action on PtdIns P 2, and Ins P 3 is then phosphorylated up to Ins P 6. The synthesis of Ins P 5 from Ins P 3 is most likely to be mediated by a two-step conversion catalysed by a single enzyme, Ipk2 ; this enzyme is essential for mammalian embryonic survival, though it is not certain yet whether that is because of its activity in converting Ins P 3 into Ins P 5. The alternative route from Ins P 3 to Ins P 5 via Ins P 4, Ins P 3 and Ins- P 4 is probably quantitatively minor, at least in fibroblasts, as suggested by the results of Leyman et al., who showed that mouse embryonic fibroblasts devoid of any Ins P 3 3-kinase isoforms synthesized Ins P 6 at a rate indistinguishable from wild-type fibroblasts; in contrast, fibroblasts derived from Ipk2 knockout mice show a greatly compromised Ins P 6 synthesis. The final step of Ins P 6 synthesis is the 2-phosphorylation of Ins P 5 by Ins P 5 2-kinase, an enzyme which is also essential to viable mammalian development. However, although we now know that mammalian cells can synthesize Ins P 6, how they probably do so, and that it is essential that they do synthesize Ins P 6, the contribution of exogenous Ins P 6 to mammalian Ins P 6 homoeostasis is not so clear. A number of studies have reported increases in Ins P 6 levels in tissue and body fluids resulting from the supply of exogenous Ins P 6, and other work has suggested that Ins P 6 added to cell cultures or tissues can impinge on their physiology or pathology. As a result of these and other studies there are many claims of therapeutic or other beneficial effects of Ins P 6, but its particular strength is a very high sensitivity and applicability to most sample types. Our results provide some new insights into Ins P 6 levels in a number of tissues and address whether mammalian cells can make all their own Ins P 6. Our results also cast doubts on the idea that Ins P 6 is directly taken up into human tissues and cells. EXPERIMENTAL Reagents All chemicals and biochemicals used were of AnalaR grade unless specified otherwise. Ins P 6 was from PerkinElmer. A Ins P 7 standard was prepared by incubating Ins P 6 with Giardia lambia Ins P 6 kinase under the normal assay conditions such that approx. 50% of the Ins P 6 was phosphorylated. The correct nomenclature for the product of Ins P 6 phosphorylation by Ins P 6 kinase is Ins P 5, and we have used this nomenclature when necessary for unambiguity. However, for most of the present paper we have used Ins P 7 as a simpler alternative. Sources of Ins P 5 isomers and scyllo -inositol hexakisphosphate were as described previously. Ins P 6 kinase This is a recombinant enzyme from G. lambia. The sequence of Giardia Ins P 6 kinase was amplified from Giardia genomic DNA, and then cloned into the hexahistidine bacterial vector pET43A, which fuses the solubility-enhancing bacterial protein NusA to the N-terminus of the fusion protein. The enzyme was purifed by talon-bead absorption and imidazole elution as described previously. As discussed previously, there is no obvious reason why a recombinant mammalian Ins P 6 kinase should not be substituted for the Giardia enzyme in this assay, although the high affinity and specificity of the Giardia Ins P 6 kinase does make it particularly suitable in this context. Extraction protocol For solid tissue samples, 20–50 mg of tissue was weighed before homogenizing with a ground glass pestle in 180 μl of water. This was rinsed with 70 μl of water and then transferred to a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube, and 50% TCA added to give a final concentration of 8.3%. After vortexing and standing on ice for 30 min, samples were centrifuged at 13000 g for 15 min in a Microfuge, the supernatant was removed and the pellet was kept for protein determination. The supernatant containing inositol phosphates was washed ten times with water-saturated diethyl ether to remove TCA and finally neutralized with 15 μl of 1:10 saturated ammonia. Tubes were spun in a centrifugal vacuum dryer for 5 min at 35 °C and then for 30 min at 45 °C to remove the ether, before being adjusted to 300 μl with water and the pH checked to ensure it was approx. pH 6.0. For most assays, we took as an aliquot the equivalent of 1 mg of wet weight of starting tissue for the Ins P 6 assay. Ins P 6 mass assay Samples of tissue extract were incubated in a final volume of 300 μl containing the following: 30 μl of 10× assay buffer, 6 μl of 600 μM 2-mercaptoethanol and 10 μl of ATP. After 60 min incubation at 37 °C, 45 μl of 0.1 M glucose and 6 μl of hexokinase were added, and the incubation was continued at 37 °C for another 90 min to convert all the remaining radioactivity into glucose 6-phosphate. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 0.5 ml of 0.4 M ammonium formate/0.1 M formic acid, and the samples were loaded on to 0.5 ml of Dowex Formate in a BioRad Econo Column. Samples were rinsed on to the column with 4 ml of 0.4 M ammonium formate/0.1 M formic acid, and the column was washed with 10 ml of 0.8 M ammonium formate/0.1 M formic acid to remove any remaining glucose 6-phosphate. The higher inositol phosphates were eluted with 2×1 ml of 2.5 M ammonium formate/0.1 M formic acid. They were spiked with 600–2000 d.p.m. of Ins P 7 and loaded on to a Whatman Patisil 10 SAX WCS analytical HPLC column or a similar-sized column packed with the same material by Phenomenex. HPLC The column was eluted at 1 ml/min flow rate with the following programme: solution A, water and solution B, 1.2 M 2 HPO 4 adjusted with phosphoric acid. The profile gives the percentage of solution B added: 0 min, 0%; 5 min, 0%; 30 min, 78%; 75 min, 78%; 76 min, 100%; 81 min, 100%; 82 min, 0%; 102 min, 0%. Fractions were usually collected between 40 and 75 min and were counted in a scintillation counter after adding 10 ml of Ultima-Flo AP ammonium phosphate-tolerant scintillation fluid. The and windows were calibrated using standards to ensure each isotope was counted independently. Protein assay Pellets from the TCA tissue extracts were dissolved in 4 ml of 8 M urea by sonication and vortexing. The majority of material dissolved, but in samples with a high fat content some fat could remain in suspension and may interfere with the assay. Samples were adjusted to a final concentration of 6 M urea, and assayed for protein using the Bio-Rad protein assay, based on a method published previously by Bradford, using BSA in 6 M urea as a protein standard. Blood fractionation Blood was taken from unfasted human volunteers who denied having taken aspirin in the preceding 48 h, mixed with acid citrate dextrose and centrifuged at 200 g for 20 min. The supernatant from this centrifugation was further centrifuged at 2500 g for 20 min, and the resulting supernatant was removed and frozen. The pellet from the first centrifugation was resuspended in 25 ml of resuspension buffer, and then centrifuged. The ‘buffy coat’ on top of the pellet was removed, along with the supernatant. The pellet was resuspended in 25 ml of resuspension buffer and re-centrifuged. The small amount of buffy coat on this pellet was removed, along with the supernatant, and the remaining pellet was then resuspended in 10 ml of resuspension buffer and frozen. The combined supernatants from the two preceding centrifugations were re-centrifuged and resuspended several times as above until no erythrocytes were evident at the bottom of the pellet, at which point the final pellet of mostly white cells was resuspended and frozen. For preparation of serum, fresh blood was left to stand for 4 h, then centrifuged at 3000 g for 20 min, and the supernatant was decanted and frozen. Human experimentation All human fluid samples were taken with informed consent of the donors in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki of the World Medical Association and with the relevant ethical guidelines of the University of Cambridge. The urine sample was taken from an adult male at 10:30 h, 3 h after a meal consisting of a bowl of breakfast cereal and a cup of coffee, with the subject subsequently having free access to water before the sample was taken. RESULTS Characterization of the enzyme and the assay Using Ins P 6, we established that the Giardia kinase has a K m of approx. 60 nM. We used this enzyme to make our own Ins P 7 standard for HPLC. Because the Giardia gene is closely related to Ins P 6 kinases from other eukaryotes, we assumed that its product is 5-Ins P 5, though we have not established its structure. Draskovic et al. have shown that the mammalian Ins P 6 kinases are remarkably specific for the 5-position such that even on prolonged incubation they prefer to add a third phosphate there rather than use another position on the inositol ring. We exposed bona fide 5-Ins P 5 synthesized from Ins P 6 by a mammalian Ins P 6 kinase to the Giardia enzyme for several hours, but detected no formation of any Ins P 8, which suggests that Giardia Ins P 6 kinase is a 5-kinase too, and that extra phosphorylation of 5-Ins P 5 is not a complicating factor in the Ins P 6 assay. In the context of this assay, the crucial point is that we always included a Ins P 7 standard made by the Giardia enzyme in every HPLC run, and collected and counted 1 min samples individually for both isotopes. This leads to a precise co-chromatography of the 3 H-labelled standard and the 32 P-labelled product formed from Ins P 6 in the cell extract ; any sample in which this co-chromatography was not absolutely precise was discarded. Note that in the Figures, the left-hand axis is always the 3 H-labelled Ins P 7 standard, and the right-hand axis, whose scale varies greatly between Figures, is the 32 P counts for the same fractions. Figure 1 HPLC profile of a liver Ins P 6 assay We have discussed elsewhere previously, and discounted, the possibility of Ins P 5 in extracts interfering significantly with the assay. Briefly, Ins P 5 s are poor substrates for the Giardia enzyme, and any PP Ins P 4 products formed elute well before Ins P 7 under our HPLC protocol. Any tri-phosphorylated Ins P 5 would be formed in minute amounts during our 60 min incubations and also would not precisely co-elute with 5-Ins P 5. High background levels in the region of the HPLC profile where PP Ins P 4 elutes prevented us from extensive quantitative analysis of Ins P 5 s as substrates for the Giardia Ins P 6 kinase. However, in one set of experiments with a fresh batch of ATP we were able to gain some results on the approximate efficacy of the six Ins P 5 isomers as substrates. Using 300 nM substrate, the rate of phosphorylation of Ins P 5 isomers relative to Ins P 6 was 2-OH-Ins P 5, 0.5%; 1/3-OH-Ins P 5, 3.2%; 4/6-OH-Ins P 5, 3.0%, and 5-OH-Ins P 5 showed no detectable phosphorylation over background levels. In parallel experiments, scyllo -inositol hexakisphosphate was phosphorylated at 4.7% of the rate of Ins P 6. We explored whether other compounds present in rat tissue extracts might interfere with the assay by ‘spiking’ samples with known quantities of Ins P 6. We found significant levels of interference caused by factors present in the extracts, which varied considerably between tissues, and we attribute this to endogenous ATP diluting our ATP, plus other unknown compounds inhibiting the enzyme. We tried a number of ‘purification’ protocols to separate Ins P 6 from these interfering factors, but this only led to losses of Ins P 6, so, in the end, we decided to adopt a protocol where we performed six assays for any single tissue sample. Three are aliquots of the tissue extract, and three are identical aliquots spiked just before the assay with a known amount of Ins P 6. From the difference between these latter spiked samples and the unspiked samples, we can calculate the d.p.m. of Ins P 7 formed from the known Ins P 6, and comparing this with a 10 pmol standard assayed at the same time quantifies the ‘quenching’ present in each individual tissue sample. This can then be used to correct the Ins P 7 formed in the unquenched samples. This is a rather laborious process, but it does allow us to be confident that each sample is quantitatively assayed. This approach assumes that the quenching is linear with Ins P 6 concentration. Although we believe such linearity is indeed likely, some non-linearity would not seriously compromise the conclusions drawn below other than to lead to an underestimate of Ins P 6 in some tissues listed in Table 1. Whenever possible, we used quantities of cell extract that contained approximately the same amount of Ins P 6 as the added spike, which self-evidently helps to ensure linearity and also simplifies the quantification of the degree of quenching. We tested our extraction protocol by spiking several samples of rat tissues with Ins P 6 before extraction, and found that we recovered 80–85% up to the point of adding the enzyme to the assay. We have corrected all our results for tissue extracts by assuming 80% recovery. Table 1 Ins P 6 content of tissues and fluids Ins P 6 content of rat tissues Figure 1 shows a typical set of single HPLC profiles from an assay performed on an extract from rat liver. The combination of the triplicate samples leads to a level of 4.75 pmol in the sample, which represents 0.84 mg of wet weight of tissue. If we assume an 80% recovery and that there is 0.64 g water/g of tissue, then the complete assay leads to an estimated intracellular level of 11±0.12 μM Ins P 6 in the liver. In a further set of experiments, we then assayed Ins P 6 levels in a selection of rat tissues, and the results are shown in Table 1. We observe no obvious pointers to tissue-specific functions in these results, as the concentrations of Ins P 6 were broadly similar. Perhaps the most relevant observation in that regard is that comparing the two internal tissues in the body exposed to the highest and lowest O 2 levels, there is no large difference. If a principal function of Ins P 6 in vivo was to act as an antioxidant, then one might expect there to be much more Ins P 6 in the lung. In fact, the likelihood of Ins P 6 interacting with iron ions inside cells has been questioned in the light of the discovery that Ins P 6 probably exists mostly as a penta-Mg 2+ salt in vivo. Slime moulds Our calculated concentrations of Ins P 6 in mammalian tissues are overall consistent with the indirect calculations derived from equilibrium labelling of cell cultures with inositol, but nevertheless we sought an independent validation of the assay. One organism for which there is already an accurate mass estimation of Ins P 6 is D. discoideum, which has an estimated intracellular concentration of Ins P 6 assayed by inorganic phosphorous determination as 594 μM. This value is significantly higher than the estimated maximum solubility of the penta-Mg 2+ salt of Ins P 6 proposed to exist in vivo, and may be explained by some form of compartmentalization in acidic vesicles. We therefore assayed pellets of axenal cultures of slime moulds for Ins P 6. The pellets were weighed before extraction, and the mass levels of Ins P 6 measured gave an estimated concentration in the cells of 352±11 μM. The figure of 594 μM used an assumption of 0.4 g of water/g of pelleted cells, which corrects to 371 μM if we use the assumption of 0.64 g of water as determined above. The close agreement between the two sets of data provides an independent validation of the present assay, and confirms the really remarkably high Ins P 6 levels in these organisms. HeLa cells We next assayed Ins P 6 in confluent cultures of HeLa cells. These have apparently higher levels of Ins P 6 than rat tissues; however, the difficulty of accurately measuring cellular wet weight, plus the absence of connective tissue in a cell culture, limit the interpretability of such comparisons. Nevertheless, these experiments provided us with an opportunity to investigate the extent to which mammalian cell lines make all their own Ins P 6. Ins P 6 is reported to be present in human and rat serum or plasma, so it is possible that cultured cells derive some or even all of their Ins P 6 from the calf serum in the medium in which they are grown. In this respect, cell cultures could be argued to be a paradigm for whole animal requirements, as they are with inositol. So we tried to measure Ins P 6 in the calf serum in which the cells were cultured, but could detect none within the limits of the assay. The arguments for these limits are detailed below when we consider human serum, and, using this logic, we estimate that there could be no more than 16 pmol of Ins P 6 in the medium of each 10-cm-diameter dish of cells. Yet a dish of HeLa cells grown to confluence in that medium contained 1.952±0.117 nmol of Ins P 6. The same medium has been used in our laboratory to grow numerous other cell lines for many passages, and so from these results we conclude that cultured mammalian cells make all their own Ins P 6. Human blood The absence of detectable Ins P 6 in calf serum raised the question of whether this is unique to cows, given that human and rat serum are reported to have levels of Ins P 6 from 30–460 nM. So we tested human blood. We fractionated the blood in two ways. As serum would be a direct comparison with the calf serum above, for some samples we let the blood clot and took the supernatant remaining. For comparison with measurements of plasma Ins P 6, and also to gain some information about Ins P 6 in some of the cells in blood, we also collected blood into citrate, and fractionated it into erythrocytes, white cells and platelet-free plasma. The results in Table 1 show that we could detect virtually no Ins P 6 in erythrocytes, which is in itself an interesting comparison with nucleated erythrocytes of amphibians and reptiles, which make high levels of Ins P 5. For the white cell fraction, we only used cellular protein as a standard, and the results suggest that, as one might expect from nucleated mammalian cells, human white cells contain Ins P 6 at a concentration similar to the rat tissues assayed above. However, in both serum and plasma, we again found no significant quantities of Ins P 6. To illustrate this point, Figure 2 shows typical HPLC profiles from assays on human serum samples which were or were not ‘spiked’ with 2.5 pmol of Ins P 6 before extraction; this extra part of the protocol was introduced to ensure that there was no extraction problem with this particular type of preparation. Similar experiments were performed on blood taken from three individuals and all gave similar results. From these profiles, it is difficult to be accurate as to how much Ins P 6 we would have been able to detect. The background in the 32 P channel where Ins P 7 elutes varied between experiments, in general this was lower if the ATP was fresh, as this 32 P background in the HPLC eluate is the ultimate limitation to the sensitivity of the assay. A further complication is that, in that background, there is frequently an apparent minor peak of 32 P that approximately co-chromatographs with Ins P 7, which is present in both blank and human serum samples. 2 B). Nevertheless, if we suggest that 100 d.p.m. above backgound in triplicate samples would have shown up as a distinct and detectable 32 P peak co-incident with Ins P 7 in Figure 2, we can calculate that this would represent no more than 64 fmol of Ins P 6, which leads us to suggest that the plasma sample typified by Figure 2 probably contains less than 0.5 nM Ins P 6. Moreover, during plasma preparation, some damage may have occurred to white cells to release traces of Ins P 6, and, with this in mind, we suggest that in vivo blood probably contains no extracellular Ins P 6 at all. Figure 2 HPLC profile of a human plasma Ins P 6 assay Human urine The other human fluid that has been analysed for Ins P 6 is urine, which is reported to contain 1–3 μM Ins P 6. We therefore measured Ins P 6 in a urine sample from one of our blood donors, again spiking some samples before extraction as well as afterwards to confirm the recovery of Ins P 6. The results revealed that there is no detectable Ins P 6 present. There is more ‘interference’ with the assay from unknown factors present in urine than in plasma or serum, which made the assay less sensitive. But the assays included 50 μl of samples of urine spiked with 2.5 pmol Ins P 6 before extraction, and these showed a clear peak of Ins P 7 product; from a similar semi-quantitative logic to that stated above, we can set a lower limit of Ins P 6 detection in the samples analysed of approx. 250 fmol Ins P 6, the equivalent of 5 nM Ins P 6 in human urine. DISCUSSION The levels of Ins P 6 that we have measured in mammalian tissues are of a similar order to those deduced from equilibrium labelling of cultured cells with inositol and we can conclude that mammalian cells contain tens of μM Ins P 6. If anything, these may be underestimates compromised by a potential non-linearity of the assay when performed on tissue extracts. Moreover, these calculations assume a uniform cytosolic localization, but obviously local concentrations may be higher. This may be most relevant in the context of well defined nuclear functions for this inositol phosphate and its more highly phosphorylated derivatives. Slime moulds, which synthesize very high levels of Ins P 6 very quickly, remain an enigma only deepened by our results. Crucially, we have shown, as far as we know, for the first time, that HeLa cells in culture synthesize all their own Ins P 6. This depends, of course, on the cells having sufficient inositol to make PtdIns P 2, and we suggest that they probably serve as a paradigm for humans. The key to this observation is our discovery that cultured cells have no significant external source of Ins P 6 because there is none detectable in the calf serum in which we grow them. This was the most unexpected finding of our study, and because of its implications for human diet and health, we went on to demonstrate, as thoroughly as the assay allows, that there is also no detectable Ins P 6 in human serum, plasma or urine. These results have important implications for the apparent uptake of exogenous Ins P 6 into cells or tissues, and for the proposed extracellular actions of Ins P 6 in health and disease. To consider cells first, when radiolabelled Ins P 6 is added at micromolar concentrations to mammalian cells in culture it has been reported to be taken up, but the radiolabel is then found as lower inositol phosphates or inositol. Ins P 6 binds strongly to Ca 2+, and its solubility limit in the presence of millimolar levels of Ca 2+ is less than 1 μM. However, the Ca 2+ salt of Ins P 6 has been found to exist naturally, for example, as a component of the extracellular coat around the parasitic cestode Echinococcus granulosus to which it can be transported as nanometre diameter granules. From these observations, it seems that the most plausible mechanism for cellular Ins P 6 uptake is endocytotic absorption, accompanied by dephosphorylation within the cell. Consistent with this argument are results from the classic studies of Eagle et al., in which mammalian cell lines in culture were shown to require approx. 0.3 μM inositol for growth, and this requirement could be fully substituted for by inositol monophosphates, or, with a much lower efficacy, by 1 μM Ins P 6. In this context, we should note that adding Ins P 6 at much higher concentrations to cell cultures will reduce extracellular Ca 2+ to 1 μM or lower, so any subsequent cell death caused by such high concentrations would be simply explained by the very well established requirement for extracellular Ca 2+ in order to maintain mammalian cell function ; in short, the cells die because Ins P 6 removes all the multivalent cations from the culture medium. Our results have an impact most directly on the issue of the uptake of Ins P 6 from the human diet. In a number of studies, Grases et al. have reported that adding Ins P 6 to the diet, or the topical application of Ins P 6 -containing creams, increases the levels of Ins P 6 in plasma, urine and tissues. We have not explored different dietary regimes here, but we would argue that any such difference is not likely to be crucial. Typical levels of Ins P 6 in urine from human subjects kept on an ‘Ins P 6 -free diet’ are 2–3 μM, and in plasma approx. 0.1 μM, whereas reverting to an ‘Ins P 6 -normal diet’ leads to approx. 4-fold increases in these parameters. Yet our estimates of maximal levels of Ins P 6 in human subjects consuming a normal, carnivorous, cereal-containing diet are respectively 200 times and 500 times lower than those reported for human subjects free of exogenous Ins P 6. These maxima are only estimates, and perhaps a more direct demonstration of the inconsistency between results published previously, where spiking serum or urine with Ins P 6 concentrations that are still respectively 4-fold and 40-fold lower than those claimed to be found in these fluids in Ins P 6 -deprived individuals gives robust signals in our assay that are very much higher than those from the unspiked samples. For these reasons, we suggest it is our assay that differs from other studies, not the diet of the donors. Experiments feeding radioactive Ins P 6 to rats showed that it is dephosphorylated within the gut, and that the radiolabel is subsequently found in plasma and urine only as inositol and Ins P, and it has been shown that microbes in the gut contribute the phytase activity responsible for this hydrolysis. As the measurement of Ins P 6 has so far been largely performed by ion-exchange chromatography or HPLC of acid extracts, followed by dephosphorylation of the fractions with phytase and then determination of myo -inositol by MS, it is conceivable that, as also suggested by Shears, the presence of high concentrations of anions in the tissue extracts might compromise inositol phosphate separation protocols characterized in their absence. Thus although our assay is not designed for the quantification of lower inositol phosphates, we can combine our results with the literature published previously to suggest that Ins P 6 is not absorbed directly from the diet, but rather is dephosphorylated before it is taken up; note that the results of Wise and Gilburt confirm that in the absence of any hydrolysis by gut flora, there is no significant Ins P 6 absorption. The inositol and Ins P generated by dephosphorylation will of course not be without effect: inositol is synthesized de novo by animals, but most mammalian tissues do not produce enough of it, and so inositol is a vitamin for which a significant dietary source is Ins P 6 from cereals. Free levels of inositol are high in many mammalian cells, but the K m for PtdIns synthetase is also high, so if raising levels of dietary Ins P 6 leads to increases in the availability of inositol and Ins P to tissues, a mass-action effect might be expected on PtdIns synthetase, perhaps leading to increases in steady-state inositol lipid and phosphate levels. So, if the conclusion of the present study is that we do indeed make all our Ins P 6, and that we derive none directly from our diet, what effect will exogenous Ins P 6, something claimed to be of significant medical benefit, cause? From the arguments in the preceding paragraph, increases may occur in cellular inositide levels, but this effect would be indirect, and high dietary inositol or Ins P would be expected to do the same thing. Any specific and direct actions of exogenous Ins P 6 will be confined to its place of application. Such direct actions would stem from its ability to bind all multivalent cations with high affinity. Binding Fe 3+ gives Ins P 6 unique and potent antioxidant properties, so it is likely that dietary Ins P 6 will alter oxidative processes within the gut. This, and its general chelation of cations to restrict their uptake, probably underlie the reported effects of Ins P 6 in vivo. These ion-binding actions of Ins P 6 can have undesirable consequences, either environmental, such as depleting Fe 3+ or Zn 2+ from some soils, or physiological, by Ins P 6 removing these same essential cations from the human diet to a degree that can be deleterious, depending on the nutritional status of the individual. However, a major thrust of many of the arguments for the benefits of Ins P 6 to humans stems from a combination of two factors: the killing of tumour-cell cultures by applying to them high extracellular levels of Ins P 6, which, we argue above, is of questionable physiological relevance; and an assumption that exogenous Ins P 6 is taken up directly to form a significant extracellular Ins P 6 pool, which bathes some or all our cells and which, because of its unique chemistry, can in turn influence their physiology or pathology. It is this latter assumption that the results in the present study suggest requires reconsideration. 