 STATc becomes tyrosine phosphorylated and accumulates in the nucleus when Dictyostelium cells are exposed to the prestalk cell inducer Differentiation inducing factor 1, or are subjected to hyper-osmotic stress. We show that the protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP3 interacts directly with STATc and that STATc is refractory to activation in PTP3 overexpressing cells. Conversely, overexpression of a dominant inhibitor of PTP3 leads to constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation and ectopic nuclear localisation of STATc. Treatment of cells with DIF-1 or exposure to hyper-osmotic stress induces a decrease in biochemically assayable PTP3 activity and both agents also induce serine-threonine phosphorylation of PTP3. These observations suggest a novel mode of STAT activation, whereby serine-threonine phosphorylation of a cognate protein tyrosine phosphatase results in the inhibition of its activity, shifting the phosphorylation-dephosphorylation equilibrium in favour of phosphorylation. Keywords: STAT, Dictyostelium, Tyrosine phosphatase, Stress, DIF-1 Introduction STAT proteins are important regulators of metazoan gene expression. They are activated when diverse signalling pathways are stimulated, but the various JAK-STAT pathways form the paradigm. In response to the binding of a cytokine to its receptor, an associated tyrosine kinase of the JAK family phosphorylates a STAT at a unique site near its C terminus. This leads, via reciprocal phosphotyrosine:SH2 domain interactions, to dimerisation of the STAT and the STAT dimers accumulate in the nucleus. Dictyostelium cells use STAT signalling to regulate several aspects of their differentiation. Extracellular cAMP signalling activates STATa, which can function as either a repressor or an activator of specific gene expression. DIF-1 is a chlorinated hexaphenone that induces differentiation of one of the prestalk cell subtypes, pstO cells. At the slug stage, STATc is nuclear localised in pstO cells, where it acts to prevent ectopic expression of a marker of pstA cell differentiation. Addition of DIF-1 to cells early in development leads to the premature tyrosine phosphorylation, dimerisation and nuclear accumulation of STATc. Nuclear accumulation of STATc in response to DIF-1 is regulated at the level of nuclear export. In uninduced cells, the effect of a nuclear import signal, located near the N terminus of STATc, is negated by a DIF-1-regulated nuclear export signal located near the centre of the protein. The balance between import and export activity seems to be linked to the homo-dimerisation that is triggered by phosphorylation of STATc on tyrosine residue 922. The mechanism by which STATc becomes tyrosine phosphorylated is unknown. There are no apparent Dictyostelium homologues of the class of tyrosine kinases that modify metazoan STATs. There are, however, an unusually large number of tyrosine kinase-like enzymes that perhaps subsume their function. In mammals, STAT1 and STAT3 are activated by specific cytokines but hyper-osmotic stress is also an activator. Similarly, STATc accumulates in the nucleus rapidly when cells are subjected to hyper-osmotic stress. Tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear localisation of STATc are maintained for at least 30 minutes. By contrast, the fraction of STATc protein that is tyrosine phosphorylated and nuclear localised after DIF-1 treatment reaches a sharp peak at 3-5 minutes of treatment and STATc is then de-phosphorylated and exits the nucleus. One likely explanation for the temporal disparity, between the stress and the DIF-1 responses, is a difference in de-phosphorylation kinetics. In metazoa TC45, the nuclear isoform of the T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase, serves to de-phosphorylate STAT1 and this causes it to re-localise to the cytoplasm. TC-PTP-null cells are also defective in STAT3 de-phosphorylation but TC45 may not be the only phosphatase involved; because the cytosolic form of PTPε de-activates STAT3 when overexpressed. STAT5 activation is normal in TC-PTP-null cells and here there is evidence for direct interaction of STAT5 with the non-receptor tyrosine phosphatases SHP2 and with PTP1B. Thus, the metazoan STATs, which differ significantly in their mechanisms of nuclear accumulation, are also heterogeneous in their modes and sites of de-activation. The two processes are of course intimately inter-related; a nuclear protein must actively shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm if a cytosolic tyrosine phosphatase is to serve to de-activate it. The tyrosine phosphatase that catalyses de-phosphorylation of STATc is unknown. Dictyostelium encodes three PTPs, all of which are predicted to be non-transmembrane proteins. PTP1 and PTP2-null strains show only minor defects in development, but PTP1 and PTP2 overexpressing strains develop aberrantly and contain an altered spectrum of tyrosine phosphorylated proteins. PTP1 is a negative regulator of STATa tyrosine phosphorylation but the failure to detect a direct interaction between the two proteins, using a substrate-trapping form of PTP1, suggests that PTP1 acts indirectly, at some point upstream of STATa. The third phosphatase, PTP3, is divergent in several otherwise highly conserved amino acid residues and the bacterially produced enzyme has a very low intrinsic phosphatase activity. Analysis of a tagged version of the protein suggests it to be partly cytosolic and partly nuclear. In the Ax3-derived strain JH10 there are two copies of the PTP3 gene. It was possible to disrupt one copy, but the second copy was refractory to disruption. Antisense inhibition also proved ineffective. Although PTP3 seems to be essential for cell viability, overexpression studies have yielded some insights into its developmental functions. The PTP3 overexpression strain grows slowly and forms large aggregation streams; in addition, many structures arrest development at the mound stage and there are changes in the tyrosine phosphorylation level of several proteins. In parental cells, hyperosmotic stress, which is generated by the addition of glucose containing growth medium, induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of a 130 kDa protein. This response is greatly attenuated in the PTP3 overexpressing strain and PTP3 itself becomes serine-threonine phosphorylated under these stress-inducing conditions. In order to identify a PTP that downregulates STATc after DIF-1 induction, we analysed mutants for the three Dictyostelium tyrosine phosphatases. We show that PTP3 directly interacts with and dephosphorylates STATc, and that STATc is the 130 kDa stress-responsive tyrosine phosphorylated protein identified by Gamper et al.. We also present evidence that PTP3 has a further, more significant role: as a mediator of the activation of STATc by DIF-1 and osmotic stress. Materials and Methods Cell culture, transformation and development Dictyostelium strain Ax2 was grown axenically and transformed by electroporation. Transformants were selected at 20 μg/ml G418. Clones were isolated by growth on a lawn of bacteria or by plating on 96-well plates. Exponentially growing cells were harvested and washed twice in phosphate buffer. For suspension, development cells were resuspended in KK2 at a concentration of 1×10 7 cells/ml and were shaken for 4 hours at 200 rpm. For late developmental stages cells were plated on 1.5% non-nutrient agar plates. Immunohistochemistry Cells in suspension culture and slugs on agar plates were fixed in absolute methanol for 10 minutes on ice. After rehydration with phosphate-buffered saline, cells and slugs were incubated with anti-STATc antibody, followed by incubation with secondary antibody. Western transfer Proteins were separated on pre-cast 4-12% polyacrylamide gels and electro-transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were blocked with 5% skimmed milk in TBS-Tween for 30 minutes and incubated with primary antibody overnight at 4°C. Signals were detected using an HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse antibody with a chemi-luminescent detection system. The 7H3 STATc antibody and anti-GSK3 antibody were used as control. Substrate-trapping chromatography Substrate trapping chromatography was performed as described previously using GST:PTP3ΔCS. The samples were analysed by western transfer using anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies, a mixture of 4G10 and P-Tyr-100, and the CP22 STATc phospho-specific antibody. Co-immunoprecipitation of PTP3 and STATc Parental Ax2 cells and cells expressing myc-tagged PTP3ΔC649S were starved for 4 hours in suspension culture at a cell density of 1×10 7 cells/ml in KK2. After treatment with DIF-1 or sorbitol, 4 ml of cell suspension was harvested and lysed in 1 ml TT-lysis buffer for 10 minutes on ice. After centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 minutes, the supernatant was collected and incubated with 9E10 anti-myc antibody for 1 hour at 4°C, followed by another 2 hours incubation with Protein G-agarose. Agarose beads were washed four times in TT-lysis buffer, and finally boiled in 1×SDS-sample buffer for 10 minutes. The samples were analysed by western transfer using the 7H3 STATc antibody and the CP22 STATc phospho-specific antibody. PTP3 immunopurification and enzyme assay PTP3 activity was measured with para-nitrophenylphosphate as a substrate and as described by Montalibet et al.. Cells expressing myc:PTP3 were shaken in suspension for 4 hours then treated with the various stimuli for 5 and 15 minutes. Cell suspension was harvested and cells were lysed in 1 ml NP40 lysis buffer on ice for 10 minutes. After centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 minutes, the supernatant was pre-absorbed with Protein G-agarose for 30 minutes at 4°C with gentle rocking. After pre-absorption, anti-myc antibody was added to samples and left for 30 minutes at 4°C. Then samples were incubated with Protein G-agarose for another 1 hour at 4°C. Beads were washed four times in NP40 lysis buffer and then once in HEPES phosphatase buffer. The phosphatase activity on pNPP and amount of immunoprecipitated PTP3 protein was measured in each immunoprecipitated PTP3 sample. The phosphatase reaction was carried out with 15 mM pNPP in HEPES phosphatase buffer at 30°C. After 30 minutes, the reaction was terminated by addition of NaOH and the activity was measured as the OD at 405 nm. The amount of immunoprecipitated PTP3 was quantified from western blotting with anti-myc antibody using NIH image software. The PTP3 activity was normalized against PTP3 protein amount. The data are presented as the activity relative to control samples. Lambda phosphatase treatment and 2D gel electrophoresis Beads bearing immunoprecipitated PTP3 were washed twice in lambda phosphatase buffer, with a tightly DIF-1 and sorbitol-regulated pool functioning to de-phosphorylate STATc. We do not know the precise mechanism whereby phosphorylation acts to inhibit phosphatase activity. In principle it could be the direct result of a conformational change induced by phosphorylation. However, the stress-induced reduction in PTP3 activity is not observed when a reducing agent is included in the extraction buffer. This suggests that the effect of PTP3 phosphorylation is indirect and that it might involve selective oxidation of the phosphorylated forms by reactive oxygen species. ROS, such as H 2 O 2, are believed to be generated in a localized manner when growth factor or antigen receptors bind their ligands. They direct reversible oxidation of the active site cysteine in PTPs, inhibiting their enzymatic activity, and they are known to affect Dictyostelium development. This could explain why the apparent inhibition engendered by DIF-1 and stress is observed only under non-reducing conditions. How does phosphorylation favour oxidation? After cells are exposed to stress PTP3 accumulates in endosome-like structures. If these contain a relatively high concentration of ROS, this might explain why the phosphorylated PTP3 population becomes selectively inactivated. Although it was known that medium-induced stress induces an increase in total serine-threonine phosphorylation of PTP3, we have now shown that phosphorylation of PTP3 also increases after DIF-1 treatment. This is, to our knowledge, the first example of DIF-1-induced serine-threonine phosphorylation. Is this likely to be a more general mechanism for ligand-induced STAT activation? The paradigmatic mechanism of STAT activation is via the regulated activation of a tyrosine kinase family member. There is, to our knowledge, no demonstration of ligand-induced STAT activation mediated via an inhibitory effect on a specific PTP. However, PTP activity is negatively regulated, in other signalling contexts, by ROS. H 2 O 2 activates both STAT1 and STAT3 in murine fibroblasts and rat vascular smooth muscle cells, and STAT3 is activated by H 2 O 2 in human lymphocytes. In two of the studies, activation could in principle be explained by concurrent JAK stimulation. However, the fact that pervanadate was in itself a potent stimulator of STAT activation led two of the groups involved to posit an additional inhibitory effect of H 2 O 2 on an unidentified PTP. Another, more fully documented case of STAT regulation by ROS derives from a study of virus infection. When respiratory syncytial virus infects cells, there is a burst of ROS production and STAT1 and STAT3 are activated. The pathway seems to involve ROS inhibition of PTP activity, but the presumptive PTP target is again unknown. 