 Thermotaxis is the phenomenon where an organism directs its movement toward its preferred temperature. So far, the molecular origin for this precision-sensing behavior remains a puzzle. We propose a model of Escherichia coli thermotaxis and show that the precision-sensing behavior in E. coli thermotaxis can be carried out by the gradient-sensing chemotaxis pathway under two general conditions. First, the thermosensor response to temperature is inverted by its internal adaptation state. For E. coli, chemoreceptor Tar changes from a warm sensor to a cold sensor on increase of its methylation level. Second, temperature directly affects the adaptation kinetics. The adapted activity in E. coli increases with temperature in contrast to the perfect adaptation to chemical stimuli. Given these two conditions, E. coli thermotaxis is achieved by the cryophilic and thermophilic responses for temperature above and below a critical temperature T c, which is encoded by internal pathway parameters. Our model results are supported by both experiments with adaptation-disabled mutants and the recent temperature impulse response measurements for wild-type cells. T c is predicted to decrease with the background attractant concentration. This mechanism for precision sensing in an adaptive gradient-sensing system may apply to other organisms, such as Dictyostelium discoideum and Caenorhabditis elegans. Introduction One of the main challenges in modern biology is to understand the molecular mechanisms for the cellular decision-making processes in response to complex chemical and physical environmental changes. Temperature is one of the most ubiquitous environmental factors that affect the behaviors of living organisms. Bacteria and other higher organisms can sense changes in temperature and move to a preferred temperature, i.e., thermotaxis. Though much progress has been made in characterizing the thermotaxis behaviors in organisms from Escherichia coli to Caenorhabditis elegans, their molecular mechanisms remain largely unknown, partly because of the ubiquity of the temperature effects. For E. coli thermotaxis, it was established by Maeda and Imae and Mizuno and Imae that the thermotactic behavior is governed by the same signaling pathway responsible for E. coli chemotaxis, one of the best-studied signaling systems in biology. Thus, E. coli thermotaxis provides us a rare opportunity to study the mechanism for this important temperature-dependent behavior at the molecular level. For E. coli, the methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein chemoreceptors also serve as the thermosensor. Analogous to ligand binding in chemotaxis, temperature affects the chemoreceptor conformational changes and affects the autophosphorylation rate of the histidine kinase CheA. CheA-P then transfers its phosphate group to the response regulator CheY. CheY-P diffuses within the cytoplasm and binds to the flagellar motor complex, reversing the rotation of flagella from counterclockwise to clockwise, which causes the cell to tumble. The adaptation to persistent stimuli is accomplished by two enzymes: the methylesterase CheB, which on activation through phosphorylation by CheA-P can remove methyl groups from chemoreceptors and decrease their kinase activities; and methyltransferase CheR, which adds methyl groups to chemoreceptors and increases their activities. Despite their commonality, there are significant differences between E. coli thermotaxis and chemotaxis. Unlike chemotaxis, in which increasing attractant concentration always decreases the receptor kinase activity, the response to higher temperature could either suppress or enhance the receptor kinase activity, depending on the receptor methylation level. It was shown in a series of pioneering experiments by Mizuno and Imae and Nishiyama et al. that one of the major chemoreceptors, Tar, switches from warm sensing to cold sensing as the receptor methylation level m increases pass a critical level m c = 2. Behavior-wise, instead of always going up an attractant gradient, i.e., gradient sensing in chemotaxis, the cells seem to migrate to a particular temperature, which requires precision sensing. Recently, several quantitative measurements on thermotaxis have been carried out by using laser heating to study the response of E. coli to controlled spatial and temporal temperature profiles. It was found in Paster and Ryu that the response to a temperature impulse is inversed as the base temperature increases pass certain critical value, in contrast to the response to ligand impulse, where the response is independent of the background ligand concentration. In Salman and Libchaber, it was discovered that E. coli thermotaxis behavior depends strongly on the chemical background and the growth condition of the cells. Taken together, these experimental works raise a set of important questions on thermotaxis. How could a signaling pathway designed for gradient sensing also lead the cell toward a particular temperature ? Where is the preferred temperature encoded in the internal signaling pathway? How does the preferred temperature depend on the external environment? So far, very little theoretical/modeling work has been proposed to address these questions. In this study, we develop a general mathematical description of E. coli thermotaxis by extending a model for chemotaxis to include temperature effects. We identify two temperature effects that are crucial for precision sensing in thermotaxis. First, we find that temperature can strongly affect the way receptor methylation level modulates the receptor kinase activity. Earlier thermotaxis experiments by Mizuno and Imae for cheRcheB mutant can be explained by including a temperature dependent methylation energy in the total free energy governing the receptor kinase activity. Second, we find that temperature can strongly affect the adaptation kinetics. Temperature not only changes the adaptation time, more importantly it directly changes the adapted kinase activity, effectively rendering the temperature adaptation imperfect, in contrast to adaptation to chemical signal, such as aspartate. We show that both of these temperature dependences are needed in understanding the inverted response to temperature changes as the base temperature increases over a critical temperature. Whereas the energetic effects of temperature, specifically the temperature dependence of the methylation free energy, makes the inverted response possible; it is the temperature dependent imperfect adaptation kinetics, i.e., condition 2, that drives the receptors to the higher receptor methylation levels where the inverted response occurs. The dependence of the critical temperature on internal pathway parameters is obtained from our model. We find that the preferred temperature is encoded predominantly in the adaptation part of the pathway. In addition to explaining the inverted responses as seen in the recent impulse response experiments, the observed overshoot in the response for base temperature below the critical temperature also comes out naturally from our model. Our model can also be used to study integration and interference between chemical and thermal stimuli. The critical temperature is predicted to decrease with the background attractant ligand concentration. Finally, we suggest that the general mechanism for precision sensing may provide insights in studying other precision-sensing systems, such as thermotaxis in C. elegans and Dictyostelium. A model for E. coli thermotaxis We develop a E. coli thermotaxis model by including key temperature effects in a general chemotaxis model recently developed by Tu et al.. Briefly, the E. coli thermotaxis signaling pathway is composed of two key parts with two different timescales. Changes of the chemoreceptor activity are fast and can be described by using a quasi-equilibrium approximation. The adaptation kinetics is slower and can be described by an ordinary differential equation governing the receptor methylation level dynamics. Temperature can affect all the biochemical processes including ligand binding, methylation kinetics and kinase activity as illustrated in Fig. 1. The kinase activity of a functional cluster containing N receptor dimers is given by: a = )) −1, where f t is the total free energy difference between the active and inactive state of the functional cluster, which can be written as: f t = N, where m is the average methylation level of the chemoreceptors, T stands for temperature, and represents ligand concentration. f m and f L are the methylation and ligand concentration dependent free energies, both dependent on temperature. All free energies here are expressed in units of the thermal energy K B T, with K B the Boltzmann constant. For the methylation free energy, we can approximate its temperature dependence by linear expansion around a reference temperature T 0: f m ≈ f m + α ≈ E m + α. Figure 1 Illustration of the key temperature effects in chemotaxis pathway. Three major components of the chemotaxis pathway... Following Tu et al., we approximate f m in the above equation by a linear function of m with two positive parameters E m, m 0, both of which could depend on the reference temperature T 0. The function α characterizes the response to temperature for a given receptor methylation level m. It can be different for different species of chemoreceptors, such as Tar and Tsr. The ligand concentration dependent part of the free energy f L can be described by the MWC type model : f L = ln)/)), K i and K a are the dissociation constants of the inactive and active receptors respectively, both of them can depend on temperature. Given the large number of possible combinatory methylation states for the chemoreceptor complex, the average methylation level m can be approximated as a continuum variable. The dynamics for the methylation level m is dictated by the perfect adaptation to ligand concentration and can be written generally by following Tu et al. : d m / d t = F ≈ k R − k B a ≡ − a )/τ m. For simplicity, we have approximated the methylation rate function F by a linear form in a in the above equation, with the steady-state activity and the linear methylation timescale represented by a 0 and τ m, respectively. This linear approximation is equivalent to allowing only inactive receptors to be methylated and only active receptors to be demethylated with the corresponding linear rates k R and k B. These two chemical reaction rates are both temperature dependent, and their ratio can be written as k R / k B = exp, where Δ G RB is the difference between the two activation energies for the methylation and demethylation reactions. Let T 0 be the temperature at which Δ G RB = 0 and, given the relative small range of temperature considered, we can approximate Δ G RB / by linear expansion around T 0 : Δ G RB / ≈ β with a constant β. Therefore, the adapted activity at steady state can be approximated as: a 0 = k R / ≈ 1/)). The methylation timescale τ m can also depend on temperature. We assume it approximately decays exponentially with temperature:τ m ≡ −1 ≈ τ 0 e −T/T m, with constant τ 0 and T m. More complex forms of F, such as those based on Michaelis-Menten kinetics of CheR and CheB-P, can be used, but they do not change the conclusions of this study. From Eq. 6, we see that the adaptation to constant chemical stimuli is perfect, i. e., the steady-state kinase activity a 0 is independent of the ambient ligand concentration as does not affect adaptation kinetics directly. However, a 0 does vary with the background temperature. This imperfect adaptation to temperature comes naturally because temperature directly affects the adaptation kinetics, and the temperature dependences of the methylation and demethylation rates are not the same, i.e., β ≠ 0. Indeed, the increase of a 0 with temperature T is consistent with recent fluorescence resonance energy transfer measurements of the adapted kinase activities at different temperatures. By including temperature effects in a general chemotaxis model, we now have a model for thermotaxis signaling. The details of this thermotaxis model are specified by a few key parameters α, β, and K i,a that describe the temperature effects in methylation free energy, adaptation kinetics and ligand binding respectively. It is difficult to calculate these quantities from first principles. Our model allows us to estimate their forms and values by connecting them with various existing experiments. At present, not enough experimental data are available to uniquely determine all the parameters. To carry out quantitative simulations of our model in this study, we use a reasonable set of parameters m 0 = 1.9, E m = 1, and β = 0.12°C at the reference temperature T 0 = 32°C, chosen by the requirement a 0 = 0.5 and guided by recent FRET experiments, which show a 0 ≈ 0.3 and a 0 ≈ 0.5 ; the pathway parameters N = 6 and C = 0.01 are taken from Mello and Tu and K i = 36 μ M is used at T 0 ; methylation timescale and its temperature dependence are set by τ 0 = 120 s and T m = 10°C. Other choices of parameters have been used without altering the conclusions of this study. Our main focus in this study is to understand the general mechanism for precision sensing independent of the quantitative details. Specifically, by studying the model for E. coli thermotaxis, we aim to uncover the general conditions that make the system capable of detecting a particular temperature by using a pathway known primarily for sensing gradients of external signals. Results Temperature response depends on receptor methylation level: the inverted thermoresponse for chemoreceptor Tar in the cheRcheB mutants The thermosensing ability of E. coli was studied extensively by Imae et al. by using temperature profile controlled by water flow. They used various cheRcheB mutants in which the adaptation process is disabled and the MCP receptors are fixed in different states of modification. They showed that the thermosensing function of the aspartate chemoreceptor Tar is modulated by covalent modification of its four methylation sites. It was found that without posttranslational deamidation Tar has no thermosensing ability, whereas the unmethylated and highly methylated receptors function as warm and cold sensors, respectively. This observed methylation-dependent response to temperature can be described by the coupling term between temperature and the methylation level in our model. Specifically, the α term in the methylation free energy and the form of α determine the kinase response to temperature change for a given receptor methylation level. For Tar, we set α = α 0 with α 0 ≥ 0 as guided by experiments with the crossover methylation level m c being that of the unmodified native receptor with m c = 2. We choose α 0 = 0.3°C in this study. The thermoresponses calculated from our model are shown in Fig. 2 for the warm sensor with m = 1.8 and the cold sensor with m = 2.15 to temperature profile similar to that used in the original experiments. As expected, our mathematical model reproduces the inverted response at high methylation levels, in agreement with previous experiments. Figure 2 Inverted thermoresponse for different cheRcheB mutants with different receptor methylation levels. Responses to the same temperature profile are shown for receptors with different average methylation levels: m = 1.8 < m c and m... Thermotaxis in wt E. coli cells: imperfect adaptation to temperature drives the inverted thermoresponse Adaptation is an essential component for biological sensory system. For E. coli, adaptation to chemical stimulus is highly accurate and this property of perfect adaptation is robust against changes in protein concentrations. The conditions for and the consequences of this perfect adaptation are studied over the past 10 years. It is now understood how such perfect adaptation can maintain high sensitivity for gradient sensing in a wide range of background ligand concentrations. However, thermotaxis operates in a relatively narrow range of temperature. It also differs from gradient sensing in chemotaxis as it is aimed at sensing/determining a particular temperature. In this section, we show that the adapted activity depends on temperature and such imperfect adaptation is essential for precision sensing and the inverted response to temperature increase as observed in the recent thermo-impulse experiments by Paster and Ryu. For a given temperature T, the steady-state Tar methylation level m s can be determined by setting dm / dt = 0 in Eq. 5 : m s = + N E m m 0 )/ + E m )). As shown by Nishiyama et al. experimentally and described mathematically in our model in the last section, receptor Tar switches its response from warm sensing to cold sensing as its methylation level rises beyond a certain threshold value m c. Therefore, the transition temperature T c for warm sensor to cold sensor can be determined by m s = m c, which leads to the expression for the critical temperature T c : T c = T 0 + N E m /β. For T ≤ T c, the cells are warm sensing because steady-state receptor methylation is m s ≤ m c ; therefore, the response to a temperature increase will be a decrease in receptor kinase activity. For T > T c, we have m s > m c ; therefore, the response to a further increase in temperature is an increase in the receptor kinase activity, similar to the response to a chemical repellent. This reversal of response allows the cell to migrate to the preferred temperature T c. Quantitatively, from Eq. 8 and the parameters used in this study, T c ≈ 37°C is consistent with existing experimental observations. Equations 7 and 8 show the conditions for the existence of the inverted response and how the critical temperature is encoded in the pathway. The reversed response as methylation level increases, i.e., the existence of the critical methylation level m c, is necessary but not sufficient for the reversed response to temperature in wt cell. The adaptation kinetics, in particular the imperfect adaptation to temperature, is needed to drive the system to methylation level higher than m c. This is achieved in our model by having a nonzero positive β. If the adaptation to temperature were perfect with β = 0 from Eq. 7 the steady-state methylation would always stay either below or above m c for m 0 < m c or m 0 > m c, respectively. Correspondingly the wt cell would be either warm sensing or cold sensing for all temperatures, thus incapable of precision sensing. According to this mechanism for the inverted response, the critical temperature is encoded mainly in the methylation part of the pathway. In particular, T c depends on how temperature affects the methylation free energy and how the methylation kinetics depends on temperature. In our model with α 0 >0, the critical temperature T c can be either attractive or repulsive depending on the sign of β. For β > 0, i.e., when the adapted activity increases with temperature as we have assumed in this study, the cells are attracted to the critical temperature T c. For β < 0, i.e., if the adapted activity decreases with T, T c becomes repulsive: cells will move away from it. This repulsive thermotaxis behavior seems to be present in Dictyostelium discoideum. Taken together, precision sensing is possible and a critical temperature T c exists only when both conditions α 0 ≠ 0 and β ≠ 0 are satisfied. T c is attractive for α 0 β > 0 and repulsive for α 0 β < 0. A detailed derivation of these precision-sensing conditions, independent of the simplifying linear approximations used in this study is provided in the Supporting Material. The presence and absence of overshoot in temperature impulse response for base temperature below and above T c, respectively We have also studied the response of the wt cells to an impulse signal T = T b + Δ T exp/ τ ) for t ≥ t 0, the same as used in the recent experiments by Paster and Ryu. T b is the base temperature for t < t 0, Δ T > 0 is the temperature jump at t = t 0 =10 s and τ = 12.5 s is the recovery time is shown in Fig. 3 c ). The impulse responses from our model for base temperature below and above the critical temperature T c are shown in Fig. 3, a and b, thick lines. In agreement with the experimental observation made in Paster and Ryu, we find that the response to temperature impulse with T b ≤ T c has an overshoot similar to the impulse response in chemotaxis; but the overshoot is absent for T b > T c. Similar difference in responses to step function change in temperature for T b ≤ T c and T b > T c is shown in Supporting Material and Fig. S1. The simulations in this study are done with only Tar receptor, and we do not expect any qualitative difference in temperature impulse response by also including Tsr receptor in our model. The general effects of Tsr in thermotaxis are discussed later in the Discussion section. Figure 3 The inverted response to a temperature impulse in wild-type cells as the base temperature increases pass a critical temperature T c. The positive response to temperature impulse at T b = 31°C < T c. Activity a... We now explain the presence or absence of the overshoot for temperature impulse by analyzing the methylation kinetics given by Eq. 5 : dm / dt = ) − a )/ τ m. The adapted steady-state kinase activity a 0 ), shown as the dotted line in Fig. 3, a and b, is determined by the instantaneous temperature and follows the same trend as T shown in Fig. 3 c. For impulse signal with low base temperature T b < T c, the activity rapidly decreases below the baseline activity a 0 at the onset of the impulse. This initial decrease in activity leads to the first lobe of the activity response curve, in which methylation level increases quickly according to Eq. 5. However, eventually the methylation level recovers to its initial value as the temperature return to its preimpulse level. Therefore, there exists a time t c, beyond which methylation level start to decrease d m / d t | t>t c < 0. From Eq. 5, we then have a > a 0 ) > a 0 for t > t c. Putting it together with the fact that the kinase activity a drops below a 0 right after the start of the impulse, the existence of the impulse response overshoot for T b < T c becomes evident. On the other hand, for T b > T c, the immediate response to the temperature impulse is the increase of the kinase activity above a 0. Therefore, in the inverted response regime, the kinase activity stays above a 0 for the whole duration of the pulse stimulus and there is no overshoot in kinase response. This direct connection between the inverted response and the overshoot to temperature impulse as shown by our model thus explains the recent impulse response measurements by Paster and Ryu, and the agreement with the experiments further verifies our model. Chemical and thermal signal interference and integration: chemical backgrounds affect thermotaxis As shown in the previous section, imperfect adaptation can induce an inverse of E. coli thermo-impulse response at a particular temperature in the absence of any ligand. We discuss the effects of chemical background on the inverse temperature T c. In steady state, the receptor methylation level can be determined by Eqs. 1–6 : m s = + ln)/))) + β)/)), where is the background attractant ligand concentration. The instantaneous thermo-impulse response of E. coli is determined by adapted methylation level at the background temperature. E. coli responses positively to temperature increase when m < m c and negatively when m > m c. Therefore, the inverse temperature can be determined by setting steady-state m s = m c. From Eq. 9, we obtain the critical temperature and its dependence on the ligand concentration for the case where K i are independent of T : T c = T c − N /β, where T c is the inversion temperature in the absence of ligand, given by Eq. 8. Equation 10 shows that the critical temperature decreases with increasing attractant ligand concentration, as verified by direct simulation of our model shown in Fig. 4. The decrease in T c is caused by the receptor methylation level increases with background attractant concentration. This reduction in the critical temperature in the presence of attractant is one of the predictions of our model, which can be tested experimentally. Figure 4 The dependence of the critical temperature on the background attractant concentration. The critical temperature at different background attractant concentrations. Higher concentration of background attractant level decreases the inversion temperature.... In addition to affecting thermotaxis through shifting receptor methylation level, chemical background can also directly interfere with thermosensing if the ligand/receptor binding affinity depends on temperature. In particular, an increase of the ligand/receptor dissociation constant K i,a with temperature can induce chemotaxis response toward lower temperature region where the normalized attractant concentration / K i for constant ligand background is higher. As a result, the temperature dependence in ligand binding affinity can reduce the inversion temperature if K i,a increases with temperature. This additional change in T c is verified by our numerical simulation as shown in Fig. 4 a, where two critical lines T c separating the warm sensing regime from the cold sensing regime are plotted for the cases with and without temperature dependence of K i,a. Two typical cases of temperature impulse responses in the warm and the cold sensing regime are shown in Fig. 4 b. The signal integration of both ligand concentration and temperature changes can also be studied in our model. Summary and Discussion In this study, we have developed a quantitative model for E. coli thermotaxis by introducing temperature effects in the chemotaxis pathway. By analyzing our model in comparison with existing experiments, a general mechanism for precision sensing in thermotaxis emerges. Although thermotaxis and chemotaxis share the same signaling pathway, their adaptation processes differ significantly, allowing the system to carry out both precision sensing and gradient sensing as illustrated in Fig. 5. Two key differences in the energetic and the kinetic aspects of the adaptation process are identified. First, for gradient sensing, an increase in stimulus strength simply shifts the activation free energy f t as shown in Fig. 5 a. Therefore, an increase of attractant concentration always results in a decrease in activity, regardless of receptor methylation level. However, for precision sensing, the external stimulus can change the dependence of methylation free energy on receptor methylation level m such that f t at different temperatures can cross at a critical methylation level m c. Consequently, the response to a temperature increase is reversed as m increases pass m c. Second, for chemotaxis, adaptation kinetics has no direct dependence on the signal strength. Therefore, the adapted states have nearly the same activity, i.e., perfect adaptation to ligand. For thermotaxis, temperature directly affects the adaptation kinetics. Consequently, the activities of the adapted states depend on temperature, i.e., imperfect adaptation to temperature. This temperature-dependent adaptation kinetics is necessary for precision sensing as it drives the receptors to high methylation level m > m c at T > T c so that the cell becomes cold sensing at high temperature. In general, T can represent other global factors, whereas m describes the corresponding adaptational state of the system. The mechanism for precision sensing of this global factor should apply provided the two conditions identified in this study are met. Figure 5 The comparison between gradient-sensing and precision-sensing mechanisms. For gradient sensing in chemotaxis, increases in ligand concentration simply shift the free energy for kinase activity and result in decreases of activity for... Like Tar receptors, the other major E. coli chemoreceptor Tsr is sensitive to temperature, albeit with a different methylation level dependence. Tsr changes from warm sensor at low methylation levels to being insensitive to temperature changes at high methylation levels. This temperature-dependent behavior of the Tsr receptor can be captured in our model by modifying the methylation temperature coupling coefficient α 2 in the receptor activation free energy for Tsr. For example, we have used a decreasing but positive function of the Tsr methylation level m 2 for α 2 : α 2 = m a e −m 2 /m c with constants m a and m c. The modified model with mixed receptors can then be used to study thermotaxis in combined chemical environments in the presence of both MeAsp and serine. Because of the different thermosensing characteristics of Tar and Tsr, the behaviors of wild-type cells are determined not only by the background attractants, but also by the relative abundance of the two types of major chemoreceptors. Our preliminary modeling results show that under the same ligand concentration background, increasing ratio of the two receptors in the mixed receptor functional cluster can change the cell from warm sensing to cold sensing, consistent with the experiments by Salman and Libchaber. The critical temperature is predicted to decease as Tar/Tsr ratio increases. Further detailed comparison between our model and experimental results for various mutant and wt cells with different Tar/Tsr ratio in different attractant backgrounds will shed light on signal integration in the chemotaxis pathway. Temperature effects are difficult to study because of its ubiquity. Because there is no known feedback from the motor to the chemotaxis signaling pathway, we have focused on temperature effects in the receptor free energy and its methylation kinetics to study the dynamics of the receptor kinase activity in response to temperature changes. However, the downstream reactions and the motor response may also depend on temperature. Some of these temperature effects have to be compensatory for the whole system to function properly. For example, the imperfect adaptation at the kinase activity level, which we find to be crucial to explain the inversed temperature response, needs to be compensated at the motor switch to bring the CheY-P level to the narrow response region of the flagella motor switch. As shown in Eq. 6, CheY-P level increases with temperature, however, the CheY-P concentration K 1/2 for the half maximum flagellar motor response also increases with temperature as observed by Turner et al.. The temperature dependence of the motor bias is at least less sensitive than that of the CheY-P level, and can even be nonmonotonic depending on the details of various temperature dependent factors, such as the CheY-P level, K 1/2, and possibly the steepness of the motor response curve. Quantitatively, motor response measurements at the single cell level for different temperatures are needed to make predictions on the motor response in thermotaxis. Indeed, it would be interesting to understand how the temperature dependence of the different components in the whole pathway coordinates to guarantee the robustness of chemotaxis behavior at different temperatures. Thermotaxis represents a generally desirable function for organisms to search for their preferred environment, i.e., precision sensing. Another well-known example is thermotaxis in C. elegans, where the worm moves toward a preferred temperature set by the temperature at which it was cultured. In E. coli thermotaxis, the search for the preferred temperature is carried out by the same gradient-sensing apparatus used in chemotaxis. The preferred temperature is encoded in the adaptation part of the pathway, such as the concentrations and kinetic rates of the adaptation enzymes. In addition, because of the difference in thermosensing abilities for Tar and Tsr, the preferred temperature is also a function of the Tar/Tsr ratio in E. coli. The E. coli Tar/Tsr ratio has recently been found to depend on how cells are grown; in particular, those harvested at a later stage of the log-phase seem to have a larger Tar/Tsr ratio. Therefore, the preferred temperature in E. coli is also a function of the growth condition. The similarity between the thermotaxis behaviors and the dependence of the preferred temperature on growth condition suggests that there may also be similarity in the underlying mechanism for thermotaxis in these two organisms. It would be interesting to investigate if the way E. coli encodes and searches for its preferred temperature is a common mechanism for precision sensing in different biological systems. Supporting Material Ten equations and two figures are available at. Supporting Material Document S1. Ten Equations and Two Figures: Click here to view. 