 The Dictyostelium discoideum gene gpt1 encodes a protein } XP_638036 with sequence similarity to the α/β subunits of mammalian UDP-GlcNAc:Glycoprotein N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase. We now demonstrate that extracts of D. discoideum clones with mutations in this gene transfer GlcNAc-P from UDP-GlcNAc to mannose residues at less than 5% the wild type value. Further, the lysosomal hydrolases of these mutant clones fail to bind to a cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor affinity column, indicating a lack of methylphosphomannosyl residues on the high mannose oligosaccharides of these proteins. We conclude that the gpt1 gene product catalyzes the initial step in the formation of methylphosphomannosyl residues on D. discoideum lysosomal hydrolases. Keywords: Dictyostelium discoideum, lysosomal hydrolases, methylphosphomannosyl residues, GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase Introduction Previously we established that the lysosomal enzymes of the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum contain mannose 6-phosphate residues on their high mannose oligosaccharides that are diesterfied to methyl groups. We also found that this organism has an active UDP-GlcNAc:Glycoprotein N-Acetylglucosamine-1-Phosphotransferase that transfers GlcNAc-P to mannose residues of high mannose oligosaccharides to form GlcNAc-P-Man diesters. However, the potential role of this transferase in the formation of the methylphosphomannosyl residues was not established. Subsequently, Freeze and coworkers reported that extracts of D. discoideum utilized S-adenosylmethionine as a donor for the transfer of a methyl group to Man-6-P. In contrast, GlcNAc-P-Man was inactive as an acceptor in this assay, presumably due to an inability to convert this substrate to Man-6-P by excision of the GlcNAc. This raised the possibility that a GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase is not involved in the formation of the methylphosphomannosyl residues. In this study we identify the gene that encodes the D. discoideum GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase and show that it is essential for the formation of the methylphosphomannosyl residues present in the lysosomal hydrolases. This allows us to propose a biochemical scheme for the formation of this unusual modification. Material and methods Materials Dictyostelium discoideum strain TL276 and TL277 were from Dr. E.C. Cox. These strains were isolated in a screen for abnormal growth or development of strain A×4 subjected to insertional mutagenesis using DpnII and pBSR1, and we have confirmed a slow growth phenotype in axenic media and morphological differences during development. After digestion of genomic DNA of TL276 with RsaI and religation, sequencing from the T7 promoter element of pBSR1 yielded sequence data indicating insertion at the DpnII site beginning at nt 3189. This corresponds to a predicted interruption of Gpt1 after Asp993 of the primary translation product, within a highly conserved region of the β-subunit. After digestion of genomic DNA of TL277 with EcoRI and religation, sequencing from the T7 promoter yielded sequence indicative of insertion of pBSR1 at the same position. UDP-GlcNAc was purchased from PerkinElmer. α-methylmannoside, QAE-Sephadex, and lysosomal enzyme substrates were from Sigma. The CI-MPR was purified from calf liver and immobilized as previously reported. All other reagents were of the highest quality available and were purchased from Sigma or Fisher. Dictyostelium discoideum lysate preparation Cells were grown in axenic growth medium to 5–10 × 10 6 /ml in shaking flasks. 10 9 cells were collected by centrifugation at 1000 g × 1 min, resuspended in ice-cold TBS, and 10 8 -cell aliquots were centrifuged again. The supernatants were aspirated and cell pellets were frozen at −80°C. 100 μl cell pellets were resuspended in 900 μl PBST and sonicated on ice for 10 sec. The cell lysates were then incubated on ice for 15 min, centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C, and the supernatant fractions collected. The protein concentrations in the supernatants were determined by Bradford assay. The supernatants were used for GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase assay, lysosomal enzyme assays and CI-MPR affinity column analysis. GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase assay The reaction mixture contained 50 mM α-methylmannoside, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM MgCl 2, 10 mM MnCl 2, 2 mM ATP, 75 μM UDP-GlcNAc, 2 mg/ml BSA, and 300 μg D. discoideum cell lysates in a final volume of 50 μl. Incubations were for 1 hour at 37 °C. Reactions were terminated by addition of 1 ml 5 mM EDTA, pH 8.0. The sample was applied to a 1 ml column of QAE-Sephadex equilibrated with 2 mM Tris base. The column was washed with 1 ml 2 mM Tris base 5 times and the GlcNAc-P-α-methylmannoside product eluted with 1 ml 30 mM NaCl in 2 mM Tris base 5 times. The incorporated GlcNAc-P was determined by scintillation counting following addition of 10 ml EcoLite scintillation fluid. The GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase activity was expressed as picomoles of GlcNAc-1-P transferred per hour per mg protein. Reactions incubated in the absence of α-methylmannoside served as the background values and were subtracted from the complete reactions. Lysosomal enzyme assays Lysosomal hydrolase activities were determined by fluorometric enzyme assays as described previously. In brief, samples were incubated with 4-methylumbelliferyl-coupled specific substrates in a 50 mM citrate buffer containing 0.5% Triton X-100, pH 4.5, at 37°C. α-Mannosidase was assayed with 5 mM 4-methylumbelliferyl α-D-mannopyranoside, β-Galactosidase was assayed with 5 mM 4-methylumbelliferyl β –D–galactopyranoside, and β-hexosaminidase was with 1 mM 4-methylumbelliferyl N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminide. Reactions were stopped by addition of 1 ml 0.1 M glycine-NaOH solution, pH 10.3, and the fluorescence was read at 495 nm. CI-MPR Affinity Chromatography D. discoideum cell lysates were diluted in CI-MPR column buffer to a total volume of 1 ml and loaded on a CI-MPR affinity column prepared as described previously. The columns were washed with 7 ml of column buffer and then eluted with 5 ml of column buffer containing 10 mM Glucose 6-phosphate, and finally with 5 ml of column buffer containing 10 mM Man-6-P. One ml fractions were collected and assayed for lysosomal enzyme activity as described above. Results Identification of the gene encoding GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase in D. discoideum A blast search of D. discoideum genome sequences identified a hypothetical protein of 1238 amino acids, of which 335 are identical to those present in the α/β subunits of the human GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. The α/β subunits of the human enzyme are encoded by a single gene that produces a precursor protein that undergoes a proteolytic clip to generate the α and β subunits. The holoenzyme is an α 2 β 2 γ 2 hexomer with the γ subunits encoded by a separate gene. Interestingly, we were unable to identify a gene homologous to the γ gene in the D. discoideum genome. Fig. 1 shows a schematic view of the human α/β subunits. The α subunit contains three regions that are shared with other proteins, the bacterial capsule biosynthesis protein-like domain, the two Notch repeats, and the DMAP binding domain. The first domain is present in a number of proteins postulated to be glycosyltransferases that mediate capsule formation in bacteria and fungi. The DMAP binding domain has been proposed to be a protein-protein interacting domain. The D. discoideum gene exhibits strong identity to the bacterial capsule biosynthesis protein-like domain and the Notch repeat domain of the human α subunit. It lacks the DMAP binding domain, which is replaced by a non-conserved sequence with low complexity. Its C-terminal region has 31% identity with the β subunit. Fig. 1 Schematic of H. sapiens GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase α/β subunits vs. D. discoideum } XP_638036. The human enzyme precursor is cleaved into two subunits-α... Since the α/β subunits of human GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase contain the catalytic activity of the enzyme, XP-638036 was a good candidate for mediating this activity in D. discoideum cells. To determine if this was the case, we turned to two mutant strains that had been picked up in a high-throughput REMI screen that looked for altered phenotypes of mutants in D. discoideum. The TL276 and TL277 clones, which exhibited aberrant growth, were shown to have mutations in the gene gpt1 which encodes the hypothetical protein } XP_638036. Lysates of A×3 wild type cells and the two mutants were incubated with 50 mM α-methylmannoside and 75 μM UDP-GlcNAc for 1 hour and the transfer of GlcNAc to α-methylmannoside was measured as described in Experimental Procedures. Table I shows that the extracts of the two mutant cell lines had less than 5% the activity of the A×3 strain. We conclude that the hypothetical protein } XP_638036 is indeed the GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase in D. discoideum. Table 1 GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase activity Protein } XP_638036 is required for the formation of methylphosphomannosyl residues on lysosomal enzymes The lysosomal enzymes of D. discoideum bind with high affinity to the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor via their methylphosphomannosyl residues. If GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase mediates the first step in the synthesis of the methylphosphomannosyl residues, we would predict that the lysosomal enzymes of the TL276 and TL277 mutants would be deficient in this modification. To test this, extracts of A×3, TL276, and TL277 cells were applied to a CI-MPR-affinity column and eluted sequentially with buffer alone, buffer containing 10 mM Glc-6-P and finally buffer with 10 mM Man-6-P. The various factions were then assayed for three lysosomal hydrolases: α-mannosidase, β-galactosidase and β-hexosaminidase. Fig. 2 shows that essentially all of the three hydrolases of the A×3 cells bound efficiently to the column and were specifically eluted with the Man-6-P. By contrast, all of the activity of the TL276 and TL277 lysosomal hydrolases was recovered in the flow-through and buffer-wash fractions, indicating a total loss of binding to CI-MPR. This clearly shows that protein } XP_638036 is essential for the synthesis of the methylphosphomannosyl residues on these lysosomal hydrolases. Fig. 2 Protein } XP_638036 is required for adding Man-6-PO-CH 3 residues to lysosomal acid hydrolases in D. discoideum. Wild type A×3 and two mutants TL276 and TL277 cell lysates... Discussion The data presented in this report combined with the finding of Freeze, et. al. demonstrate that the synthesis of the Man-6-P-OCH 3 residues on the lysosomal hydrolases of D. discoideum occurs by the scheme shown in Fig. 3. The initial step is catalyzed by the product of the gpt1 gene which transfers GlcNAc-1-P residues from the donor UDP-GlcNAc to specific mannoses on the N-linked high mannose glycans of the acceptors. This is followed by the cleavage of the GlcNAc residues by an “uncovering” enzyme yet to be identified. Finally, a S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methyltransferase acts on the Man-6-P monoesters to generate the Man-6-P-OCH 3 residues. Fig. 3 Scheme for Man-6-P-OCH3 synthesis. The scheme indicates that the terminal Man on the 3′-arm is removed prior to addition of GlcNAc-P to the penultimate Man. This has been shown to be the case in mammalian cells, but not directly demonstrated in... The evidence that the gpt1 gene encodes the D. discoideum GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase that mediates the first step in the scheme shown in Fig. 3 is two fold. First, two strains with mutations in this gene exhibit less than 5% of wild type activity in the standard GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase assay using α-methylmannoside as acceptors. And second, the lysosomal hydrolases of these mutant strains fail to bind to a CI-MPR-affinity column whereas essentially all of these enzymes from the wild type strain bind and are specifically eluted with Man-6-P. This binding is known to be mediated by the Man-6-P-OCH 3 residues of the lysosomal hydrolases. The GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase of D. discoideum differs from the mammalian enzyme in that the α subunit lacks the DMAP binding domain. The DMAP binding domain has been postulated to be a protein-protein interaction domain and could potentially have a role in the recognition of the protein determinants on lysosomal hydrolase substrates. While the D. discoideum GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase lacks the ability to recognize the protein determinant of mammalian lysosomal hydrolases, its ability to interact with D. discoideum hydrolases has not been studied. It is also of interest that the D. discoideum GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase appears to lack the γ subunit that is present in the mammalian enzyme, based on the absence of γ subunit-related sequences in the genome. This subunit is required for the efficient phosphorylation of a subset of the lysosomal hydrolases by the mammalian enzymes. Since the lysosomal hydrolases of wild type D. discoideum are well phosphorylated, the γ subunit seems to be dispensable in this species. Finally, it is of note that the cellular content of the three lysosomal hydrolases measured in the experiments shown in Fig. 2 was much higher in the TL276 and TL277 extracts compared to the wild type A×3 extract. The cells used in these experiments were harvested in the late vegetative stage when the A×3 cells secrete much of their content of lysosomal hydrolases into the media. In preliminary experiments, we have found that hydrolase secretion by the TL276 and TL277 cells is impaired when compared to A×3 cells. This suggests that the methylphosphomannosyl residues may have a role in the sorting and/or secretion of lysosomal hydrolases in D. discoideum. The demonstration that the TL276 and TL277 strains are unable to synthesize this unusual modification will allow for studies to define the role of the Man-6-P-OCH 3 residues. Supplementary Material 01 Click here to view. 