 Acidocalcisomes are acidic organelles with a high concentration of phosphorus present as pyrophosphate and polyphosphate complexed with calcium, and other cations. The acidocalcisome membrane contains a number of pumps, exchangers, and channels, while its matrix contains enzymes related to PP i and poly P metabolism. Acidocalcisomes have been observed in pathogenic, as well as non-pathogenic prokaryotes and eukaryotes e.g. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, and Dictyostelium discoideum. Some of the potential functions of the acidocalcisome are the storage of cations and phosphorus, the participation of phosphorus in PP i and poly P metabolism, calcium homeostasis, maintenance of intracellular pH homeostasis, and osmoregulation. In addition, acidocalcisomes resemble lysosome-related organelles from mammalian cells in many of their properties. For example, we found that platelet dense granules, which are LROs, are very similar to acidocalcisomes. They share a similar size, acidic properties, and both contain PP i, poly P and calcium. Recent work that indicates that they also share the system for targeting of their membrane proteins through adaptor protein 3 reinforces this concept. The fact that acidocalcisomes interact with other organelles in parasitic protists, e.g. the contractile vacuole in Trypanosoma cruzi, and other vacuoles observed in Toxoplasma gondii, suggests that these cellular compartments may be associated with the endosomal/lysosomal pathway. Keywords: Acidocalcisome, calcium, dense granules, platelets, polyphosphate, pyrophosphate, volutin granules, Trypanosoma, Toxoplasma ACIDOCALCISOMES are acidic calcium-storage organelles found in a diverse range of organisms, including trypanosomes in which they were first defined. Beginning as early as 1895, acidic calcium-storage organelles have been variously defined as “metachromatic granules”, “volutin granules” or “polyphosphate bodies”. The high concentrations of both calcium and polyphosphate in prokaryotes was first succinctly described by Kornberg. Subsequently, when these highly acidic calcium-storage organelles were discovered in eukaryotes, the trypanosomatids and apicomplexans, they were biochemically redefined as “acidocalcisomes”. The presence of enzymes and transporters in the surrounding membranes of these organelles was fundamental in understanding their potential function and origin. More recent work from our laboratory reveals that the previously described “volutin granules” in prokaryotes are acidocalcisome-like organelles. Interestingly, the dense granules from human platelets also have characteristics similar to acidocalcisomes. The fact that acidocalcisome-like organelles occur both in bacteria and humans suggests that this organellar compartment was established before prokaryotic and eukaryotic lineages diverged, and that these organelles have been conserved over evolutionary time. ACIDOCALCISOME STRUCTURE AND CHEMICAL COMPOSITION IN PROTISTS In trypanosomatids and other protists, acidocalcisomes are easily identified because they stain with dyes such as acridine orange or cycloprodigiosin that accumulate within acidic compartments, or they appear as cytoplasmic granules in Giemsa-stained preparations. The morphology of acidocalcisomes varies among different species and methods of cultivation. In general these organelles are spherical, with average diameters of 0.2 μm in Trypanosoma cruzi and Trypanosoma brucei, which can reach 0.6 μm in some Leishmania species. However, the morphology of these organelles may vary from spherical to elongated and polymorphic as in some Leishmania and Phytomonas species. They are typically randomly distributed within the cell. Fig. 1--5 Morphology of acidocalcisomes in whole cells and sections. Fig. 1—3. Visualization of acidocalcisomes in whole unfixed Toxoplasma gondii: Leptomonas collosoma, and Trypanosoma cruzi acidocalcisome fractions, allowed to adhere to Formvar-... Using transmission electron microscopy, acidocalcisomes typically contain electron-dense material, although this may vary with the method used for sample preparation. Using standard methods for transmission electron microscopy part of the dense material can be lost, leaving an empty vacuole, or a thin layer of dense material that adheres to the inner face of the membrane, prompting the name “inclusion bodies”. A useful method for observing acidocalcisomes is to dry entire protist cells or fractions onto carbon- and formvar-coated grids and then view them by TEM. When unfixed cells of the apicomplexan Toxoplasma gondii or the trypanosomatid Leptomonas collosoma are treated in this manner, the acidocalcisomes are clearly delineated as electron-dense spheres within the cytoplasm. By light microscopy, acidocalcisome-like organelles in prokaryotes and eukaryotes can be stained by a number of dyes that accumulate either in polyphosphate or acidic compartments eg. 4′-6′-diamino-2-phenylindole, cycloprodigiosin or Lysosensor blue DND-167, respectively. In addition to analyzing the elemental composition of acidocalcisomes in trypanosomatids and apicomplexans using TEM, both 31 P NMR, and biochemical techniques were employed to demonstrate the presence of O, Na, Mg, P, K, Ca and Zn in these organelles. Elemental iron was also detected in several trypanosomatids cultivated in complex media, as well as in T. cruzi trypomastigotes, Leishmania amazonensis promastigotes, and promastigotes of the plant kinetoplastid Phytomonas francai. The presence of P and Ca in similar organelles led some authors to propose the presence of hydroxyapatite in some apicomplexan. In protists, both structural and elemental composition of acidocalcisomes can be modulated by varying culture conditions. In semi-defined medium promastigotes of L. amazonensis contain spherical organelles lacking iron, but when these cells are transferred into a complex, iron-rich medium, the acidocalcisomes accumulate iron and became dispersed throughout the cytoplasm. On the other hand, changes in the content of acidocalcisomes appear to have diverged among various lineages of trypanosomatids. i.e. under identical conditions of culture, the elemental composition varies. This is congruent with the idea that the function of this cellular compartment has become tailored for species within each lineage. As mentioned previously, it is well established that the acidocalcisomes from eukaryotes concentrate phosphorus both as inorganic pyrophosphate and polyphosphate. Poly P is a linear chain of a few to many hundreds of phosphate residues linked by high-energy phosphoanhydride bonds that occurs across a wide spectrum of diverse organisms. It is proposed that acidocalcisomes accumulate poly P as one mechanism to reduce the osmotic effect of large pools of cellular phosphate. Trypanosomatids are especially rich in short-chain poly P such as poly P 3, poly P 4, and poly P 5. 31 P NMR spectra of purified acidocalcisomes in the kinetoplastids T. cruzi, T. brucei and L. major have indicated that the average chain length of poly P is 3.2 P i residues. On the basis of its total concentration in different stages of T. cruzi, and the relative volume of the acidocalcisomes in these cells, and assuming that poly P is mostly concentrated in acidocalcisomes, the calculated concentration in these organelles is about 3–5 M. This is congruent with the detection of solid-state condensed phosphates by magic-angle spinning NMR techniques, as well as by electron density measurements in situ using TEM. It has recently been proposed that carbohydrates and/or lipids might also help maintain the physical configuration of poly P in these organelles. Compartmentalization of amino acids is also apparent in trypanosomatids. In T. cruzi epimastigotes, 90% of the 1,250 nmol per mg total protein in acidocalcisomes consisted of the basic amino acids arginine and lysine, whereas whole cell extracts chiefly contained neutral and acidic amino acids. Interestingly, elemental sulfur was only detected in small amounts, suggesting that very few proteins are present in this cellular compartment. Nevertheless, a number of rather critical enzymes have been detected in trypanosomatid acidocalcisomes. In T. cruzi these include a polyphosphate kinase which responds to cell growth, differentiation and environmental stress, an a Zn + -sensitive soluble exopolyphosphatase affecting osmoregulation which is also present in L. major, a soluble inorganic pyrophosphatase in T. brucei that regulates poly P metabolism and which is essential for virulence in mice, a metacaspase in L. donovani which may play a role in cell death, and an acid phosphatase in T. rangeli epimastigotes detected by cytochemistry. ACIDOCALCISOME MEMBRANES AND PUMPS The membranes of acidocalcisomes differ from other types of organellar membranes. Highly purified acidocalcisomes from T. cruzi epimastigotes primarily contain phospholipids, one of which is a glycoinositolphospholipid quite distinct from microsomal GIPLs. These phospholipids are also accompanied by low concentrations of 3b-hydroxyesterols. As in other organisms, the membranes of acidocalcisomes are known to have several pumps, exchangers and at least one channel. Ca 2+ -ATPase activities have been observed in isolated acidocalcisomes of T. cruzi and T. brucei. Not only have the genes encoding these enzymes been identified in T. cruzi, T. brucei, and Toxoplasma gondii, but each of these can complement yeast deficient in the vacuolar Ca 2+ -ATPase, PMC1. Furthermore, the acidocalcisomal Ca 2+ -ATPases of T. cruzi, T. brucei, T. gondii and Dictyostelium discoideum, as well as the vacuolar Ca 2+ -ATPases of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Entamoeba histolytica belong to a subcluster of conserved core sequences within the family of plasma membrane calcium ATPases. In contrast to other PMCA-Ca 2+ -ATPases a common feature of these pumps is the apparent lack of a typical calmodulin-binding domain. A scheme of all the transporters identified in the acidocalcisomes of diverse organisms is depicted in Fig. 2. Two proton pumps have been detected in acidocalcisomes of different microorganisms. One is a vacuolar-type H + -ATPase and the other is a vacuolar-type H + -pyrophosphatase. The V-H + -ATPase was first identified in permeabilized trypomastigotes of T. brucei and epimastigotes of T. cruzi by its sensitivity to bafilomycin A 1, a specific inhibitor at low concentrations of this proton pump. Using intact trypanosomatids loaded with the fluorescent calcium indicator Fura 2, bafilomycin A 1 was able to release calcium from an intracellular compartment of T. cruzi, T. brucei, and L. amazonensis, implying its presence in the acidocalcisome. In T. cruzi a V-H + -ATPase was also shown, by immunofluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy, to co-localize to acidocalcisomes with the vacuolar-type Ca 2+ -ATPase, and to be absent in the endocytic pathway. The V-H + -PPase activity first noted in T. cruzi, and later in T. brucei and L. donovani has also been localized within acidocalcisomes of L. amazonensis, P. francai, T. gondii and P. falciparum. The T. cruzi enzyme could be functionally expressed in yeast, whereas this gene in T. brucei has not yet been tested. This enzyme is a member of the K + -stimulated group of V-H + -PPases, and serves as a marker for purified acidocalcisomes because it localizes to and is concentrated in them. Interestingly, the V-H + -PPase of trypanosomatids and apicomplexans can also occur within one or two additional compartments. In T. cruzi this enzyme may localize within the Golgi and plasma membrane, whereas in species of Plasmodium the pyrophosphatase has been observed, in addition to the acidocalcisomes, in the plasma membrane and digestive vacuoles, and in T. gondii within a microneme maturation vacuolar compartment. There is also evidence for the presence of Na + /H + and Ca 2+ /H + exchangers in the acidocalcisomes of procyclic and promastigote forms of T. brucei and L. donovani, respectively. Although the Na + /H + exchanger is unable to transport lithium, it is sensitive to 3,5-dibutyl-4-hydroxy toluene and insensitive to 5- amiloride. It was suggested that the Ca 2+ /H + exchanger might serve as a mechanism for Ca 2+ release, because Ca 2+ is released from acidocalcisomes both in situ and in vitro when Na + is present, whereas other known second messengers such as inositol trisphosphate, are unable to do so. Isolated organelles of trypanosomatids also differ remarkably in the type and functions of exchangers. Although T. brucei procyclic trypomastigotes and L. donovani promastigotes both possess an Na + /H + exchanger, only in procyclic forms of T. brucei it is stimulated by ADP. Furthermore, trypomastigotes of T. cruzi entirely lack this exchanger, but their acidocalcisomes posses an unique water channel or aquaporin which appears to participate in osmoregulation because it is translocated to the contractile vacuole complex. FUNCTIONS OF ACIDOCALCISOMES Storage of phosphorus Protist acidocalcisomes are a major storage compartment for phosphorus. Of these, PP i is a byproduct of the biosynthesis of nucleic acids, coenzymes, and proteins, activation of fatty acids and biosynthesis of isoprenoids. Almost nothing is known about how PP i is transported across acidocalcisomes or why it is stored. On the other hand, quite a lot is known about poly P, which occurs across a wide spectrum of prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In trypanosomatids, changes in the concentration of short and long chain poly P have been detected during the life cycle and differentiation of T. cruzi. These concentrations rapidly decrease when cells are exposed to hyposmotic stress, whereas concentrations increase after hyperosmotic stress. This might indicate a role for acidocalcisomes in the stress response to environmental changes, and may potentially be linked to changes in the concentration of P i. The concentration of poly P has been linked to virulence both in prokaryotes and eukaryotes eg. decreased virulence in the apicomplexan T. gondii. Cation storage That acidocalcisomes contained very high concentrations of calcium was their first distinguishing characteristic. This and other cations such as magnesium, sodium, potassium, and others are combined with poly P for storage. In addition, heavy metals can accumulate with poly P in acidocalcisomes when present in the environment. Furthermore, host cell invasion is inhibited by depletion of calcium from within acidocalcisomes by pretreatment of metacyclic and extracellular amastigote stages of T. cruzi with ionomycin in combination with nigericin or ionomycin to which NH 4 Cl has been added. Additional evidence that acidocalcisome calcium plays a role in invasion has been observed in T. gondii tachyzoite knockouts of TgA1, the enzyme necessary for pumping calcium into the organelles. This results in the deregulation of cytosolic calcium, which then alters micronemal secretion leading to less virulent tachyzoites. pH homeostasis In addition to osmoregulation, stress response and virulence, poly P appears to help regulate intracellular pH. For example, the generation of H + from the hydrolysis of poly P has been shown to neutralize pH changes as much as 2.5 units in S. cerevisiae. RNA interference experiments to reduce acidocalcisome V-H + -PPase activity confirm this regulatory function. The phenotypic changes induced in T. brucei procyclic trypomastigotes by RNAi resulted in the loss of the cell’s ability to maintain pH homeostasis after exposure to an external basic pH > 7.4. These cells were also slower to recover from intracellular acidification, and failed to reach their more neutral, starting intracellular pH. Osmoregulation It is well established that trypanosomatids encounter extreme changes in their osmotic environments as they move from insect guts into the mammalian bloodstream. Because of this, it is assumed that mechanisms for osmoregulation play an essential role in their survival during transmission from invertebrate into vertebrate host. In fact it has been shown that the cellular release of ions and osmolytes, including amino acids and potassium, does occur and that this enables metacyclic trypomastigotes to adjust their volume following the hyposmotic stress induced during transmission. Nevertheless, this mechanism is unable to account for the total recovery of volume observed, and our hypothesis is that acidocalcisomes, in conjunction with the contractile vacuole complex, might aid this osmoregulatory process. Evidence supporting this hypothesis in trypanosomatids has been documented in epimastigotes of T. cruzi by the rapid hydrolysis or synthesis of acidocalcisomal poly P during hypo- or hyperosmotic stress, and by the change in sodium and chloride concentrations in acidocalcisomes of L. major promastigotes in response to acute hyposmotic stress. Interestingly, the aquaporins of T. cruzi, which are located in both the acidocalcisomes and contractile vacuole complex, have also been implicated in osmoregulation. Aquaporins are vacuolar and plasma membrane water channel proteins that occur among a diverse spectrum of organisms which passively permit water molecules to move along a gradient. In T. cruzi, the aquaporin TcAQP1 is translocated from the acidocalcisome to the contractile vacuole when cyclic AMP stimulates the fusion of these two organellar compartments. Additional evidence that acidocalcisomes participate in trypanosomatid osmoregulation was observed when RNAi knockdowns of the T. brucei acidocalcisomal soluble pyrophosphatase TbVSP1 markedly reduced the concentration of organellar poly P and the subsequent ability of cells to respond to hyposmotic stress. Furthermore, the ablation by RNAi of the T. brucei vacuolar transporter chaperone TbVTC1 resulted in abnormal morphology of acidocalcisomes, decrease in their poly P content, and a deficient response to hyposmotic stress. ACIDOCALCISOMES AS LYSOSOME-RELATED ORGANELLES Lysosome-related organelles are a heterogeneous group of organelles that both share some physiological features with lysosomes, and yet are distinguished from them by structural and functional diversity eg. melanosomes, lytic granules, major histocompatibiliy complex class II compartments, platelet dense granules, basophil granules, and neutrophil azurophil granules. Their sharing of traits suggests that there may be a common origin of biogenesis for lysosomes and LRO. Recent results from several laboratories have shed some light on the origin of acidocalcisomes, and their relatedness with LROs. Endocytic tracers such as transferrin, horseradish peroxidase, and FM4-64, do not accumulate in these organelles. However, if parasites are treated with an inhibitor of the sterol biosynthetic pathway, their acidocalcisomes do accumulate endocytic markers, suggesting that there is some association of acidocalcisomes with the endosomal/lysosomal pathway. In L. major, a mutant deficient in sphingolipid synthesis was shown to be defective in the biogenesis of both multivesicular bodies and acidocalcisomes, which suggests that these compartments have a common origin. Besteiro et al. recently found that Adaptor protein 3, the system known to be involved in transport of membrane proteins to lysosomes and LROs in other cells, has a similar function with respect to acidocalcisomes in Leishmania major, providing support for a close similarity between acidocalcisomes and the endo/lysosomal system. Furthermore, mutants of T. brucei deficient in an orthologue of the vacuolar sorting protein 41, which is known to interact with the δ subunit of AP-3-coated carrier vesicles, and is involved in the biogenesis of lysosome-related organelles were shown to have large numbers of small intracellular vesicles similar to acidocalcisomes. Finally, acidocalcisomes of L. donovani deficient in ADP-ribosylation factor-like protein, which controls vesicle traffic and vacuole formation in yeast, were deficient in V-H + -PPase. Acidocalcisomes also resemble LROs in many of their properties. For example, platelet dense granules, which are LROs, are very similar to acidocalcisomes. They share a similar size, acidic properties, and both organelles contain PP i, poly P and calcium. The finding that they also share the system for targeting of their membrane proteins reinforces this concept. The finding that acidocalcisomes and LROs are related implies that further studies of the acidocalcisomes could shed light on conserved functions in similar organelles of other cells of medical relevance. In turn, an analysis of the features of various LROs is likely to highlight as-yet-undiscovered functions of acidocalcisomes. CONCLUSIONS Acidocalcisomes were found in bacteria more than one hundred years ago but an investigation of these organelles, and of their main constituent, poly P, has been neglected for many years. The conservation of this organelle in bacteria and eukaryotes indicates that it has important functions that await discovery. Further studies are necessary to understand the biogenesis and function of acidocalcisomes in different organisms, why they have been conserved and how widely the organelle is distributed. Phylogenetic relationships of various acidocalcisomal enzymes need to be established, as sequence comparisons are important indicators of the evolution of these organelles. We do not know how acidocalcisomes are distributed in daughter cells after cell division or why morphological changes occur in acidocalcisomes of some trypanosomatids. Intracellular PP i, poly P, cations and basic amino acids are accumulated in large amounts in acidocalcisomes, but the mechanisms by which these compounds are transported into the organelle and the reasons for their accumulation are largely unknown. This is an exciting area of research, not only because these organelles have different characteristics in diverse eukaryotes, but because they might serve as new targets for drugs as recently reviewed by us. ​ Fig. 6 Schematic representation of an acidocalcisome. A H + gradient is established by a vacuolar ATPase and a vacuolar pyrophosphatase. Ca 2+ transport is driven by a Ca 2+ -ATPase. Other transporters include Na + /H +, and Ca 2+ /H + exchangers,... 