 Phosphatidylinositol lipids have been identified as key signaling mediators for random cell migration as well as chemoattractant-induced directional migration. However, how the PtdIns lipids are organized spatiotemporally to regulate cellular motility and polarity remains to be clarified. Here, we found that self-organized waves of PtdIns 3,4,5-trisphosphate are generated spontaneously on the membrane of Dictyostelium cells in the absence of a chemoattractant. Characteristic oscillatory dynamics within the PtdIns lipids signaling system were determined experimentally by observing the phenotypic variability of PtdIns lipid waves in single cells, which exhibited characteristics of a relaxation oscillator. The enzymes phosphatase and tensin homolog and phosphoinositide-3-kinase, which are regulators for PtdIns lipid concentrations along the membrane, were essential for wave generation whereas functional actin cytoskeleton was not. Defects in these enzymes inhibited wave generation as well as actin-based polarization and cell migration. On the basis of these experimental results, we developed a reaction-diffusion model that reproduced the characteristic relaxation oscillation dynamics of the PtdIns lipid system, illustrating that a self-organization mechanism provides the basis for the PtdIns lipids signaling system to generate spontaneous spatiotemporal signals for random cell migration and that molecular noise derived from stochastic fluctuations within the signaling components gives rise to the variability of these spontaneous signals. Keywords: phosphatase and tensin homolog, spontaneous polarization, relaxation oscillation, traveling wave, noise How the biological functions of living cells arise spontaneously and intrinsically from the dynamics of intracellular reaction networks is a central question in cell biology. Random cell migration under no or uniform external cues, which is a fundamental form of cell motility, is an example of this spontaneity. To induce motile activity in random directions, internal signals need to be generated without any external cues. Specific intracellular processes are likely responsible for such spontaneous signal generation. Therefore, it is important to understand the internal processes responsible for spontaneous signal generation and their regulatory mechanisms in the absence of external stimuli. Stochastic fluctuations in molecular reaction networks may be an origin for the internal signals that drive random cell migrations. For example, in the case of paramecium cells, a mechanism for spontaneous signal generation has been proposed in which a hierarchical organization exists ranging from small thermal fluctuations in membrane ion channels to large spike-like fluctuations in membrane potentials that generate signals to stochastically turn their direction of motion in homogeneous environments. In bacteria, the noise amplification of signaling reactions through high gain responses has been implicated in the generation of stochastic signals for flagella motors. In contrast to these stochasticity-based forms of random cell motility, cells that exhibit crawling movements over surfaces using actin-based motile machinery such as pseudopods and tails need to be organized both spatially and temporally to generate cell polarity and motility. Therefore, the spontaneous signal generation in these crawling-type cells should include a spatiotemporal organization mechanism as well as a stochastic mechanism, distinguishing them from swimming-type cells like the aforementioned bacteria. To explain the cytoskeletal organization relating to cellular polarity and motility, a self-organization concept has been suggested. A spatiotemporal self-organization has been previously described in actin-based motile machinery in which the collective behaviors of cytoskeletal proteins and molecular motors give rise to highly organized supramolecular structures such as actin waves in living cells. However, how signaling mediators working upstream of actin-based motile machinery are involved in the self-organization process is unknown. Within Dictyostelium discoideum cells that exhibit random migration using actin-based motile machinery, intracellular phosphatidylinositol lipids have been identified as key signaling mediators for directional cell migration in response to the extracellular chemoattractant cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate. Membrane-bound PtdIns 3,4,5-trisphosphate has been described as a key element for the biochemical compass to direct chemotaxis in which the chemoattractant-induced localization of PtdInsP 3 on the membrane serves as a cue for pseudopod formation. Phosphoinositide-3-kinase and phosphatase and tensin homolog, which catalyze PtdInsP 3 production and degradation, respectively, have been revealed to regulate chemotaxis. In addition to their roles in chemotaxis, PI3K and PTEN have been revealed to regulate random cell motility and polarity in the absence of cAMP. However, few studies have focused on the intrinsic dynamics of PtdIns lipids in cells with no chemoattractants. To understand how motile signals for random cell migration arise spontaneously from the internal dynamics within intracellular reaction networks, we explored dynamical aspects of the PtdIns lipids signaling system in living Dictyostelium cells in a nonstimulated state. We found that the self-organization of the PtdIns lipids signaling system, which spontaneously generates PtdInsP 3 -enriched domains that travel rotationally along the membrane of living cells in an F-actin-independent manner, provides a mechanistic basis for spontaneous cell polarization and migration in the absence of chemoattractants. Results and Discussion Self-Organized Traveling Waves in the PtdIns Lipids Signaling System. To monitor the dynamics of the PtdIns lipids system, we prepared Dictyostelium cells that express the fluorescently labeled pleckstrin-homology domain of Akt/PKB and PTEN, where PH Akt/PKB and PTEN were used as indicators for PtdInsP 3 metabolism. PH Akt/PKB can bind to PtdInsP 3 at the membrane, whereas PTEN catalyzes the degradation of PtdInsP 3 and has a binding motif for PtdInsP 2. PH Akt/PKB was tagged with enhanced green fluorescent protein, whereas PTEN was tagged with HaloTag with the fluorescent dye tetramethylrhodamine. Both proteins were coexpressed in wild-type cells without any obvious defects in growth, chemotaxis, and development. We observed PH Akt/PKB -EGFP and PTEN-TMR in developed cells chemotactically competent to cAMP. Consistent with previous observations, PH Akt/PKB -EGFP and PTEN-TMR localization exhibited reciprocal polarity in locomoting cells. PI3K was also localized at the pseudopod regions. Such reciprocal localization of PI3K and PTEN in cells leads to the polarized localization of PtdInsP 3 along the membrane, providing binding sites for PH Akt/PKB. Fig. 1. Self-organized traveling waves of PH Akt/PKB and PTEN. Fluorescent image of Dictyostelium discoideum cells expressing PTEN-TMR and PH Akt/PKB -EGFP and cells expressing PTEN-TMR and PI3K2-EGFP. Both PH Akt/PKB... This polarized localization of both PH Akt/PKB -EGFP and PTEN-TMR was observed even in the absence of external cAMP and cellular motile activities. To exclude any spatiotemporal effects from actin-based shape changes or motility on the dynamics of the PtdIns lipids system, cells were treated with 5 μM of the actin polymerization inhibitor latrunculin A, leading to a spherical shape lacking both motile and protrusive activities. The cells were also observed in the presence of 4 mM caffeine, which inhibits the self-production of cAMP catalyzed by intracellular adenylyl cyclase. Thus, the observed dynamics are thought to be independent of actin-based motility and extracellular chemoattractant-evoked events. As shown in Fig. 1 C, both PH Akt/PKB -EGFP- and PTEN-TMR-enriched domains were not stationary. Rather, they traveled along the membrane while maintaining their reciprocal polarity. We performed kymograph analysis in which fluorescence intensities of PH Akt/PKB -EGFP and PTEN-TMR along the cell periphery were plotted with time to show the wave propagation clearly. These localized domains exhibited continuous propagation in one direction at an almost constant speed along the membrane for >30 min. Fluorescence intensities at a given position of the membrane exhibited a periodic transition between PH Akt/PKB - and PTEN-enriched states. The autocorrelation functions of the two time series showed an oscillatory nature with a period of ~200 s. Their cross-correlation function exhibited anticorrelation, showing a clear reciprocal relationship between PH Akt/PKB -EGFP and PTEN-TMR membrane levels. A variety of spatiotemporal patterns in PH Akt/PKB -EGFP and PTEN-TMR localization were observed in individual cells. Cells exhibited not only continuous propagation of localized domains, but also the generation, separation, and fusion of domains and reversal in their propagation directions. The spatiotemporal auto- and cross-correlation functions of these patterns revealed several modes of ordered patterns such as traveling waves and spatiotemporal oscillations. However, even in these cases, the reciprocal localization of both PH Akt/PKB -EGFP and PTEN-TMR was maintained. For these observations, >92% of the cells exhibited the ordered patterns whereas the remainder exhibited a membrane uniformly covered with PTEN-TMR lacking a distinctive PH Akt/PKB -EGFP domain. Although the expression levels of both proteins vary among individual cells even when a cloned cell line was used, cells expressing the proteins at an extremely low level still exhibited the ordered patterns. In fact, wild-type cells expressing either PH Akt/PKB -EGFP or PTEN-TMR showed similar spatiotemporal dynamics, indicating that the exogenous expression of both proteins was not essential for these patterns to occur. Fig. 2. Various ordered patterns of PH Akt/PKB and PTEN. Gallery of kymographs of PH Akt/PKB -EGFP and PTEN-TMR. Each kymograph corresponds to different single cells. Developed cells and vegetative cells in the absence, it follows that if the PtdInsP 3 /PTEN waves are associated with random motility, then the vegetative cells should exhibit similar waves. As shown in Fig. 2, vegetative cells treated with latrunculin A exhibited ordered patterns even in the absence of 4 mM caffeine. In locomoting cells without latrunculin A, PH Akt/PKB and PTEN were localized with a reciprocal polarity. These observations in vegetative cells are almost the same as those in developed cells, suggesting that the self-organizing properties of the PtdIns lipids signaling system in vegetative cells are shared at least in part with those in developed cells. Furthermore, the fact that vegetative cells do not use autocrine signaling through self-production of cAMP suggests that developmental stage-specific components such as cAMP receptors and adenylyl cyclase are not essential for the wave generation. Involvement of PI3K and PTEN in the PtdIns Lipids Wave Generation As Well As Random Cell Migration. We studied the roles of three key enzymes, PI3K, PTEN, and phospholipase C, on both the self-organized dynamics of the PtdIns lipids system and random cell migration under no external chemoattractant. When cells were treated with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002, the oscillation periods of their waves modulated in ~30% and 80% of the cell populations at 10 μM and 40 μM LY294002, respectively, but disappeared in most cells at 60 μM LY294002. Because PtdInsP 3 production is inhibited partially at 10 μM LY294002 but completely at 60 μM, the results suggest PI3K activity is associated with PtdInsP 3 /PTEN wave generation. Because LY294002 has been known to significantly inhibit kinases other than PI3K at higher concentrations, we examined the pi3k1-5 -null cells lacking all PI3K genes. In these cells, PH Akt/PKB -EGFP localized uniformly in the cytosol but not on the membrane. Furthermore, PTEN-TMR localized on the membrane in a polarized manner, but these membrane localizations showed no continuous traveling waves. Spatiotemporal correlation analysis of a kymograph revealed continuous PTEN-TMR wave generation in wild-type cells but not in the pi3k1-5 -null cells. These results indicate that PI3K is required for the generation of PtdInsP 3 /PTEN waves. In pten -null cells, enhanced accumulation of PH Akt/PKB -EGFP was observed uniformly over the entire cell surface with no traveling waves. This result is probably because of an abundance of PtdInsP 3 on the membrane due to a loss of PTEN activity. In contrast to PI3K and PTEN, PLC was not essential for the generation of PtdInsP 3 /PTEN waves, as PtdInsP 3 /PTEN waves in plc -null cells were indistinguishable from those in wild-type cells. These results demonstrate that the enzymes PI3K and PTEN are involved in the self-organized traveling waves of the PtdIns lipids system. Fig. 3. Involvement of PI3K and PTEN in signal generation for cell polarization and migration. PH Akt/PKB -EGFP and/or PTEN-TMR dynamics in cells in the presence of latrunculin A and an inhibited PtdIns lipids system. At the time points indicated by the arrowheads,... For PI3K activation, Ras has been revealed to be essential in the random migration of Dictyostelium cells, which functions as a component in the Ras-PI3K-PtdInsP 3 positive feedback loop in an F-actin-dependent manner. Even when using latrunculin A to inhibit actin polymerization, PH Akt/PKB still shows localization along the membrane under our experimental conditions, which is conceivable as a result of PtdInsP 3 accumulation produced by activated PI3K. To see how PI3K is activated for the PtdInsP 3 /PTEN wave generation, we examined Ras activation by using the GFP-labeled Ras-binding domain of Raf1, which acts as an indicator for activated Ras. We observed two types of GFP-RBD dynamics in wild-type cells. In type 1, GFP-RBD was localized uniformly over the entire cell surface with no obvious traveling waves, showing uniform activation of Ras along the membrane. In type 2, GFP-RBD exhibited traveling waves with an oscillation period similar to those of PH Akt/PKB -EGFP and PTEN-TMR, showing localized activation of Ras. The PI3K inhibitor LY294002 suppressed GFP-RBD waves in a dose-dependent manner, indicating that RBD waves are somehow coupled to PtdInsP 3 /PTEN waves. However, because the number of cell populations categorized as type 2 and exhibiting RBD waves was significantly less than that exhibiting PtdInsP 3 /PTEN waves, we conclude that RBD waves are not prerequisite for PtdInsP 3 /PTEN waves and that uniform activation of Ras and PI3K along the membrane is sufficient for the generation of PtdInsP 3 /PTEN waves. Even if the Ras-PI3K-PtdInsP 3 feedback loop somehow functions in latrunculin A-treated cells, the effects of the feedback loop on the generation of both PtdInsP 3 /PTEN and RBD waves would only be partial, which can thus explain why the generation of RBD waves was observed only in some cells. Uniform activation of Ras and PI3K along the membrane was probably due to the presence of caffeine because GFP-RBD was not observed on the membrane in the absence of caffeine. We then examined cell shape and motility. In the absence of latrunculin A, which means no direct inhibition of the actin cytoskeleton, cells treated with LY294002 exhibited defects in motility in a dose-dependent manner. At 10 μM LY294002, cells were still able to move but the movements were inefficient. When treated with 60 μM LY294002, most cells exhibited no protrusive activities, resulting in round, immobile cells. Thus, prevention of PtdInsP 3 /PTEN waves by LY294002 treatment largely correlated with the suppression of cell motility irrespective of whether LY294002 has off-target effects on kinases other than PI3K. Genetic disruption of PI3K resulted in the reduction of cell migration speed, clearly showing that PI3K is involved in random cell migration, consistent with previous reports. Because the defects observed in pi3k-1–5 -null cells are less severe than those observed in wild-type cells following 60 μM LY294002 treatment, it can be concluded that some PI3K-independent cell migration is sensitive to LY294002 treatment at higher concentrations. Furthermore, pten -null cells formed abnormal pseudopods along the entire cell surface and moved less effectively. This result is consistent with reports showing that defects in PtdInsP 3 metabolism mediate abnormal signaling for pseudopod formation. On the other hand, plc -null cells exhibited random migration with velocities and morphologies similar to wild-type cells. These results suggest that the PI3K/PTEN-dependent self-organizing properties of the PtdIns lipids system are associated in part with cell migration in the absence of an external chemoattractant. In contrast, the PI3K-independent cell migration seen in pi3k-1–5 -null cells suggests some other mechanism for cell mobility absent of PtdInsP 3 /PTEN waves. Although PLC has been suggested to modulate PtdInsP 2 levels during chemotactic responses, it is not essential for PtdInsP 3 /PTEN wave generation and random cell migration in the absence of chemoattractants. Reconstructed Spatiotemporal Dynamics of the PtdIns Lipids Signaling System. To reconstruct the dynamics of the PtdIns lipids system, we quantitatively extracted the dominant dynamics from the temporal changes in the fluorescence intensities of and. The reconstructed dynamics shown in - coordinates exhibited a reciprocal relation with a characteristic crescent shape and temporal clockwise rotation. Note that the temporal progression of the oscillation was not constant along the crescent-shaped trace. The PtdIns lipids system can adopt either a stable PH Akt/PKB -enriched or a PTEN-enriched state in a local region on the membrane. However, the transition between these two states is fast. This type of oscillation is known as relaxation oscillation. Despite the different kymograph patterns, the characteristic crescent-shaped dynamics were commonly observed in all cells analyzed. The period of oscillation was 217.6 ± 99.9 s. Such oscillatory dynamics were also observed in cells that partially recovered their actin cytoskeleton using modest treatment of latrunculin A, resulting in similar periods of oscillations. This partial recovery of the actin cytoskeleton caused spontaneous shape changes with partial motility in which PH Akt/PKB - and PTEN-enriched regions correlated with the formation and suppression of membrane protrusion, respectively. Thus, the oscillatory dynamics of the PtdIns lipids system are correlated at least in part with the spontaneous dynamics of actin-based polarity and motility. Fig. 4. Dynamics of the PtdIns lipid system. Averaged temporal evolution dynamics of PTEN-TMR and PH Akt/PKB -EGFP obtained by principal components analysis of the traveling waves observed in the cell shown in Fig. 1. Time trajectories of the averaged... The reconstructed dynamics of the PtdIns lipids system shown in Fig. 4 A also reveal the spatial profiles of PTEN- and PH Akt/PKB -enriched domains along the membrane at a given time. The clockwise temporal evolutions along the crescent-shaped trace were equivalent to spatial changes along the membrane in the direction opposite that of the wave propagation. The upper and lower branches of the crescent-shaped trace correspond to the front and back regions of the PH Akt/PKB -enriched domain, respectively, and also to the back and front regions of the PTEN-enriched domain, respectively. These spatial and temporal dynamics of the PtdIns lipids system indicate that individual local regions along the membrane undergo transitions between PTEN- and PH Akt/PKB -enriched states in accordance with the crescent-shaped dynamics, whereas the membrane as a whole maintains the asymmetric spatial profile dynamically in accordance with the wave propagation. Thus, progression of the crescent-shaped dynamics at individual local regions was observed as wave propagations along the membrane as a whole. Fig. 4 C also reveals that the spatial profiles of PTEN- and PH Akt/PKB -enriched domains were asymmetric along the membrane. Moreover, the time delay in the reciprocal changes between and was revealed in the reconstruction dynamics. The lag was distributed over 0–40 s with a 10-s average. This time delay implies a spatial shift in the reciprocal localization between and along the membrane. These observed asymmetries with respect to time and space are regarded as a consequence of symmetry breaking in the PtdIns lipids system. Theoretical Model. On the basis of these experimental observations, we constructed a simple reaction-diffusion model for the generation of the traveling waves in the PtdIns lipids system. First, we consider the dynamics of the PtdIns lipids system at a local area along the membrane. The local reaction dynamics show a relaxation oscillation with both the reciprocal relation and time delay between and. To reproduce the dynamics in the PtdIns lipids system with the reciprocal relation between PtdInsP 3 and PTEN concentrations, we assumed a PtdInsP 3 -dependent negative regulation on PTEN recruitment to the membrane. This regulation works as a positive feedback loop on both PtdInsP 3 and PTEN concentrations. Such relaxation oscillators with a positive feedback loop have been found and studied in various biological systems. When PtdInsP 3 increases on the membrane, PTEN recruitment to the membrane is inhibited through negative regulation, which allows PtdInsP 3 to accumulate, resulting in a PtdInsP 3 -enriched state. Likewise, by decreasing PtdInsP 3, PTEN recruitment to the membrane is accelerated, further degrading PtdInsP 3 and leading to a PTEN-enriched state. Thus, the assumed negative regulation can produce two stable states with rapid transitions between them. In fact, this model successfully reproduces the characteristic crescent-shaped dynamics including the time-delayed anticorrelation behavior between PtdInsP 3 and PTEN. Although the mechanistic basis for this negative regulation in Dictyostelium cells is not yet clear, small GTPase rhoA and its effector Rock have been suggested to be involved in the regulation of PTEN localization. Interestingly, PTEN often showed uniform localization over the entire cell surface in pi3k1-5 -null cells, but was absent from leading edge pseudopods in wild-type cells. Furthermore, PTEN was often observed in F-actin-enriched pseudopod regions of pi3k1-5 -null cells, but had an anticorrelative relationship with F-actin in wild-type cells. These observations suggest a PI3K-dependent pathway for the negative regulation of PTEN localization probably via PtdInsP 3. Together with a previous study that showed PTEN is excluded at regions facing a higher cAMP concentration gradient in the absence of PtdInsP 3, these results suggest that PTEN localization is regulated by at least two mechanisms: one PtdInsP 3 dependent and the other PtdInsP 3 independent. Fig. 5. Mathematical model of PtdIns lipid traveling waves. Scheme of reactions. PTEN recruitment to the membrane is negatively regulated by PtdInsP 3, a relationship crucial for reproducing the traveling waves observed experimentally. Crescent-shaped... Fig. 6. Requirement of PtdInsP 3 for PTEN exclusion from the leading edge of migrating cells. PTEN localization in wild-type and pi3k1-5 -null cells. Numbers in the upper right of each panel are time in seconds.... In our model, PI3K activation is assumed to be uniform along the membrane. However, some cells exhibit RBD waves, suggesting that local activation of membrane PI3K may be involved in PtdInsP 3 /PTEN wave generation. To examine the effects of local PI3K activation on wave generation, we further included a Ras-PI3K-PtdInsP 3 positive feedback loop into the model. This extended model can also reproduce PtdInsP 3 /PTEN waves with the characteristics of a relaxation oscillator. Without the positive feedback loop, PI3K activity is distributed uniformly along the membrane, whereas increasing the strength of the positive feedback loop couples PI3K activity spatiotemporally to PtdInsP 3 /PTEN waves, suggesting that the two types of RBD dynamics observed in living cells may be derived from differences in the strength of the positive feedback loop. With this positive feedback, the wave propagation can be stabilized by modulating the oscillation period. This is probably because the Ras-PI3K-PtdInsP 3 feedback stabilizes both the PtdInsP 3 -enriched and the PTEN-enriched states. We next explore the relationship between the local regions and global integration. The local reaction dynamics in individual regions interact globally through the rapid diffusion of PTEN in the cytosol. When a PtdInsP 3 -enriched domain is formed on a membrane region, the cytosolic PTEN concentration increases to suppress new PtdInsP 3 -enriched domains in other membrane regions. That is, the conservation of the total concentration of PTEN, which diffuses faster in the cytosol, affects global coupling between local regions at the membrane leading to the integration of local signaling processes to cause global polarization. Thus, the local oscillatory dynamics in individual regions can be coordinated with each other through cytosolic PTEN and thereby enable the membrane to generate traveling waves and spatiotemporal oscillations. We performed both deterministic and stochastic simulations, successfully reproducing traveling waves with the characteristic relaxation oscillation dynamics. In the stochastic simulation in particular, the PtdInsP 3 -enriched domain exhibited not only continuous propagation but also the generation, separation, and fusion of other domains and also showed a tendency to reverse its propagation direction. Changing parameters like the supply rate of PtdInsP 2 resulted in variations like those seen in living cells, i.e., traveling waves and spatiotemporal oscillations. These results suggest that experimentally observed phenotypic variations in the spontaneous pattern formation were generated under the influence of stochastic noise derived from the signaling components of the PtdIns lipids system as well as variations in the biochemical components of individual cells. The self-organization of the PtdIns lipids system provides the robust dynamic mechanisms necessary to establish polarity when influenced by molecular noise. In addition, molecular noise from PtdIns lipids signaling mediators can give rise to the phenotypic variability seen in PtdIns lipids dynamics. The noise-robust self-organization and noise-induced phenotypic variability in the PtdIns lipids signaling system may be the origin of the spontaneous signal generation used for the ordered patterns observed in the random cell migrations of crawling-type cells. Random cell migration in the absence of chemoattractants can be regarded as the basis for realizing directional migration in response to environmental chemoattractant signals. The self-organizing properties of the PtdIns lipids signaling system also provide important insight regarding the mechanisms for chemoattractant-induced directional migration. Eukaryotic cells, including Dictyostelium and mammalian leukocytes, can perform chemotaxis even when signaled by an input intensity approximately at the level of noise. In these cells, the PtdIns lipids system can mediate the chemotactic signals by localizing a PtdInsP 3 -enriched domain to the membrane such that it faces a higher concentration of chemoattractants. In general, self-organization in biomolecular systems can provide robustness against molecular noise derived from the stochastic fluctuations within signaling molecules. In the case of directional cell migration, extracellular stimulations may modulate the self-organization dynamics within the PtdIns lipids system during stochastic signal processing against molecular noise, which in turn generates intracellular directional cues that lead to the biased random migration seen in chemotaxis. Materials and Methods Microscopy. Fluorescence images were obtained by using an inverted microscope equipped with a confocal unit through a 60× oil immersion objective lens. Both PH Akt/PKB -EGFP and PTEN-TMR were excited simultaneously by 488- and 561-nm solid-state CW lasers. By using dual view optics, each emission was separated into two parts at 550 nm by a dichroic mirror. The separated images were passed through an emission filter and captured simultaneously by an EMCCD camera. Time-lapse movies were acquired at 5-s intervals. Cell Preparations. D. discoideum cells were used for all experiments. Full methods and any associated references for cell preparations are described in SI Materials and Methods. Supplementary Material Supporting Information: Click here to view. 