 Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas disease, is surrounded by a mucin coat that plays important functions in parasite survival/invasion and is extensively O -glycosylated by Golgi and cell surface glycosyltransferases. The addition of the first sugar, α- N -acetylglucosamine linked to Threonine, is catalyzed by a polypeptide α-GlcNAc-transferase which is unstable to purification. Here, a comparison of the genomes of T. cruzi and Dictyostelium discoideum, an amoebazoan which also forms this linkage, identified two T. cruzi genes that might encode this activity. Though neither was able to complement the Dictyostelium gene, expression in the trypanosomatid Leishmania tarentolae resulted in elevated levels of UDP-GlcNAc:Thr-peptide GlcNAc-transferase activity and UDP-GlcNAc breakdown activity. The ectodomain of TcOGNT2 was expressed and the secreted protein was found to retain both activities after extensive purification away from other proteins and the endogenous activity. Product analysis showed that 3 H was transferred as GlcNAc to a hydroxyamino acid, and breakdown was due to hydrolysis. Both activities were specific for UDP-GlcNAc relative to UDP-GalNAc and were abolished by active site point mutations that inactivate a related Dictyostelium enzyme and distantly related animal pp-αGalNAcTs. The peptide preference and the alkaline pH optimum were indistinguishable from those of the native activity in T. cruzi microsomes. The results suggest that mucin-type O -glycosylation in T. cruzi is initiated by conserved members of CAZy family GT60, which is homologous to the GT27 family of animal pp-αGalNAcTs that initiate mucin-type O -glycosylation in animals. Keywords: Chagas disease, Dictyostelium, GlcNAcT, polypeptide αGlcNAc-transferase, trypanosomatid Introduction Trypanosoma cruzi is the causative agent of Chagas disease that affects millions of humans in endemic areas of Latin America. The acute phase often shows parasitemia, prior to a chronic phase that may be asymptomatic or exhibit varying clinical features including myocarditis or pathology of the digestive and peripheral nervous systems. Throughout its life cycle in both the triatomine insect vector and the mammalian host, most of the parasite is covered by glycosylphosphatidylinositol -anchored glycoproteins and free glycoinositolphospholipids. These glycoconjugates likely support survival in the wide range of extracellular and intracellular environments confronted by T. cruzi during its life cycle. The abundant GPI-anchored mucin-like glycoproteins are extensively modified by O -glycans attached via GlcNAcα1-Thr linkages. The UDP-GlcNAc:polypeptide N -acetyl-α-glucosaminyltransferase activity that initiates this glycosylation has been characterized biochemically, but has thus far been too unstable to purify. Depending on the parasite strain, β-galactopyranose and/or β-galactofuranose residues are linked respectively to the O -6 and/or O -4 positions of the GlcNAc residue and can be extended by other βGal residues before the addition of terminal αGal p or sialic acid residues. The dense arrays of mucins may protect epimastigotes from proteases in the intestinal tract of the insect vector and support survival of metacyclic trypomastigotes and their penetration of the gastric mucosal epithelium during acute infection after oral ingestion by the mammalian host. Mucin sialoglycans may also protect bloodstream forms from complement attack. Mucin O -glycans have been implicated in T-cell suppression possibly through binding l -selectin. Antibodies against mucin-like O -glycan Gal epitopes inhibit host-cell invasion, and anti-sialic acid Abs inhibit trypomastigote attachment to host cells, suggesting that the sialoglycans play a direct role in parasite-host cell attachment. Sialic acid levels are associated with both reduced and increased infectivity; the issue is complicated because the two major phylogenetic groups of T. cruzi appear to utilize distinct mechanisms of infection, and infection processes change in different life cycle stages. The addition of GlcNAc and that of Gal likely occur according to conventional mechanisms in the Golgi, and sialic acids are transferred from host glycans by a cell-surface trans -sialidase, with mucin glycoproteins being the sole acceptors on the parasite's cell surface. Transfer of Gal is mediated by potentially dozens of genes, probably reflecting the extensive structural diversity observed in T. cruzi O -glycans, and the trans -sialidases and mucins are encoded by a large gene family with potentially hundreds of members, making a genetic analysis of these processes intractable using current methods. The addition of αGlcNAc to Thr represents the first step and a possible “bottleneck” for subsequent O -glycosylation. In higher eukaryotes, the biosynthesis of mucin-type O -linked glycans is initiated by a family of pp-αGalNAcTs which transfer GalNAc from UDP-GalNAc to protein substrates in the Golgi. Genomic and functional analyses of pp-αGalNAcTs derived from humans, Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, and the unicellular parasite Toxoplasma gondii have revealed the presence of 20, 9, 14, and 5 genetic isoforms of the transferase, respectively. However, the genetic basis of the O -GlcNAc addition in T. cruzi is unknown. A seemingly unrelated glycosylation pathway in the cytoplasm of the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum has provided a clue for the genetic basis of the initial transfer of GlcNAc in T. cruzi. The first sugar added to the recipient protein, Skp1, is a GlcNAc α-linked to hydroxyproline, and the HyPro-pp-αGlcNAcT has been identified. Bioinformatics studies yield three classes of related sequences in other genomes: other predicted soluble cytoplasmic pp-αGlcNAcTs in eukaryotes and prokaryotes, putative membrane-bound Golgi pp-αGlcNAcTs, and the animal Golgi pp-αGalNAcTs. Examination of the only class 2 sequence in Dictyostelium showed it to be the anticipated pp-αGlcNAcT for cell surface proteins, and the enzyme is inhibited by two neutral uridine analogs that inhibit class 3 pp-αGalNAcTs. All known trypanosomatid genomes harbor three class 2-like genes related to DdGnt2, though the GlcNAcα1-Thr linkage has only been observed in T. cruzi. If the predicted T. cruzi homologs mediate this activity, the low complexity of the gene family, compared to subsequent processing steps, may enable future genetic analysis of the role of mucin-type O -glycosylation in Chagas disease. Expression studies reported here show that at least one of the T. cruzi genes possesses this expected biochemical function, but may exhibit a more complex biochemical mechanism than its Dictyostelium counterpart. Results pp-αGlcNAcT-like sequences in the T. cruzi genome The T. cruzi CL-Brener genome contains three open reading frames related to the catalytic domain of DdGnt2, a CAZy family GT60 sequence, based on BLAST analysis. I ). All three genes are predicted to encode type 2 membrane proteins with topology similar to that of DdGnt2 and other eukaryotic Golgi-associated glycosyltransferases, with their catalytic domains oriented toward the Golgi lumen. 1 ). The predicted sequences of TcOGNT1 and TcOGNT2 are 38–46% identical and 61–81% similar to the 250-amino-acid catalytic domain of DdGnt2 and are more distantly related to the family GT27 pp-αGalNAcTs that initiate mucin-type O -glycosylation in animals. Similarity was highest at positions thought to be important for catalytic activity in both the NRD2 and so-called Gal/GalNAc-like regions. In contrast, TcOGNTL lacked the DxD-like DxH motif of the NRD2 domain and key motifs of the Gal/GalNAc domain characteristic of family GT60 and GT27 sequences and was only 27–31% identical and 51–57% similar to 174 amino acids of the catalytic domains of TcOGNT2 and TcOGNT1, respectively. TcOGNT2, like DdGnt2, has a short predicted stem region separating its catalytic and transmembrane domains, in contrast to the long sequence of TcOGNT1. 1 ). The predicted catalytic domain of TcOGNT2 possesses three pairs of Cys residues in similar positions to Cys residues in DdGnt2 and may form conserved disulfide bonds. Its two N -glycosylation sequons are not conserved with the single one in DdGnt2. The TcOGNT2 open reading frame is represented in the GeneDB genomic sequence database by two genomic fragments, whose nt and amino acid sequences are 98% identical. These probably represent the two haplotypes present in the hybrid CL-Brener strain. Eight of the 11-amino-acid differences are in the transmembrane and short cytoplasmic domains; of the other three, one is a conservative N to D substitution and the other two are in the less-conserved C-terminal region. Fig. 1 Domain analysis and expression of pp-αGlcNAcT-like sequences from D. discoideum and T. cruzi. The lead sequence DdGnt2 is a type 2 membrane protein whose catalytic domain, connected via a “stem” domain to its transmembrane... Table I Characteristics of predicted OGNT-related coding regions in trypanosomatids Sequences related to those of TcOGNT1, TcOGNT2, and TcOGNTL are found in the genomes of T. brucei and L. major, I ), and in all other trypanosomatids for which genomic sequence information is available. Related putative genes are present in other protists including plant pathogens in the oomycete group and diatoms. These sequences, including a cytoplasmic pp-αGlcNAcT which appears to have descended along a separate lineage tracing back to an early common eukaryotic ancestor, were aligned and a maximum likelihood method was used to infer evolutionary relationships. The best tree, rooted with DdGnt1, indicates that TcOGNT1, TcOGNT2, and TcOGNTL derive from gene duplications early in the trypanosomatid lineage. 2 ). These genes exhibit conserved synteny in all examined trypanosomatid genomes. The sequence of TcOGNTL is closer to that of TcOGNT1 than TcOGNT2, which correlates with their chromosomal proximity. The five DdGnt2-like sequences in the Phytophthora species diversified in a separate clade, indicative of independent, lineage-specific diversification of the oomycete genes. In contrast, the multiple diatom sequences are represented in both the oomycete and trypanosomatid-containing clades, suggesting an early duplication in the common ancestor of all these organisms. The results suggest that trypanosomatids retained and diversified one of these sequences, oomycetes retained and diversified the other sequence, Dictyostelium retained the trypanosomatid type, and diatoms retained and diversified both types. Fig. 2 Phylogenetic analysis of putative Golgi pp-αGlcNAcT sequences from protists. Conceptually translated protist nucleotide sequences related to DdGnt2 and predicted to encode Golgi-associated pp-αHexNAcTs, and the cytoplasmic... TcOGNT2 and TcOGNT1 expression in T. cruzi T. cruzi coding RNA is typically spliced at its 5′-end to a shared miniexon. Total RNA from epimastigotes was amplified by reverse transcription and PCR using primers corresponding to the miniexon and a TcOGNT2 -specific reverse primer. Analysis of 10 clones revealed at least three splice donor sites 70–109 nt upstream of the predicted ATG start codon, to the 3′-side of typical consensus ag dinucleotide motifs. These findings indicate that TcOGNT2 mRNA accumulates in parasites, confirm the position of the predicted start codon, and suggest that TcOGNT2 is a functional gene. Similar studies indicated that TcOGNT1-2 I ) is also a functional gene with a 5′-UTR splice-acceptor site located 88 nt upstream of its predicted start codon. Expression of TcOGNTs in Dictyostelium Dictyostelium was initially used to test the function of TcOGNT2 because a previous study showed that expression of the DdGnt2 ectodomain complemented deletion of the DdGnt2 locus. TcOGNT2 was examined first because it is more similar to DdGnt2 than TcOGNT1. Strain DL118, which harbors a null DdGnt2 allele and expresses no detectable endogenous Golgi pp-αGlcNAcT activity, was used as the host. The predicted ectodomain of TcOGNT2 1 B) was expressed with either an N - or C -terminal c-myc epitope tag under control of the semi-constitutive discoidin 1γ promoter. 1 B). Both strains accumulated substantial levels of a novel myc-tagged protein at the expected apparent M r position in cells. However, no protein was detected in the conditioned media fraction in contrast with the ability of D. discoideum to secrete truncated DdGnt2-myc. Cell fractionation revealed that the myc-tagged TcOGNT2cat proteins could be released from microsomes by sonication, consistent with normal folding compatible with solubility though not secretion. However, no changes in transfer of 3 H from UDP-GlcNAc to an acceptor peptide or in UDP-GlcNAc hydrolysis activity relative to the parental extracts were detected in these soluble fractions, using optimized conditions described below. In addition, these constructs did not consistently restore DdGnt2-dependent glycoepitopes normally recognized by mAb 54.2 or WGA, indicating the absence of pp-αGlcNAcT activity in vivo. Furthermore, no activity or glycoepitope complementation was observed when a full-length TcOGNT2 construct 1 B) was expressed. Similar negative results were obtained using TcOGNT1, or when TcOGNTL or TcOGNT1 was coexpressed with TcOGNT2, despite successful protein accumulation. Though these negative results have multiple possible explanations, we speculated that either the T. cruzi proteins required specific posttranslational modifications that do not occur in Dictyostelium, that Dictyostelium exerted a negative modification on the T. cruzi proteins, that the expressed proteins do not tolerate either N- or C-terminal epitope tags, or that these polypeptides require an additional factor during biosynthesis or for activity. Expression of TcOGNT2 and TcOGNT1 in Leishmania tarentolae microsomes L. tarentolae is a trypanosomatid distantly related to T. cruzi and is an effective host for expressing heterologous proteins. DNA corresponding exactly to the full-length coding regions of TcOGNT2 and TcOGNT1 were cloned into commercially available expression vectors. TcOGNT2cat was also subcloned downstream of DNA encoding an N -terminal cleavable signal peptide from secreted acid phosphatase. No epitope tag was incorporated to avoid potential interference given the negative results from the Dictyostelium expression studies. Their RNA polymerase II-dependent transcripts were designed to undergo appropriate 5′-trans-splicing with spliced leader RNA for stable expression in the axenically grown promastigote stage. Incorporation of linearized DNAs from these plasmids, expected to integrate as tandem arrays into the ssu locus, was selected for using G418 or hygromycin B according to the vector employed. Drug-resistant control strains were generated by transfection with empty expression vectors. Microsomal fractions were analyzed initially for pp-αGlcNAcT-like activity using peptide T29, II ), modeled from a Dictyostelium cell surface protein with a mucin domain. Activity was based on transfer of 3 H from UDP-GlcNAc to peptide T29. Microsomes from parental P10 or empty vector control strains exhibited substantial activity that was 10-fold higher than zero-time and zero-peptide controls. 3 A). The existence of peptide and time-dependent activity was consistent with bioinformatics evidence that all trypanosomatids possess a TcOGNT2 -like gene. A 67% higher level was measured in microsomes from cells expressing full-length TcOGNT2, suggesting that TcOGNT2 may catalyze transfer of GlcNAc from UDP-GlcNAc to Thr residues in the T16 peptide. An intermediate increase was observed in the truncated TcOGNT2cat expressing strain. The highest level did not match the activity detected in microsomes from T. cruzi, where the gene originated. Therefore, though a consistent increase in secreted activity was detected, the difference was small and could be explained by modulation of endogenous activity. Fig. 3 Expression of TcOGNT2 and TcOGNT1 in microsomes of stably transfected L. tarentolae cells. Microsomes were assayed for UDP-GlcNAc transferase activity in the absence or presence of 200 μM T29 peptide for 2 h at... Table II Peptide acceptor substrates Some glycosyltransferases also hydrolyze sugar nucleotides. Hydrolysis-like activity was assayed by passing the C 18 -SepPak eluate of the transferase assay through a Dowex-1 anion exchanger column to remove negatively charged UDP-GlcNAc. Cells expressing full-length TcOGNT2 exhibited up to 8-fold greater level of hydrolysis activity than control strains and this activity was not dependent on T29 peptide. 3 B). Less hydrolysis activity in the presence of peptide could represent competitive transferase activity. Interestingly, T. cruzi microsomes exhibited 3- to 4-fold higher specific hydrolysis activity than control L. tarentolae membranes. Analysis of a strain expressing full-length TcOGNT1 but using T16 as an acceptor peptide, II ), modeled from a Dictyostelium spore coat protein, yielded results similar to TcOGNT2. The stimulation of hydrolysis activity was more dramatic than that of transferase activity, and were together consistent with the idea that the expressed proteins have intrinsic enzymatic activities. Secretion of truncated TcOGNT2cat from L. tarentolae Conditioned media from the cell lines were examined for evidence of secreted activity. Individual clones were grown in parallel to the same density for the same period of time in 0.1–2% FBS, and the culture media were concentrated 50-fold. Low but reproducible incorporation of 3 H into peptide T16 was observed for samples from parental cells or an empty vector control strain, relative to zero-time controls. 4 A). Incorporation was also detected in the absence of peptide, suggesting a low rate of transfer to endogenous protein that could be eluted from the C 18 -SepPak. The amount of activity was approximately 100-fold less than that found in the corresponding microsomal fraction, indicating that endogenous activity is efficiently retained in the cell. Conditioned media from cells transfected with TcOGNT2cat exhibited 4- to 8-fold higher levels of peptide-dependent incorporation. Strains transfected with expression plasmids carrying either G418 or hygromycin resistance markers yielded similar results. 4 B). No increase was observed in cells expressing full-length TcOGNT2, indicating that the full-length protein is stably compartmentalized intracellularly. As expected, both endogenous and TcOGNT2cat-dependent activities were specific for UDP-GlcNAc relative to UDP-GalNAc. Fig. 4 Secretion of TcOGNT2cat in conditioned media. Conditioned media from cultures of L. tarentolae grown in 2% FBS were concentrated 50-fold by centrifugal ultrafiltration and assayed for 0 or 30 min at 22°C for the transfer of 3 H from UDP-GlcNAc reaction was observed to flow through a Dowex-50 column, confirming its neutrality. Further analysis by chromatography on a Dionex PA-1 column showed it to co-elute with αGlcNAc and βGlcNAc standards, which are not resolved. This confirms that UDP-GlcNAc breakdown results from hydrolysis, as expected. Temperature dependence of the activities The functional significance of sugar nucleotide hydrolysis is not understood. A possible explanation is that it reflects an abnormal state of the enzyme protein, possibly due to aberrant posttranslational modification, incomplete folding or absence of a modulatory factor, as might occur during heterologous expression. To assess the potential physiological relevance of the hydrolase activity, its temperature dependence was examined. As expected, both peptide-dependent and -independent endogenous transferase activities approximately doubled as the temperature was raised from 22°C to 32.5°C, slightly above the physiological temperature of T. cruzi epimastigotes, but declined to the 22°C level at 37°C. The increase is consistent with Q10 values of 2–3 for many enzymes until they reach their T m, when activity declines. Surprisingly, activity in the TcOGNT2cat samples was not stimulated over this temperature range, even though the data also presumably include 20–30% contribution from endogenous activity. In contrast, the hydrolase activity of TcOGNT2cat was stimulated at 32.5°C. The endogenous activity was below the detection threshold. The lack of temperature stimulation for the transferase activity in the TcOGNT2 sample is unusual and, in comparison with the endogenous activity, suggests a deficiency during heterologous expression. Mutagenesis of TcOGNT2 activities To address whether the TcOGNT2cat-dependent activities were mediated directly by TcOGNT2cat, point mutations in the DxD-like DxH motif required for catalytic activity of DdGnt1 were introduced. Western blotting of concentrated conditioned media prepared in parallel showed that TcOGNT2cat was expressed at nearly the same level as normal TcOGNT2cat, whereas the D234A mutant was expressed at a somewhat lower level. 6 A). A lower M r breakdown product was detected in all preparations. The mutant samples exhibited no more transferase or hydrolysis activity than the nonexpressing control strains. 6 B). This pointed to a direct catalytic function for normal TcOGNT2cat in both transferase and hydrolysis activities. Fig. 6 Analysis of mutant TcOGNT2cat. Concentrated conditioned media from L. tarentolae expressing native TcOGNT2cat, TcOGNT2cat, or TcOGNT2cat were analyzed as described in Figure ​ Figure4. 4. Western blot analysis... Chromatographic resolution of the endogenous and TcOGNT2cat-dependent activities Based on contrasting temperature dependence and the importance of catalytic amino acids, the TcOGNT2-dependent activities are hypothesized to be independent of, rather than derived from the endogenous activities. This was examined further by gel filtration of concentrated conditioned media. 7 A). Endogenous transferase activity eluted monodispersely within the included volume. Conditioned media from TcOGNT2cat-expressing cells exhibited, in addition, a later-eluting novel activity peak, which co-eluted with the TcOGNT2cat protein as determined by Western blotting. 7 C). Based on the comparison with globular protein standards, the activity eluted at a position roughly consistent with the monomeric M r of 48,000 as estimated by SDS–PAGE. Peak 2 also exhibited abundant hydrolase activity, 7 B), confirming that both activities were associated with TcOGNT2cat. Both activities were recovered at high yield relative to the sample load. No hydrolase activity was found in peak 1 though a low level of unknown origin was observed at an intermediate position. Similar analysis of the mutant TcOGNT2 proteins confirmed the absence of peak 2 activities. Fig. 7 Chromatographic purification of TcOGNT2 activities from endogenous activities. Conditioned media from the strains described in Figure ​ Figure6, 6, collected at cell densities within ±20% of each other, were analyzed... To examine whether TcOGNT2cat is alone capable of catalyzing transferase and hydrolysis reactions, the Superdex 200 peak 2 activity pool was further purified on a mono-Q anion exchange column. Only a single major OD 280 peak and activity peak 7 D) was observed, at good yield, and analysis by SDS–PAGE showed it to contain three predominant bands that stained with Coomassie blue. The upper two bands reacted with the anti-TcOGNT2 antibody. The gel slices were trypsinized and analyzed by MALDI-TOF-TOF-MS. Based on MS and MS-MS analysis, the upper band was confirmed to be full-length TcOGNT2cat, and the middle and lower bands were confirmed to be derived from the N-terminal and C-terminal regions of TcOGNT2cat. The cleavage event was localized between aa 371 and 432. Since the three bands were not resolved by gel filtration, it is likely that cleavage does not dissociate the N- and C-terminal regions. The ratio of the upper band at the M r 48,000 position, corresponding to intact TcOGNT2cat, to the lower bands at M r 35,000 and 13,000, varied between experiments, but the ratio of transferase to hydrolysis activities did not, suggesting that cleaved TcOGNT2cat is not the source of hydrolysis activity. Since no other discrete bands were detected by Coomassie blue or silver staining, though a broad smear of OD 280 -absorbing material was noted in the central region of the gel of most fractions, TcOGNT2cat likely acts alone to catalyze the transferase and hydrolysis activities. Further characterization of TcOGNT2cat activities and comparison with microsomal activity of T. cruzi The concentration dependence of the highly purified activity toward the T16 peptide was determined in the presence of 50 μM UDP-GlcNAc under initial velocity conditions. 8 A). Transferase activity increased nearly linearly up to the highest concentration tested, 10 mM, indicating a high but undeterminable K m with respect to this substrate. In contrast, hydrolysis activity was only slightly reduced at the higher concentrations of T16 tested. Thus, hydrolysis activity predominated below 1 mM T16, at which the previous assays were performed, whereas transferase activity prevailed above 1 mM. The purified enzyme showed the expected hyperbolic dependence on UDP-GlcNAc at 0.2 mM T16, with indistinguishable K m values of 8–9 μM for the transferase and hydrolysis activities. 8 B). Based on enzyme protein amounts estimated from OD 280 values and Coomassie blue staining intensity relative to known standards, the optimized transferase activity at 50 μM UDP-GlcNAc and 10 mM T16 was approximately 0.5 mol product/mol enzyme/min, at least 100-fold slower than typical glycosyltransferases. Fig. 8 Characterization of the highly purified activities and comparison with T. cruzi microsomal transferase activity. Highly purified preparation of TcOGNT2cat was analyzed for dependence of its transferase... To begin to evaluate acceptor substrate preference, peptides II ) corresponding to a T. cruzi mucin sequence and from the two D. discoideum mucin sequences were compared at a 0.2 mM concentration. The peptides exhibited the following order of activity using TcOGNT2 from the cell culture supernatant: T16>T29>T2. 8 C). Analysis of a crude microsomal preparation from T. cruzi exhibited an almost identical ratio of activities; in contrast, D. discoideum microsomes were inactive toward T2. Analysis of the pH dependence revealed an unusually high optimum of 8.3–8.5, 8 D), which contrasts with the broad pH optimum of DdGnt2 centered at 7.5, at which TcOGNT2 exhibits <10% maximal activity. A similar preference for alkaline pH was observed for the endogenous microsomal activity, in accord with a previous report. The similar and novel acceptor substrate and pH preferences suggest that recombinant TcOGNT2 represents at least part of the native enzyme detected in microsomes. Discussion The first step in mucin-type O -glycosylation in T. cruzi involves formation of the GlcNAcα1-Thr linkage in the Golgi apparatus. This report establishes TcOGNT2 as a prime candidate for catalyzing this reaction. Sequence analysis shows that TcOGNT2 is the T. cruzi gene most similar to the Golgi-associated pp-αGlcNAcT from the mycetozoan D. discoideum, DdGnt2. A soluble expression construct of TcOGNT2, deleted of its transmembrane anchor to allow secretion as for DdGnt2, conferred increased pp-GlcNAcT activity to the conditioned medium of cells of the distantly related trypanosomatid L. tarentolae, based on acid hydrolysis and β-elimination analyses of the glycopeptide product of the reaction. The expressed activity was chromatographically purified from endogenous pp-GlcNAcT-like activity to near homogeneity and consisted of the primary polypeptide and lesser amounts of a proteolytic cleavage product. The dependence of activity on the Asp residue of the DxH motif, which lies in the active site based on the comparison with the distant homolog Mm pp-αGalNAcT2, indicates that TcOGNT2 directly contributes the catalytic function rather than activates a potential minor component in the purified preparation. The considerable sequence similarity with DdGnt2 indicates that, as for DdGnt2 and Mm pp-αGalNAcT2, TcOGNT2 attaches the HexNAc in an α-linkage. The enzyme preparations were, however, insufficiently active to produce enough product for chemical confirmation. As known for some other glycosyltransferases, secreted TcOGNT2cat also expresses a robust sugar nucleotide hydrolysis activity. Hydrolysis was confirmed based on chromatographic coelution of the product with GlcNAc. This distinctive activity was a useful correlate during initial screening for the transferase activity. The activity copurified at a similar ratio to transferase activity throughout the purification. Hydrolase activity was inactivated together with transferase activity by the Asp mutations, confirming the involvement of TcOGNT2. Each activity exhibited a similar K m for UDP-GlcNAc, 8 B), consistent with a related catalytic mechanism. Whereas the transferase activity was dependent on the T16 peptide concentration up to the highest concentration tested, hydrolase activity was relatively insensitive to T16. 8 A). This resulted in hydrolase activity prevailing below 1 mM T16 peptide. TcOGNT2 was partially cleaved during purification, but the similar ratio of hydrolase to transferase activities in different preparations indicated that the cleaved polypeptide is not responsible for hydrolase activity. Although it is not known if the hydrolase activity is biologically relevant, it is noted that microsomes prepared from T. cruzi, where TcOGNT2 is probably normally expressed, exhibit higher UDP-GlcNAc hydrolysis activity than native L. tarentolae microsomes, though not as high as microsomes from transfected L. tarentolae. The pp-αGlcNAcT activity assigned to the secreted TcOGNT2 construct offers an attractive mechanism for initiating mucin-type O -glycosylation in T. cruzi. In support of this model, a fusion protein containing the N -terminal region of TbOGNT2, the presumptive ortholog of TcOGNT2 in T. brucei, I ), accumulates in the Golgi apparatus where the pp-αGlcNAcT activity resides in T. cruzi. TcOGNT2 mRNA accumulates in epimastigotes consistent with protein expression. Heterologous expression of full-length TcOGNT2 confers additional transferase activity to microsomes of L. tarentolae such that their activity approaches the native activity of T. cruzi microsomes. 3 ). A comparison of the pp-αGlcNAcT activity of T. cruzi microsomes with that of TcOGNT2cat secreted from L. tarentolae cells reveals a striking similarity with respect to acceptor peptide preferences and narrow alkaline pH optima. TcOGNT2 is distinctive in these characteristics relative to DdGnt2, which has a broad pH optimum, is inactive toward T2, and exhibits substrate inhibition with T16. Each activity also requires divalent cations. As mentioned above, both preparations exhibit substantial UDP-GlcNAc hydrolysis activity though the source of activity in microsomes is not known. Limited analysis of the related predicted protein, TcOGNT1, indicates that its mRNA is also expressed in epimastigotes and may contribute transferase and hydrolase activities. 3 ). Genetic studies enabled by the present work can now be planned to confirm the predicted and potentially essential in vivo roles of TcOGNT2 and TcOGNT1 in cells, which might target separate classes of mucins in different life cycle stages. Although TcOGNT2 possesses the pp-αGlcNAcT activity predicted by its sequence similarity to DdGnt2, characteristics of the in vitro activity raise critical questions about its function in cells. The sharp alkaline pH optimum of TcOGNT2cat, observed also in T. cruzi microsomes, 8 D), suggests that the enzyme will have low activity in the more neutral pH environment expected for the Golgi apparatus. Even under optimized conditions, the transferase activity of the purified enzyme is low. Physiological acceptor substrates, which remain to be identified, may have greater activity. Though peptide acceptors are generally active for this enzyme class, some pp αGalNAcTs prefer partially modified substrates. Alternatively, the enzyme protein may not be correctly posttranslationally modified in the heterologous expression system, or is abnormal without its transmembrane anchor. Nevertheless, the level of protein secreted from L. tarentolae was surprisingly low compared to other recombinant proteins, consistent with the deficiency of an unknown limiting factor in this heterologous system. The good recovery of enzyme activity during purification suggests that low activity is not due to instability or separation from a critical factor during purification itself. A comparison of transgenic TcOGNT2cat with the endogenous activity is potentially informative. Peak 1 shown in Figure 7 A likely derived from an LtOGNT, considering the widespread distribution of the genes in trypanosomatids. 2 ). Proteolytically cleaved but active Golgi glycosyltransferases are commonly secreted at low levels from cells. Unlike the endogenous transferase activity, TcOGNT2cat was not activated by temperature in the physiological range, exhibited substantial UDP-GlcNAc hydrolysis activity, and eluted later on the gel filtration column. The low Q10 value of unity could be explained by imperfect folding or the absence of a critical cofactor. Hydrolysis might be more stable than transferase activity, as described for bovine pp-αGalNAcT1. Since additional proteins were not observed in the purified TcOGNT2cat protein preparation, 7 E), the retarded elution on a gel filtration column relative to the endogenous activity 7 A) is consistent with the absence of such a protein cofactor needed for optimal activity. Dependence on a cofactor might help explain the difficulty of purifying native pp-αGlcNAcT activity from microsomes of T. cruzi. In future studies, the possible importance of TcONGT1 and TcOGNTL will be examined by co-expression. Alternatively, a missing factor might serve as a chaperone during biosynthesis as exemplified by the role of Cosmc for T-synthase, which might be restricted to trypanosomatids and/or saturated by heterologous overexpression. These differences raise the possibility that regulation of TcOGNT2 is more complex than that of other members of the GT60 and GT27 pp-αHexNAcT families, whose known examples appear to function in the absence of heterologous subunits. CAZy family GT60 pp-αGlcNAcT-like sequences are broadly distributed in protists and prokaryotes. Examples include predicted soluble cytoplasmic and Golgi-associated type 2 membrane proteins. A phylogenetic analysis of the sequences suggested that an ancient eukaryotic gene duplication enabled population of the Golgi lumen with this enzyme activity while retaining a cytoplasmic copy, inherited from prokaryotes possibly for the modification of cytosolic and nuclear proteins. Both genes were retained by Dictyostelium, the diatoms, green algae, and the oomycetes. The gene encoding the Golgi enzyme duplicated, with one form retained by the trypanosomatids and Dictyostelium, the other form retained by the oomycetes, and both forms retained by the diatoms. 2 ). The trypanosomatids multiplied their Golgi enzyme gene early on and now harbor three related genes. A subsequent gene duplication is postulated to have allowed evolution of the family GT27 class of sequences which encode pp-αGalNAcTs in Toxoplasma gondii and other apicomplexans, and in animals. However, family membership may not predict donor–acceptor substrate specificity because the animal Caenorhabditis elegans, which has multiple GT27 but no GT60 sequences, apparently forms both GalNAcα1-Thr/Ser and GlcNAcα1-Thr/Ser linkages, whereas an unconfirmed study suggests that T. cruzi also forms a GalNAcα1-Thr linkage in addition to GlcNAcα1-Thr. Though most family GT27 sequences possess a discrete C -terminal lectin domain that supports acceptor substrate targeting, it is not required for in vitro activity. Further studies are therefore required to understand the relationship between sequence and selection of donor and acceptor substrates for these enzymes. Nevertheless, it is evident that mucin-type O -glycosylation represents an ancient class of glycosylation that potentially changed from an αGlcNAc in early protists to an αGalNAc linkage in animals as epimerases and transporters co-evolved to increase sugar diversity. Mucin-type O -glycosylation is involved in cell–cell adhesion, cell sorting, and spore coat integrity in Dictyostelium, and recent studies have identified critical functions for specific pp-αGalNAcTs in animals. If the prediction that TcOGNT2 and TcOGNT1 solely mediate the first step in mucin-type O -glycosylation in T. cruzi is correct, it should be practical to test the function of mucin-type O -glycosylation genetically, where indirect evidence indicates a role in virulence, and in other trypanosomatids, where the genes are present 2 ) though mucin-type O -glycosylation has not yet been described. Materials and methods Cells Epimastigote forms of T. cruzi strain CL-Brener were cultured at 28°C in 3.7% brain–heart infusion medium supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum, 10 μg/mL hemin and 20 μg/mL folic acid in T25 flasks, and split 1:10 every 6 days. For scale-up, parasites were inoculated at 5–10 × 10 5 cells/mL in the same medium in Erlenmeyer flasks and maintained on a gyratory shaker at ∼200 rpm and 22°C until stationary phase. Leishmania tarentolae strain P-10 was maintained at 26°C in M199 medium containing 5% FBS and Pen-Strep as above, and split 1:10 every 4 days. The serum level was reduced by serial splitting at 1:10 in brain–heart infusion medium containing 5 μg/mL hemin. Large-scale cultures were prepared as above. Cultures were renewed from frozen stocks every 2 months. D. discoideum strains Ax3 and DL118 were grown axenically and developed as described. Phylogenetic analysis of sequences Amino acid sequences related to that of the catalytic domain of DdGnt2 were identified at NCBI, the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Pathogen Sequencing Unit, and the Joint Genome Institute at the US Department of Energy, using tBLASTn, PSI-BLAST, and PHI-BLAST. For the phylogenetic analysis of the aligned sequences, Modelgenerator was used to find the best fitting amino acid substitution model. A WAG+G+I substitution model was selected consisting of the Whelan and Goldman model with a gamma rate distribution and a proportion of invariable sites. This model was implemented in a maximum likelihood framework, executed using several runs of the program PhyML to search for the best tree. Mapping the 5′-region of the TcOGNT transcripts Total RNA from CL-Brener epimastigotes was reverse transcribed using internal reverse primers TcE5AS415 or TcE2NAS and SuperScript® III Reverse Transcriptase, according to the manufacturer's instructions. The reactions were amplified by PCR with Taq DNA polymerase after the addition of the mini-exon primer TcME33 and additional internal primer, over 30 cycles of 95°C, 30 s; 63°C, 45 s; 72°C, 1 min, and a final extension for 7 min at 72°C. The amplified products were cloned into InstaClone pTZ57R and transfected into chemically competent DH5α cells. Plasmids from ampicillin-resistant clones were sequenced using M13F and M13R primers. Recombinant expression of TcOGNT2 in D. discoideum TcOGNT2 DNA was amplified from CL-Brener gDNA prepared with a Rapidprep genomic DNA isolation kit. PCR reactions were performed in 50 μL of 20 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM MgSO 4, 10 mM KCl, 10 mM 2 SO 4, 0.1% Tx-100, 1 mg/mL nuclease-free BSA, 1–10 ng template DNA, 0.4 mM dNTPs, 0.8 μM of primers, and a mixture of 2.5 U Taq and 0.25 U Pfu DNA polymerases. The full-length TcOGNT2 coding region was amplified using primers E5SATG2 and E5AS2, over 30 cycles of 94°C, 45 s; 65°C, 45 s; 68°C, 3 min, followed by 68°C at 7 min. The DNA was cloned into pCR4TOPO, released by digestion with KpnI and BglII, and ligated into similarly digested pVS4 expression plasmid yielding pVS4OGNT2. Primers E5-U2 and E5L1 were used to amplify DNA for expression of N -terminally truncated TcOGNT2cat as mentioned above, except that the annealing temperature was 60°C. Coding DNA was cloned into pCR4TOPO, excised using BglII, and ligated in the forward orientation into pVS4 predigested with the same enzyme, yielding pVS4OGNT2cat.C-myc. An N -terminal myc-tagged construct was prepared using BamH1-digested pVS4. Plasmids were electroporated and expression clones were isolated essentially as described. Clonal isolates grown in the HL-5 axenic medium were screened by Western blotting with mAb 9E10 for expression of the c-myc epitope-tagged protein. Recombinant expression of TcOGNT2 and TcOGNT1 in L. tarentolae The full-length TcOGNT2 coding region was amplified using primers E5S1 and E5AS1 as mentioned above, using an annealing temperature of 57°C. The amplified fragment was cloned into pCR4TOPO. After digestion with BglII and XhoI, the released DNA was ligated into similarly digested pF4SPmX1.4neo, yielding pF4SPlmpOGNT2.neo. Full-length TcOGNT1 was created similarly using primers E2S1 and E2AS1 using an annealing temperature of 62°C. After digestion with Nco I and Xho I, the released DNA was ligated into similarly digested pF4SPmX1.4neo, yielding pF4SPlmpOGNT1.neo. DNA encoding truncated TcOGNT2 lacking the transmembrane signal anchor domain and short cytoplasmic extension was amplified using primers E5S2 and E5AS1. Coding DNA was excised using Kas I and Xho I and ligated separately into similarly digested pF4SPlmsapX1.4neo and pF4SPlmsapX1.4hyg, yielding the expression plasmids pF4SPlmsapOGNT2cat.neo and pF4SPlmsapOGNT2cat.hyg. Amplified sequences were confirmed by sequencing and found to match sequences in the Sanger genome database. Expression plasmids were digested with 10 U of Swa I, EtOH precipitated, and resuspended in 50 μL 2 mM Tris-HCl. L. tarentolae P-10 cells were transfected essentially as described. After 24 h in the M199 culture medium, G418 or hygromycin B were added to 50 or 100 μg/mL, respectively. Non-DNA control cells were killed in 7–9 days. Resistant cultures were split 7 days after the drug addition and again after 4 days. Cells were cloned by limiting dilution in 50 μL in 96-well plate wells. Site-directed mutagenesis of TcOGNT2cat The amino acid sequence of TcOGNT2cat was altered by site-directed mutagenesis of pF4SPlmsapOGNT2cat.neo. The D234A substitution was generated using primers TcE5D234Afor and TcE5D234Arev, resulting in the point mutations A701C and C702T and a novel Nhe I restriction site; D234N was generated using primers TcE5D234Nfor and TcE5D234Nrev, which yielded G700A and C702T, and a novel AseI restriction site. DNA was amplified as mentioned above using an annealing temperature of 65–70°C, digested with Dpn I for 1 h at 37°C, heat inactivated, and used to transform chemically competent TOP10 E. coli cells. After sequence confirmation, the plasmids were introduced into L. tarentolae as mentioned above. Conditioned media and cell extracts Stationary phase cultures of T. cruzi or L. tarentolae were centrifuged as mentioned above. The supernatants were supplemented with protease inhibitors, clarified further by centrifugation at 16,000 g × 15 min at 4°C, and concentrated 50-fold in a YM-30 Centricon centrifugal concentrator at 4°C. Microsomes were prepared by resuspending the cell pellets in the sucrose buffer, 10 mM MgCl 2, 50 mM KCl, 0.5 M sucrose, protease inhibitors) by probe sonication as described. The P100 pellet was resuspended in 5 mL of sucrose buffer and stored at −80°C. Protein was quantified using a micro BCA protein assay kit. S100 and P100 fractions were prepared from exponentially growing D. discoideum cells as described. The P100 fraction was resuspended in 5 mL of the above sucrose buffer by probe sonication and centrifuged again at 100,000 g × 1 h at 4°C. The supernatant was removed, and the pellet was resuspended in the same volume of sucrose buffer; each was stored at −80°C. TcOGNT2cat purification Concentrated cell culture supernatants were chromatographed on a Superdex 200 PC3.2/30 or HiLoad 16/60 gel filtration column pre-equilibrated in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 15% glycerol, 1 mM MnCl 2, 0.1 mM EDTA. Active fractions were chromatographed on a 5/5 mono-Q column at 1 mL/min using a 0–0.7 M NaCl gradient in 25 mM Tris-HCl, and 0.5 mL fractions were collected. SDS–PAGE and Western blotting SDS–PAGE and Western blotting were performed as described. Apparent M r values were estimated using the Benchmark prestained protein ladder from Invitrogen. Wheat germ agglutinin-reactive proteins were detected using 0.125 μg/mL Alexa Fluor 680-conjugated WGA in 0.5% hemoglobin in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM NaCl. Protein identification Slices from a Coomassie blue stained 7–20% SDS–polyacrylamide gel were vacuum dried and rehydrated in a solution of sequence grade trypsin, as described. The resulting peptides were profiled in positive ion mode on an Ultraflex MALDI-TOF-TOF MS by co-crystallizing with an HCCA matrix. Peptide masses were determined in MS-reflector mode, and MS-MS was carried out in LIFT mode. Enzyme activity assays The standard transferase assay was carried out for 1 h at 28°C in a final volume of 100 μL and contained 0.5 μCi UDP-GlcNAc, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 5 mM MgCl 2, 5 mM MnCl 2, 0.2% CHAPS, 200 μM T16 acceptor peptide, II ), and enzyme protein. Time or temperature was varied as indicated. UDP-GlcNAc or UDP-GalNAc was substituted for UDP-GlcNAc in some trials. Other variations included use of pH 8.0 instead of 8.5 and alternate peptide substrates. II ). For the pH optimization study, the buffer was 100 mM Tris-maleate. The reaction was started by the addition of protein and stopped by dilution with 900 μL 50 mM Na 2 EDTA. After centrifugation at 15,000 g × 15 min at 22°C, or 100,000 g × 60 min for microsomes, the reaction supernatant was loaded onto a Waters 1 mL C 18 Sep-Pak, and bound radioactivity was determined after elution with MeOH and scintillation counting in BioSafe-II as described. One milliliter of the C 18 Sep-Pak flow-through/wash pool was applied to a 0.8 mL Dowex-1 and eluted under positive pressure, and an additional 1 mL H 2 O was applied and collected in the same way. Breakdown activity was based on the sum of the dpm values of the two fractions. Characterization of reaction products For identification of the incorporated sugar, the 3 H-labeled glycopeptide was eluted from a C 18 Sep-Pak, dried by vacuum centrifugation, hydrolyzed in 6 N HCl, and analyzed by HPAEC on a CarboPac PA-1 column as previously described. The 3 H-glycopeptide was subjected to β-elimination by dissolving in 0.5 mL freshly prepared 1 M NaBH 4 in 0.1 M NaOH and incubated for 18 h at 45°C. The reaction was stopped by the slow addition of 29 μL glacial acetic acid. The sample was loaded onto 2 mL of Dowex 50 W, eluted 3× with 4 mL of water and passed through a 1-mL C 18 Sep-Pak. The column was washed with 1.5 mL of water, and all 13.5 mL were pooled and freeze-dried, suspended in 1 mL MeOH and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The addition of MeOH and drying were repeated 6× to eliminate borate. Recovery of radioactivity was 69%. Samples were suspended in water, mixed with 1–10 nmol/10 μL of GlcNAcitol and GalNAcitol, and separated by HPAEC at 0.4 mL/min on a CarboPac MA-1 column using a gradient of NaOH on a Dionex DX-600 HPLC. Standards were detected by pulsed amperometry, and fractions were collected and counted in a liquid scintillation counter to detect radioactivity. The UDP-GlcNAc breakdown product, collected as the Dowex-1 flow-through fraction from a reaction containing 70 μM UDP-GlcNAc and mono-Q-purified enzyme, was dried, redissolved in water with 1 nmol of GlcNAc, passed through a 1 mL Dowex-50, and analyzed on a CarboPac PA-1 column as mentioned above. Antibody preparation For bacterial expression, TcOGNT2cat DNA was PCR amplified using primers E5S3 and E5AS3 and cloned into pCR4TOPO as mentioned above. DNA was excised with Nde I and BamH I and cloned into pET15-TEVi predigested with the same enzymes. The resulting expression plasmid, pET15TEVTcOGNT2cat, was transformed into E. coli strain ER2566, and clonal transfectants were induced with 0.5 mM isopropyl 1-thio-β- d -galactopyranoside for 6 h at 22°C. E. coli was incubated in lysozyme, lysed in a French pressure cell in the presence of protease inhibitors, and incubated in nucleases according to standard procedures. TcOGNT2 was found exclusively in inclusion bodies which were washed with 2% Triton X-100, 2 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 5 mM EDTA, and 5 mM DTT. Because of insolubility, TcOGNT2 was solubilized by probe sonication in 6 M guanidine isothiocyanate in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT. After centrifugation, the supernatant was diluted 10-fold in 6 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0. 5 M NaCl, 5 mM imidazole, loaded onto a Ni +2 -primed His-Trap HP column, and eluted in 0.1–0.25 M imidazole in 0.5 M NaCl. The EtOH-precipitated protein was electrophoresed on a gradient polyacrylamide slab gel, and the major Coomassie blue-stained band at M r 49,000 was excised, minced, and used to immunize New Zealand White female rabbits using complete Freund's adjuvant for the initial injection and incomplete Freund's for booster injections. Preimmune serum and anti-TcOGNT2cat antiserum from bleeds 5–7 were used at 1:100–500. GenBank accession numbers The TcOGNT2 haplotype nucleotide sequences reported in this paper have been submitted to the GenBank TM /EBI Data Bank with accession numbers } EU599317 and } EU599318. Funding The Oklahoma Center for Advancement of Science and Technology to C.M.W.), the National Institutes of Health, the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico, and the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro. Supplementary data Supplementary data for this article is available online at. Click here to view. 