 Cytoplasmic dynein is a large, microtubule-dependent molecular motor. Although the structure of dynein by itself has been characterized, its conformation in complex with microtubules is still unknown. Here, we used cryoelectron microscopy to visualize the interaction between dynein and microtubules. Most dynein molecules in the nucleotide-free state are bound to the microtubule in a defined conformation and orientation. A 3D image reconstruction revealed that dynein's head domain, formed by a ring-like arrangement of AAA+ domains, is located ≈280 Å away from the center of the microtubule. The order of the AAA+ domains in the ring was determined by using recombinant markers. Furthermore, a 3D helical image reconstruction of microtubules with a dynein's microtubule binding domain revealed that the stalk extends perpendicular to the microtubule. By combining the 3D maps of the dynein-microtubule and DS-microtubule complexes, we present a model for how dynein in the nucleotide-free state binds to microtubules and discuss models for dynein's power stroke. Keywords: cryoelectron microscopy, Dictostelium Dynein is a motor protein that utilizes ATP as its energy source to mediate intracellular retrograde transport of various cargoes along microtubules. Dynein generates pico-Newton scale forces and moves processively toward the microtubule minus end, but how it interacts with microtubules is not yet understood. Cytoplasmic dynein is a large protein complex composed of two identical heavy chains and several intermediate and light chains. The heavy chain has three functionally distinct domains : a globular head with ATPase activity, a cargo-binding tail, and a microtubule-binding stalk. The tail is formed by the N terminus of the heavy-chain. It associates with accessory proteins and binds various cargoes. An N terminus region of the head domain is called the “linker” domain, and its interaction with the dynein head is thought to be important for power generation. The head makes up C-terminal two-thirds of the heavy chain and consists of six AAA+ domains in a ring-like arrangement. The first four domains each contain a P-loop known to be important for ATPase activity. The head also contains an additional domain at the C terminus, the function of which is still unknown. AAA1 can hydrolyze ATP, whereas the remaining three P-loop containing AAA+ domains are thought to play a regulatory role. In particular, AAA3 has been shown to also hydrolyze ATP, although the enzymatic activity of this domain may vary among different dyneins. The 10- to 15-nm long stalk protrudes from the head and is comprised of a coiled-coil domain ending in a small globular domain that binds microtubules in an ATP-dependent manner. Fig. 1. Schematic diagrams of the dynein constructs. Proposed domain structure of the dynein heavy chain. The dashed line represents the region that was deleted from the expression construct. Domain organization of the dynein heavy chain. Numbers 1–6... Recent structural and biochemical studies have revealed conformational changes potentially involved in force generation by dynein. Burgess et al. used negative stain electron microscopy to visualize the structure of axonemal dynein-c in the nucleotide-free and ADP-Vi states. 2D projection averages of dynein in these two states showed the tail in different positions with respect to the head domain, and this conformational change was proposed to represent dynein's “power stroke.” This model is supported by FRET studies by Kon et al. showing that dynein adopts at least two conformational states. In state I, the dynein tail is close to the C-terminal domain, whereas it is close to AAA2 in state II. These experiments were performed, however, in the absence of microtubules. Therefore, how dynein interacts with microtubules and how the observed conformational change in dynein contributes to the movement along microtubules remain unresolved questions. Although cryo-EM has produced 3D structures of axonemal dyneins, the head domains were not sufficiently well resolved to identify the sidedness or the polarity of the AAA+ ring. Therefore, it was not possible to relate the conformational change observed in projection to the structure of dynein in the axoneme. Moreover, although cytoplasmic dynein can move freely along microtubules, the tails of axonemal dyneins are tightly bound to neighboring microtubule doublets. Therefore, interaction of free dynein with microtubules and the relation of the observed conformational change in dynein with respect to the microtubule remain to be elucidated. To elucidate the orientation of dynein relative to the microtubule, we recorded cryo-EM images and performed 3D reconstructions of recombinant cytoplasmic dynein bound to microtubules. For these experiments, we used a minimal functional motor domain of Dictyostelium cytoplasmic dynein in the nucleotide-free state. The 3D reconstruction revealed a ring-like structure ≈280 Å away from the center of the microtubule. By using H380 constructs containing recombinant GFP and/or BFP tags, we determined the position of the tail and the arrangement of the AAA+ domains in the ring. In addition, we expressed a dynein stalk construct, consisting only of the coiled coil and the small globular microtubule-binding domain and calculated a 3D reconstruction of the DS-microtubule complex. By combining the 3D maps of the H380-microtubule and DS-microtubule complexes, we addressed the question of how dynein interacts with microtubules. Based on our 3D reconstructions and the positional information of dynein's individual domains relative to the microtubule, we propose models for the molecular mechanism of dynein's power stroke. Results Analysis of Structural Variability in the Dynein-Microtubule Complex. The microtubule-binding domain of dynein is connected to its head domain by a long thin stalk that might be flexible. To assess the feasibility of calculating a 3D reconstruction, we had to analyze the potential structural heterogeneity in the dynein-microtubule complex. Such structural heterogeneity could be caused by variable interactions between the microtubule-binding domain and the microtubule, flexibility of the stalk-forming coiled-coil domain itself, and variability in the connection between the stalk and the dynein head. To test the first two possibilities, we added relatively high concentrations of dynein to our microtubule preparation. Images of the dynein-decorated microtubules in vitrified ice showed that under these conditions dynein covered most of the microtubule surface. Based on visual counting of individual dyneins in highly defocused cryo-EM images, we estimate that dynein occupied ≈5% of the tubulin dimers in the microtubule lattice. At this stoichiometry, steric effects between dynein molecules are negligible, because we can assume that >80% of the dynein molecules are bound to the microtubule without neighboring dynein binding sites on the microtubule being occupied. Fig. 2. Helical 3D reconstruction of dynein-microtubule complex. Cryo-electron micrograph of a microtubule highly decorated with recombinant dynein molecules. Scale bar, 1,000 Å. Helically averaged image of the dynein-microtubule complex. If the conformation and orientation of dyneins bound to microtubules are variable or nonspecific, the density representing dynein should be randomly distributed and smeared out over the entire circumference of the microtubule. The 3D reconstruction showed, however, discrete well defined densities at a radius of 280 Å from the center of the microtubule. The dynein stalk thus appears to be rigid and to connect to the microtubule in a defined geometry. The dyneins formed 14 discrete densities around the circumference of the microtubule because we selected for our analysis microtubules with 14 protofilaments and imposed the symmetry of a 14-start helix. Individual dyneins are, however, not resolved in the direction parallel to the microtubule axis, where they form continuous lines of density. This is due to the 40-Å periodicity of the microtubule 3-start helix, which is smaller than the size of a dynein head. Nevertheless, the density lines representing the dynein heads could be used as “tracks” to determine the position of each dynein bound to the microtubule in the subsequent analysis. From our analysis imposing helical symmetry, we could not determine whether the dynein AAA+ ring is connected to the stalk rigidly or by a flexible hinge. To determine whether the dynein head can swivel about the axis of its stalk, we added a lower concentration of dynein to microtubules and recorded cryo-EM images at high defocus values to obtain a high image contrast. Of the 418 particle images interactively selected, only 13 particle images were oriented with their AAA+ ring perpendicular to the axis of the microtubule. In the majority of bound dyneins, the plane of the AAA+ ring was aligned parallel to the microtubule axis, suggesting that the linker between the stalk and head domain is mostly rigid. To assess whether the head domain can bend at its connection to the stalk, we selected 273 dynein particle images aligned parallel to the microtubule axis, classified them into six groups according to their distance from the center of the microtubule, and calculated averages. The shape of the head domain image changed with the distance of the dynein from the microtubule. Dynein head domains selected from close to the center of the microtubule density mostly showed an oval shape. Head domains close to the edge of the microtubule showed mostly the thin side view, whereas head domains outside of the microtubule density showed predominantly the front view of the AAA+ ring. Although there was a certain degree of variation in the orientation of the dynein heads at each position, the averages showed a clear correlation between the shape of the head domain and its distance from the center of the microtubule. Taken together, our results suggest that most dyneins in the nucleotide-free state are bound to the microtubule in a defined orientation and that the dynein-microtubule complex is suitable for 3D reconstruction. Fig. 3. Orientation of dynein head bound to microtubules. Two possible types of dynein flexibility. Rotation of the AAA+ ring about the axis of the stalk. Bending of the AAA+ ring. Distributions of dynein particles showing the face view... Three-Dimensional Reconstruction of the Dynein-Microtubule Complex. To calculate a 3D reconstruction of the dynein-microtubule complex, we used cryo-EM images of microtubules sparsely decorated with dynein. We treated each microtubule-bound dynein molecule as a single particle and developed a new set of programs that allowed us to assess the degree of heterogeneity in the particles during the calculation of the 3D reconstruction. The resolution of our final density map was estimated to be 26 Å. The image analysis program confirmed that the majority of dynein molecules in selected images adopt a defined conformation. In agreement with the analysis described above, the 3D reconstruction showed that the plane of the AAA+ ring is oriented parallel to the microtubule axis. The ring has inner and outer diameters of ≈32 and 92 Å, respectively, and a thickness of ≈51 Å. The surface of one side of the ring, which we will call the back side, is relatively smooth, whereas the surface of the front side is more corrugated and shows a thin rod-like density spanning the central hole. This rod-like density might represent the N-terminal tail of dynein. The individual densities constituting the ring became more distinct when we calculated a projection map, which showed seven clear densities in the ring, consistent with a previous study. Fig. 4. Single particle 3D reconstruction of dynein-microtubule complex. Cryo-electron micrograph of a microtubule sparsely decorated with recombinant dynein molecules. Phases are flipped to be positive in this figure. The red... Fig. 5. Locating subdomains of dynein head. The H380 reconstruction shows seven distinct densities. Projected density of the head domain seen in the same orientation as the 3D density map in A. Numbers 1–7 label densities representing individual... Locating the N-Terminal Tail and AAA2 of Dynein. To locate the N-terminal tail and AAA2, we used recombinant dynein constructs that either contained only a green fluorescent protein at the N-terminal tail or, in addition, a blue fluorescent protein inserted in AAA2. Both dynein constructs were confirmed to have ATPase activity and to be able to translocate microtubules. The recombinant dyneins were individually mixed with microtubules, and projection averages were calculated by using individual microtubule-bound dyneins extracted from cryo-EM images. Compared with H380, H-GFP-380 showed an additional density on the microtubule-proximal side of the dynein ring. BFP inserted into AAA2 also appeared as an additional density, also on the microtubule-proximal side but more toward the microtubule plus end. The location of the BFP inserted into AAA2 has important implications for dynein function. First, the microtubules determine the orientation of the AAA+ ring through their interaction with the dynein stalk. This is supported by the analysis presented in Figs. 2 and ​ and3. 3. The asymmetric distribution of the BFP density on the AAA+ ring shows that the coiled-coil stalk domain determines the orientation of the head domain and largely prevents flipping of the AAA+ ring with respect to the microtubule. Second, we can determine the arrangement of the AAA+ domains in the dynein head domain. The determination of the AAA+ domains was done as follows. In the amino acid sequence, the BFP tag is inserted at the C terminus of AAA2, close to AAA3. Therefore, the domain at the 1:30 o'clock position is either AAA2 or AAA3. In addition, because the stalk is located in between AAA4 and AAA5, these two domains should be on the right side of the dynein ring. Because the arc between AAA2–3 and AAA4–5 should be short, we concluded that the AAA+ domains are arranged clockwise in the ring. In Fig. 5 B, we assigned the density at the 1:30 o'clock position to AAA3 rather than AAA2, because, if this density were AAA2, the junction between AAA4 and AAA5 would face downwards rather than toward the microtubule, which is unlikely. In this arrangement, the GFP inserted at the N terminus of the tail localized near AAA3 and AAA4. Hence, in the front view, the tail should be located on the upper-right side of the ring and may connect to the rod-like density, which may be representing the tail connecting to AAA1. Position of the Dynein Stalk on Microtubules. Our 3D reconstruction did not visualize the stalk that bridges the gap between the head domain and the microtubule, presumably because of its thin architecture and the limited resolution of our density map. To determine the position where the stalk binds to the microtubule, we made a construct that contains only 278 residues of the microtubule-binding domain of the stalk. The DS construct was based on the Saccharomyces cervisiae dynein sequence, which shares 38% identity with the Dictyostelium sequence. We decorated microtubules with the DS construct and calculated a helical reconstruction of the complex. The 3D map of the complex shows a globular density attached to the tubulins, from which a 90-Å long, thin density extends outwards from the microtubule. It is oriented almost perpendicular to the axis of the microtubule and presumably represents the coiled coil that forms the stalk. The globular density of the DS construct contacts the microtubule at the same position as the globular head of the dynein stalk, which uses the same microtubule surface area for binding as kinesin. Therefore, the DS construct binds to microtubules through the globular tip domain of the stalk. The coiled coil extending from the tip of the stalk is represented by a strong, extended density, indicating that the connection between the coiled coil and the globular tip is fairly rigid. Fig. 6. Three-dimensional reconstruction of dynein stalk–microtubule complex. Helical reconstructions of a microtubule decorated with DS viewed from the plus end of the microtubule and from the side, with the plus end facing up.... The density maps of complexes formed by microtubules with the dynein head domain and the DS construct were combined to identify the most likely position of the stalk. α- and β- tubulins cannot be distinguished in our reconstruction of the dynein-decorated microtubule. Therefore, the tip of the stalk could bind to either tubulin subunit in the map. Based on the extension seen in our reconstruction of the DS-microtubule complex perpendicular to the microtubule axis, we conclude that dynein binds to a microtubule perpendicularly to the axis of the microtubule. Views along the axis of the microtubule revealed two DS densities that may form the connection to the dynein head. A stalk extending out straight form the DS density attached on the microtubule protofilament closest to the dynein head would not contact the dynein head. In contrast, a stalk extending out from the DS density on the succeeding protofilament would directly connect to the dynein head. The distance from the microtubule to the head domain along this line is 115 Å, which is comparable with the previously measured length of the dynein stalk in the absence of microtubules. We therefore propose that the blue line in Fig. 6 D is the most likely position of the stalk. Discussion We visualized the binding of cytoplasmic dynein to microtubules. Although the stalk and tail in free dynein molecules can adopt various conformations with respect to the AAA+ ring, we find that in most dynein molecules bound to the microtubule these domains adopt a single, well defined conformation. The minor population of microtubule-bound dyneins that may be in different conformations was excluded from our structural analysis. The resolution of our 3D reconstruction was sufficient to determine the orientation in which dynein binds to the microtubules, identify the position of the tail, and define the arrangement of the AAA+ domains in the ring structure. We have thus characterized the binding of dynein to microtubules, which allows us to evaluate possible mechanisms underlying the power stroke of this large motor protein. We determined the domain arrangement of dynein relative to the microtubule by tagging specific domains of dynein. AAA2 is located on the side of the AAA+ ring that is facing toward the plus end of the microtubule. Because the stalk should extend from the ring between AAA4 and AAA5, we could assign the positions and the clockwise arrangement of the AAA+ domains in the ring. The difference map between H380 and H-GFP-380 showed that the N-terminal tail is located around the top of the ring, close to the connection to the stalk. This finding differs from a previous study that used labeling of the N-terminal tail with Fab fragments and concluded the tail to be flexible. Experimental differences may explain this inconsistency. The previous study was done with free dynein in the absence of microtubules, in which case both the tail and the stalk can move freely. Binding of dynein to a microtubule may cause an allosteric effect that leads to an interaction of the presumed linker region with the AAA+ ring of the head domain, thus fixing the tail in a defined position. Furthermore, the previous experiments were done with negatively stained dynein molecules adsorbed to a carbon support film, which could have distorted the dynein architecture. In contrast, our study was done with frozen-hydrated samples, which should fully preserve the native structure of the dynein-microtubule complex. Because we defined the position of dynein with respect to the microtubule together with the arrangement of the AAA+ domains, we propose a new model for the power stroke in cytoplasmic dynein. Burgess et al. proposed a model for the power stroke of axonemal dynein-c based on the assumptions that the domains in the AAA+ ring are arranged counterclockwise with the stalk tilting toward the microtubule plus end in the nucleotide-free state. In this model, the stalk of ADP-Pi-bound dynein is oriented perpendicular to the microtubule axis. Tight binding of the stalk to the microtubule then causes a conformational change in AAA1-AAA4, resulting in the release of ADP and Pi, which, in turn, causes a counterclockwise rotation of the dynein ring. Rotation of the AAA+ ring results in a change of the angle between the tail and the stalk from 160° to 136°. Fig. 7. Models showing how a conformational change in the dynein domain could generate movement along a microtubule. The N terminus of the dynein heavy chain, which is not included in the construct, is shown in dotted line. Our construct starts from the GFP tag... Our reconstruction of cytoplasmic dynein bound to a microtubule in the nucleotide-free state shows that the domains in the AAA+ ring are arranged clockwise and the stalk in this state appears to extend perpendicular to the microtubule axis. We therefore propose an alternative model for the power stroke of cytoplasmic dynein. In our model, the stalk is tilted toward the microtubule minus end in state II. When the power stroke occurs, the relationship between the tail and the AAA+ ring would change in the same way as proposed for dynein-c, which would cause dynein to move toward the microtubule minus end. Further biochemical and biophysical studies will be required to test these two models and to understand how conformational changes in cytoplamic dynein are translated into movement along a microtubule. In particular, it will be important to directly visualize the dynein stalk in the microtubule-bound H380 construct, because we infer the stalk orientation from the reconstruction of the microtubule-bound DS construct, which is missing the head domain and may thus have a different conformation from the stalk in the head-containing H380 construct. Because we selected only dynein molecules in the predominant conformation, our study does not exclude the possibility that some dynein molecules bind to microtubules in a different conformation. Still, with the selected dynein molecules the reconstruction converged into a single structure with a 2D agreement of 0.89, confirming the validity of our dynein structure. This finding indicates that the majority of dyneins are bound to the microtubule in a defined orientation and conformation. Moreover, we rarely observed the dynein ring oriented perpendicular to the microtubule axis, making it unlikely that the dynein head can rotate by 180° while bound to the microtubule. This raises the question of how dynein can occasionally move toward the plus end. Possibly the stalk and tail domains are only rigid when dynein is tightly bound to a microtubule but flexible when dynein dissociates from it. This may create sufficient flexibility for the head domain to flip and to allow dynein to move, although inefficiently, toward the plus end. Materials and Methods Protein Preparation. His-6-tagged 380-kDa dynein motor domain was prepared by using 380-kDa motor domain of the Dictyostelium dynein heavy chain. The H-GFP-380 construct containing a GFP at the N terminus and the H-GFP-380B2 construct containing a GFP at the N terminus and a BFP in between AAA2 and AAA3 were prepared as described in ref. 5. The DS was engineered by inserting the DNA fragment encoding residues M3061 to K3267 of cytoplasmic dynein from S. cervisiae into the pET17b expression vector then expressed and purified as described in ref. 13. The tubulin was purified from bovine brain. Cryo-Electron Microscopy. Microtubules were polymerized in DMSO-PEM buffer and mixed with 0.2 to 1.0 mg/ml dynein. ATP was removed by gel filtration chromatography. Dynein-microtubule mixtures were adsorbed to holy carbon grids then blotted and plunged into liquid ethane. Microtubule decorated with H380 or H-GFP-380B2 were imaged with a JEM-2200FE electron microscope at a nominal magnification of 40,000× at defocus values ranging from −2 to −8 μm. For H-GFP-380, images were collected with a FEI Tecnai F20 at a nominal magnification of 29,000× at defocus values ranging from −3 to −6 μm. For the DS-microtubule complex, image collection and analysis were done as reported in ref. 13. Image Analysis. For image analysis of the dynein-microtubule complex, we developed a new set of image processing programs described in ref. 19. Fourteen protofilament microtubules were selected from CCD images based on their Moiré patterns. Three hundred forty-seven filaments decorated with H-380, 108 filaments decorated with H-GFP-380, and 106 filaments decorated with H-GFP-380-B2 were analyzed by using the EOS software. The defocus values of the images were determined by using ctffind3 and the contrast transfer function was corrected by phase flipping. Details are described in SI Methods. Evaluation of the Structure. 2D agreement is defined as the correlation coefficient between a 2D averaged image of free dynein and the corresponding reprojection from the final 3D reconstruction. 2D averaged dynein images were calculated by averaging dynein molecules in vitrified ice in the absence of microtubules. Reprojections were calculated from the 3D reconstruction at an angular interval of 2.57° and cross-correlated with the 2D averaged dynein images to identify the corresponding reprojections. Fourier shell correlation between the resolution 180 and 40 Å was defined as “2D agreement.” Based on simulation experiments described in ref. 19, the 3D reconstruction is considered to be well determined if the value for 2D agreement is >0.88. Image Averaging of H380, H-GFP-380, and H-GFP-380-B2. The dynein constructs were individually mixed with microtubules. Averages were calculated by using the H-380 reconstruction as a reference for alignment. Dyneins within 25.2° arc of the transverse plane were averaged to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. Interactive Dynein Particle Selection. H380 was mixed with microtubules. Highly defocused images without microtubule densities were used for the analysis. Particles were selected manually and categorized according to their position from the axis of the microtubule. Individual particles in each class were visually separated into three groups according to their shapes. Averages were then calculated. Supplementary Material Supporting Information: Click here to view. 