 The Dictyostelium G α 5 subunit has been shown to reduce cell viability, inhibit folate chemotaxis and accelerate tip morphogenesis and gene expression during multicellular development. Alteration of the D-motif (mitogen-activated protein kinase docking site) at the amino terminus of the G α 5 subunit or the loss of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 diminished the lethality associated with the overexpression or constitutive activation of the G α 5 subunit. The amino-terminal D-motif of the G α 5 subunit was also found to be necessary for the reduced cell size, small aggregate formation and precocious developmental gene expression associated with G α 5 subunit overexpression. This D-motif also contributed to the aggregation delay in cells expressing a constitutively active G α 5 subunit, but the D-motif was not necessary for the inhibition of folate chemotaxis. These results suggest that the amino-terminal D-motif is required for some but not all phenotypes associated with elevated G α 5 subunit functions during growth and development and that ERK1 can function in G α 5 subunit-mediated signal transduction. INTRODUCTION Signal transduction through G protein-coupled receptors activates many downstream regulatory proteins and leads to a wide variety of cellular responses. Receptors, and sometimes G proteins, are pathway-specific, but many other signalling proteins function in multiple G protein-mediated pathways, suggesting that signal-specific responses involve receptor and/or G protein interactions with specific downstream signalling components ( Albert & Robillard, 2002 ; Hildebrandt, 1997 ). The soil amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum uses several different G protein-mediated pathways during growth and development to regulate cell movement and differentiation; therefore, this organism offers a useful system for studying the interactions between pathway-specific and common signalling components during development. The Dictyostelium G α 5 subunit functions in a signalling pathway that inhibits folate chemotaxis, promotes a small aggregate size and accelerates tip formation and gene expression during development. The activator and receptor for this pathway remain to be determined but a recent study of chimeric G α subunits suggests that the functional specificity of the G α 5 subunit is not limited to the specificity of receptor coupling but requires interactions with other signalling components. The G α 5 subunit primary sequence is closely related to the G α 4 subunit, a subunit required for folate chemotaxis, except for a region near the amino terminus of the G α 5 subunit where a putative mitogen-activated protein kinase docking site, known as a D-motif, exists, suggesting that interactions with MAPKs might be important for G α 5-specific responses ( Hadwiger, 2007 ; Remenyi et al., 2005 ). An interaction between the amino-terminal D-motif of a G α subunit and a MAPK has been reported previously in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, where the interaction of the Gpa1 G α subunit and the Fus3 MAPK facilitates the G α subunit-mediated adaptation to pheromone stimulation. In Dictyostelium, a D-motif in the central region of the G α 4 subunit has recently been shown to be important for interactions with the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 and for G α 4 function late in the culmination stage of development. The Dictyostelium genome contains genes for only two MAPKs, ERK1 and ERK2, and both kinases can be activated in G protein-mediated signalling pathways. ERK1 can be activated in response to cAMP and loss of ERK1 results in small aggregate size during development. ERK2 is rapidly phosphorylated and activated in response to either cAMP or folate, and the loss of ERK2 prevents aggregation and reduces prespore gene expression during development. Both ERK1 and ERK2 contain sequence similarity with MAPKs from other organisms in a common docking domain, suggesting that they also interact with proteins containing D-motifs. In this study, the role of the D-motif at the amino terminus of the G α 5 subunit was explored by analysing the phenotypes of G α 5 subunits with alterations in this D-motif. Growth and developmental phenotypes associated with G α 5 subunit overexpression or constitutive activation were found to depend on the amino-terminal D-motif. Sensitivity to elevated G α 5 subunit expression and function during vegetative growth was found to be absent in erk1 but not erk2 cells, indicating a specific requirement for ERK1 in G α 5 subunit-mediated signalling. The G α 5 subunit D-motif alteration did not eliminate the inhibition of folate chemotaxis, suggesting that this D-motif plays an important role in some but not all G α 5 functions during growth and development. METHODS Strains and media. All of the Dictyostelium strains were isogenic to the wild-type strain KAx3, except where noted in the mutants. The gα5 strain has been described previously. The erk2 strain was created from the JH8 strain using the pAK240Cla gene disruption construct, as described previously. The pAK240Cla gene construct was kindly provided by J. Segall and the Dictyostelium Stock Center. Disruption of the ERK2 locus was verified by genomic DNA blot analysis (data not shown). The erk1 strain was created in KAx3 cells by disrupting the ERK1 gene by inserting the blasticidin S resistance gene, as described by Nguyen et al.. Cells were grown in axenic HL5 medium or on bacterial lawns ( Watts & Ashworth, 1970 ). DNA vectors were electroporated into cells as described previously. Transformed cells were grown in medium containing G418, and drugs used for selection were removed several hours prior to analysis. Modelling of the G α 5 subunit structure was conducted using the swiss - model program and displayed using the PyMOL Molecular Graphics System 2008. Recombinant DNA constructs. The wild-type G α 5 gene, replacing the GFP gene, was expressed from the act15 promoter in the pTX-GFP vector (Ddp1-based plasmid) as described previously. Alterations to the G α 5 subunit D-motif, G α 5 K10E,K11E subunit, were created in a Hin dIII/ Pst I fragment of the Gα 5 gene in the vector pT7T318U by PCR mutagenesis of the entire vector using the following overlapping oligonucleotides: sense strand, 5′-gcgccgATCGAtTATCAATTAAGAAAAGAAGAAGGAAG, and antisense strand, 5′-gcgccgaTCGATGTCTCTTGATTcCTcTGTTCAATTGTTAATATACAACCC (lower case nucleotides differ from those of the template sequence). These mutations were confirmed by sequence analysis and this mutant segment of G α 5 was used to replace the same segment of the wild-type G α 5 gene in the expression vectors. The constitutively active G α 5 Q198L subunit expressed from the act15 promoter was created by replacing a Pst I/ Bcl I fragment of the wild-type G α 5 constructs with a fragment from a G α 5 Q198L gene previously created in a genomic fragment. This mutation was also combined with the mutations in the G α 5 D-motif to create the combined mutant G α 5 d−, * subunit expression vector. To create this gene, the Hin dIII/ Pst I fragment of the G α 5 d− gene was used to replace the beginning of the G α 5 * ORF. All G α 5 expression constructs were also created in the pDXA-GFP2 vector that integrates into the genome unless co-electroporated with the pREP vector, because plasmid copy number can sometimes influence the phenotypes of cells. Similar results were obtained with both vector systems but only the results from the pTX vector are shown. Cell growth and drug selection. Comparison of cell viability for cells expressing wild-type and mutant G α 5 subunits was assessed by either counting the number of transformants after electroporation or growing established strains in media containing different concentrations of drug selection. Briefly, cells were electroporated with equal amounts of wild-type and mutant G α 5 expression vectors, plated onto solid HL5 medium, and after 24 h, the cells were selected by using G418 from 1 to 10 μg ml −1. Drug-resistant colonies were counted 10−14 days after drug selection. Cell sizes were compared by growing equal concentrations of different strains, harvesting cells by centrifugation, washing cells in phosphate buffer and weighing cell pellets. Protein content of cells treated with Triton X-100 (0.01 % final concentration) was assessed using a Bradford protein assay. Development and chemotaxis assays. Cells were grown to mid-exponential phase, washed twice in phosphate buffer (12 mM NaH 2 PO 4 adjusted to pH 6.1 with KOH), and suspended in phosphate buffer, before spotting on non-nutrient plates for development. Alternatively, cells were spotted on to Whatman-50 filters soaked in phosphate buffer for developmental RNA isolation. Total RNA was isolated, separated on formaldehyde-denaturing agarose gels and blotted to membranes as described previously ( Hadwiger et al., 1996 ). Radioactive probes were created using the random primer method as described by Feinberg & Vogelstein. Hybridized blots were detected using autoradiography. rRNA bands on blots were detected by UV light shadowing before hybridization to verify consistency in sample loading and blotting. Chemotaxis assays were performed by spotting droplets of cell suspensions on non-nutrient plates, allowing absorption of liquid into the agar, followed by the spotting of 1 μl droplets of 1 mM folate solutions approximately 2–3 mm away from the cell droplet, as described previously. Images of the cell droplet perimeter and the location of the leading edge of cells migrating toward the folate source were recorded after 3 h using a dissecting microscope and a digital camera. The early and late images were accurately aligned by scarring the agar surface with a needle. RESULTS Docking site motifs in G α subunits A region near the amino terminus of the G α 5 subunit was identified as a potential site of functional specificity due to sequence diversity with respect to the G α 2 and G α 4 subunits; further inspection of this region revealed a D-motif. This D-motif is located near a highly conserved guanine nucleotide interaction domain and at a position analogous to the previously characterized D-motif of the yeast mating response G α subunit, Gpa1. The sequence of this motif is similar to the consensus sequence 1–3 -X 1–6 --X- found in MAPK kinases and other proteins that dock with MAPKs. The G α 5 D-motif contains a tyrosine residue at a position typically occupied by a leucine or isoleucine residue, but the aromatic ring of the tyrosine side group probably contributes to the hydrophobic nature of this region. A survey of the other 11 Dictyostelium G α subunit sequences revealed putative D-motifs on the G α 2, G α 3 and G α 11 subunits in the same region, suggesting that MAPKs might interact with multiple G α subunits in this organism. The human G α 16 subunit also has a D-motif near the amino terminus. The Dictyostelium G α 4 subunit does not contain a D-motif near the amino terminus but does have a D-motif at a more internal site where there is a second possible D-motif in the G α 5 subunit. Both the amino-terminal and internal D-motifs of the G α 5 subunit are predicted to be located in exposed regions of the subunit based on structural modelling of the G α 5 subunit. Fig. 1. Location of D-motifs in the G α 5 subunit. Alignment of D-motifs in G α subunits. Primary sequences of the yeast Gpa1, Dictyostelium G α 5, G α 3, G α 11, G α... Alteration of the amino-terminal D-motif reduces the lethal effects of G α 5 subunit overexpression To determine if the amino-terminal D-motif in the G α 5 subunit plays a role in G protein-mediated signalling, the first two lysine residues of this motif were changed to glutamate because an analogous change in the yeast Gpa1 subunit was previously reported to reduce both Gpa1–Fus3 interactions and Gpa1-mediated downregulation of the pheromone response. The G α 5 D-motif mutant subunit, G α 5 K10E, K11E and the wild-type G α 5 subunit were electroporated into gα5 and wild-type cells to examine phenotypes associated with D-motif alterations. Electroporation of the G α 5 d− subunit vector into cells typically resulted in at least a 10-fold higher number of viable transformants compared with the wild-type G α 5 subunit, unless the drug selection for the vectors was reduced to less than 2 μg G418 ml −1. Increasing the G418 concentration resulted in the death of clonal transformants expressing the G α 5 but not the G α 5 d− subunit, suggesting that the G α 5 d− subunit is less detrimental to vegetative growth than the wild-type G α 5 subunit (Supplementary Table S1, available in Microbiology Online). Fig. 2. Survival of wild-type, erk1 and erk2 cells transformed with G α 5 subunit expression vectors. The strains were electroporated in parallel experiments with equal concentrations of G α 5, G α 5 d−, G α 5* and G α... Stimulation of the G α 5-mediated pathway with an exogenous signal has not been possible because the signal for this pathway remains unknown. However, the mutant G α 5 Q198L subunit contains an alteration known to impair the GTPase activity of G α subunits resulting in a constitutively active G α subunit. Expression of the G α 5* subunit typically resulted in 10-fold fewer viable transformants compared with the expression of the wild-type G α 5 subunit, consistent with earlier studies that suggest G α 5 subunit activation is detrimental to vegetative growth. Combining the D-motif mutations with the constitutively active mutation resulted in a G α 5 d−, * subunit expression vector that typically generated 100-fold more viable transformants than the G α 5* vector, suggesting that the D-motif is important for the lethal effect of the G α 5* subunit on vegetative cells. The increased viability of cells expressing the G α 5 d−, * subunit also correlated with the ability of clonal transformants to survive at higher G418 concentrations (Supplementary Table S1). erk1 cells are not sensitive to G α 5 expression vectors The increased yield in viable transformants with the G α 5 d− subunit expression vector in gα5 and wild-type cells could possibly result from decreased interactions with MAPKs. To test this possibility, the various G α 5 subunit mutants were transformed into erk1 and erk2 cells, and the numbers of viable transformants were determined after selection with 3 μg G418 ml −1. erk2 cells transformed with either the G α 5 or G α 5* subunit expression vectors gave very few viable transformants compared with those cells transformed with G α 5 d− or G α 5 d−, * subunits. In contrast, erk1 cells produced a similar number of transformants with all of the G α 5 subunit expression vectors, suggesting that these cells are insensitive to the detrimental effects of the G α 5 and G α 5* subunits. All erk1 transformants and the erk2 cells expressing the G α 5 d− or G α 5 d−, * subunits were also resistant to higher drug selection (>10 μg G418 ml −1 ). These results indicate that ERK1 but not ERK2 is required for the lethality associated with overexpression of the G α 5 or G α 5* subunits, implying that ERK1 functions downstream of the G α 5 subunit-mediated signalling pathway during vegetative growth. G α 5 subunit inhibition of folate chemotaxis does not require the amino-terminal D-motif Overexpression of the G α 5 subunit has been shown to inhibit chemotaxis to folate, indicated by the increased chemotactic movement of gα5 cells and the reduced chemotactic movement of cells overexpressing the G α 5 subunit. Clonal transformants overexpressing the G α 5 subunit were inhibited in their chemotactic movement to folate, similar to that previously reported; cells overexpressing the G α 5 d− subunit were also capable of inhibiting chemotaxis. The level of chemotaxis inhibition correlates with G α 5 subunit expression level and so clonal transformants with similar levels of G α 5 and G α 5 d− subunit expression were compared in the chemotaxis assay and all subsequent analyses. Increasing the G α 5 d− subunit expression by using higher levels of drug selection did not significantly change the growth or developmental phenotypes. Cells expressing the G α 5* or G α 5 d−, * subunit were also inhibited with respect to folate chemotaxis, indicating that the altered amino-terminal D-motif does not eliminate chemotaxis inhibition. Fig. 3. Chemotaxis of wild-type and G α 5 mutant cells to folate. Chemotaxis assays were conducted as described in Methods and measurements were determined for the distance travelled by the leading edge of cells. Measurements are the maximum distance of... Reduction of large cell phenotype by G α 5 subunit D-motif mutants Cells lacking the G α 5 gene typically appear larger than wild-type cells when attached to culture plates, suggesting that the mutant cells are either larger or more capable of extensive spreading. To quantify cell size differences, wild-type and gα5 cells carrying various G α 5 subunit expression vectors were counted and then analysed for cell weight and protein content. The large cell phenotype of gα5 cells is reversed when the G α 5 subunit is overexpressed in these cells. Overexpression of the G α 5 d− subunit decreased cell size to near that of wild-type cells but not to the extremes observed for G α 5 subunit expression, indicating that the alteration to the amino-terminal D-motif reduces but does not eliminate the ability of the G α 5 subunit to decrease cell size. Expression of the G α 5* or G α 5 d−, * subunits in gα5 cells also reduced cell size to nearly that of wild-type cells. Fig. 4. Wild-type and G α 5 mutant cell sizes. Cells were grown in HL5 medium on plastic Petri dishes and photographed using an inverted phase-contrast microscope at ×200 magnification. Sizes of wild-type... G α 5 subunit amino-terminal D-motif is important for early tip formation Expression of the wild-type G α 5 subunit in gα5 cells resulted in noticeably smaller aggregates with precocious tip formation (9 h into development) compared with the aggregates formed by wild-type or gα5 cells. This same level of accelerated development was not observed for gα5 cells expressing the G α 5 d− subunit, but expression of the G α 5 d− subunit does correct for the delayed development observed for gα5 cells. Expression of the G α 5* subunit in gα5 cells resulted in a greater delay in aggregate formation than the delay observed for gα5 cells with no expression vectors. This phenotype is probably due to an inhibition of cAMP chemotaxis previously observed for cells expressing constitutively active G α 5*, G α 4* or G α 2* subunits. The expression of the G α 5 d−, * subunit did not delay the formation of aggregates by gα5 cells, suggesting that the altered D-motif reduces the aggregation delay associated with the G α 5* subunit. Therefore, the developmental morphologies associated with elevated and constitutive G α 5 subunit activity were diminished when the amino-terminal D-motif was altered, suggesting MAPK interactions might be important for the timing of these developmental processes. Fig. 5. Developmental morphology of wild-type and gα5 cells with or without G α 5 subunit expression vectors. Cells were grown in axenic medium and washed with phosphate buffer and then cell suspensions (2×10 7 cells ml −1... G α 5 subunit amino-terminal D-motif affects the timing of gene expression during development The importance of the G α 5 subunit D-motif in developmental morphology and the established role of MAPKs in gene regulation suggest that the D-motif might also contribute to the regulation of developmental gene expression. To examine developmental gene expression, RNA was isolated from gα5 cells that express wild-type or mutant G α 5 subunits during tip formation. Expression of the prespore-specific gene cotC was delayed in gα5 cells and slightly accelerated in cells expressing the wild-type G α 5 subunit compared with wild-type cells, consistent with the results from previous studies. Cells containing the G α 5 d− or G α 5 d−, * subunit expressed cotC with kinetics similar to gα5 cells, suggesting that the G α 5 amino-terminal D-motif is important for the early onset of prespore-specific gene expression. The expression of the cotC gene in cells expressing the G α 5* subunit was similar to that of wild-type cells, even though these cells have a delay in aggregation. The effect of wild-type and mutant G α 5 subunits on the expression of the prestalk-specific gene, ecmA, was much more subtle than that observed for the prespore gene. Only slight differences were observed in the timing and level of ecmA expression. Fig. 6. Developmental gene expression in wild-type and gα5 cells with or without G α 5 subunit expression vectors. Cells were grown in axenic medium and washed with phosphate buffer and then cell suspensions (1×10 8 cells ml −1... DISCUSSION The identification of a D-motif in the amino terminus of the G α 5 subunit that impacts vegetative and developmental functions suggests that G α 5 subunit–MAPK interactions contribute to signalling pathways in Dictyostelium. The molecular modelling of the G α 5 subunit predicts that the position of the amino terminal D-motif is near the G βγ dimer and receptor binding sites, suggesting that this motif might not be available for MAPK interactions when the G α subunit is inactive and bound by the G βγ dimer and receptor. Support for this concept is provided by the increase in Gpa1–Fus3 interactions when yeast cells are stimulated by mating pheromone. However, molecular modelling of the G α 5 subunit structure predicts that the internal D-motifs of G α 5 might be available in the inactive state, and this is supported by the interactions of the internal D-motif of the G α 4 subunit with ERK2 in the absence of pathway activation. Attempts to analyse the G α 5 subunit and ERK1 interactions in Dictyostelium have been hampered by the inability to express sufficient levels of epitope-tagged wild-type and constitutively active G α 5 subunits in Dictyostelium, presumably due to the lethal effects of these subunits (H.-N. Nguyen and J. A. Hadwiger, data not shown). The requirement of the amino-terminal D-motif for the lethality associated with G α 5 subunit suggests that MAPK interactions are important for this phenotype; this concept is further supported by the specific requirement of ERK1 for this phenotype. In addition, ERK1 expression vectors can also affect cell viability. The mechanism responsible for the loss of viability due to G α 5 or ERK1 function remains to be determined but this mechanism could possibly involve a loss in nutrient uptake similar to that accompanying the transition from vegetative growth to multicellular development. The amino-terminal D-motif of the G α 5 subunit is important for the formation of small aggregates with precocious tip development and cell-type-specific gene expression. The G α 5 subunit-mediated tip development might also require ERK1 function because erk1 aggregates are often delayed or blocked in tip development, and overexpression of the G α 5 subunit in erk1 cells does not accelerate tip development. The spatial expression patterns of the G α 5 subunit and ERK1 appear to be very similar, with both proteins expressed from anterior-like cells found near the posterior of slugs. However, the small aggregate size phenotype cannot be readily attributed to the activation of ERK1 function because the loss of ERK1 results in a similar phenotype. How the G α 5 subunit D-motif affects the timing of prespore-specific gene expression is also not clear, but MAPKs often contribute to the regulation of gene expression through the phosphorylation of cytoplasmic or nuclear substrates. Previous studies implicate Dictyostelium ERK2 function in prespore gene expression and the indirect activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, a regulator of prespore gene expression ( Hopper et al., 1995 ; Maeda et al., 2004 ; Mann & Firtel, 1993 ; Mann et al., 1994 ). Therefore, the contribution of G α 5 subunit signalling through ERK2 or other regulatory components cannot be excluded. The presence of D-motifs in the amino terminus of other G α subunits in Dictyostelium, yeast and mammalian cells implies that MAPK interactions with G α subunits might be widespread among eukaryotes. The requirement of ERK1 for G α 5 subunit-mediated phenotypes and the previously determined association of ERK2 and the G α 4 subunit suggests that interactions between G proteins and MAPKs might be specific, but we cannot exclude the possibility of other signalling combinations ( Nguyen & Hadwiger, 2009 ). Variations in D-motif sequence and location might contribute to the specificity of G α subunit–MAPK interactions, and these interactions are likely to play an important role in signalling specificity downstream of G protein-coupled receptors. 