 The signaling pathways governing pathophysiologically important autophagic and necrotic cell death are not entirely known. In the Dictyostelium eukaryote model, which benefits from both unique analytical and genetic advantages and absence of potentially interfering apoptotic machinery, the differentiation factor DIF leads from starvation-induced autophagy to ACD, or, if atg1 is inactivated, to NCD. Here, through random insertional mutagenesis, we found that inactivation of the iplA gene, the only gene encoding an inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor in this organism, prevented ACD. The IP3R is a ligand-gated channel governing Ca 2+ efflux from endoplasmic reticulum stores to the cytosol. Accordingly, Ca 2+ -related drugs also affected DIF signaling leading to ACD. Thus, in this system, a main pathway signaling ACD requires IP3R and further Ca 2+ -dependent steps. This is one of the first insights in the molecular understanding of a signaling pathway leading to autophagic cell death. INTRODUCTION Apoptosis, or type I cell death, has long been considered the major type of programmed cell death in animal cells. However, other cell death types exist and occur in particular when the apoptosis machinery is disrupted. In animal cells, the main nonapoptotic types of cell death, autophagic and necrotic cell death are still incompletely defined, whereas their pathophysiological importance is increasingly appreciated. To better understand the molecular mechanisms governing these nonapoptotic cell death types, mammalian model systems were used, and they brought novel insights in the field. However, data from these models also revealed the difficulty of unambiguously dissecting nonapoptotic cell death mechanisms from the apoptosis machinery. For example, Bcl-2 family members are well-characterized mediators of apoptosis, but they also regulate nonapoptotic programmed cell death requiring autophagy genes. Bcl-2 and Bcl-X L bind to and inhibit Beclin-1, the mammalian orthologue of yeast Atg6, an essential mediator of autophagy. Moreover, Caspase-8 has been shown to inhibit autophagic death dependently of Atg7 and Beclin-1. Conversely, calpain-cleaved Atg5, another protein required for autophagy, interferes with apoptosis by binding to Bcl-X L. Thus, these cell death types share components, and one may regulate and modify the activity of the other, complicating their study. An experimental system from which main apoptosis-governing proteins are absent would thus be a significant asset to investigate nonapoptotic cell death types. The protist Dictyostelium discoideum benefits from favorable experimental and genetic properties, including a small, sequenced, and haploid genome. It undergoes developmental cell death upon differentiation into stalk cells. Under in vitro monolayer conditions mimicking this development, wild-type Dictyostelium cells underwent vacuolar cell death. Vacuolization could be suppressed by targeted mutagenesis of the autophagy gene atg1, showing a link between vacuolization and autophagy. The corresponding cell death was referred to as autophagic cell death. Importantly, in Dictyostelium cells, there are no main members of the apoptosis machinery that could interfere with nonapoptotic cell death: there are no caspase-family members, no Bcl-2 family member and no BH3 -bearing molecule. Triggering ACD in monolayers required at least two distinct stimuli. The first stimulus was starvation, which triggered autophagy as manifested by the formation of autophagosomes revealed by electron microscopy. However, starvation and the resulting autophagy did not by itself lead to ACD. A second stimulus was required for this, namely, DIF-1, a major differentiation factor in Dictyostelium. DIF is a small dichlorinated molecule, which when added to starved cells undergoing autophagy led to their vacuolization and death. DIF is normally made by Dictyostelium prespore cells, upon starvation. It is not made by Dictyostelium strain HMX44, which thus requires exogenous DIF to vacuolize and die, enabling one to distinguish easily the role of starvation and that of DIF. Other Dictyostelium strains make some DIF when starved in monolayer tests. However, this is made in relatively small amounts so that addition of exogenous DIF still leads to markedly more cell death than controls with only starvation-induced endogenous DIF. Importantly, exogenous DIF has no detectable effect on cells that do not undergo starvation. These data enabled one to dissect out DIF-induced ACD from starvation proper. Inactivation of the autophagy gene, atg1, also revealed another type of death in Dictyostelium. The atg1 -null cells, when starved and subjected to DIF, underwent in succession reactive oxygen species production, ATP depletion, and early membrane rupture reflecting necrotic cell death. DIF may induce NCD through a direct or indirect uncoupler-like effect on mitochondria of starved cells. However, it was not clear through which intracellular pathways this was achieved. Mechanisms leading to nonapoptotic death are still poorly understood in animal cells. We took advantage of the powerful genetic tools and the absence of main actors of apoptosis in Dictyostelium to study signaling pathways involved in these cell death types. As reported here, through random insertional mutagenesis and selection for resistance to death we obtained a Dictyostelium mutant that did not vacuolize and did not undergo ACD. The disrupted gene was iplA, the only gene encoding inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. This governs Ca 2+ fluxes from the endoplasmic reticulum stores into the cytosol. Although the iplA mutation suppressed ACD, it inhibited NCD only inconsistently. Response to exogenous DIF, analysis of the iplA phenotype, and additional use of Ca 2+ -related drugs allowed us to define an iplA-dependent DIF pathway required for ACD. Thus, in this model system, DIF leads through IP3R, Ca 2+ fluxes, and Ca 2+ -related proteins to autophagic cell death. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells, Cell Culture, Induction of Cell Death, and Microscopy The parental Dictyostelium strains used in this report were HMX44A, HMX44A. atg1-1, DH1, DH1. atg1-1, and the thymidine auxotroph JH10. The mutants obtained in the work reported here were HMX44A. atg1-3, HMX44A. atg1-3.iplA −, HMX44A. iplA −, JH10. iplA −, DH1. iplA −, DH1. iplA −, and DH1. atg1-1.iplA −. Strains bearing the iplA − mutation were grown in HL5-modified medium supplemented with 10 μg/ml blasticidin. The thymidine auxotroph JH10 cells were grown in HL5 supplemented with 100 μg/ml thymidine. Others strains were grown in HL5-modified medium alone. To induce vacuolar death in JH10, DH1, and HMX44A cells, or necrotic cell death in strains mutated for the autophagy gene atg1, cells were starved in the presence of cAMP, and then they were treated with the differentiation factor DIF-1 as described. After the indicated period, cells in the Lab-Tek chambers were examined using an Axiovert 200 microscope. Fluorescence-activated cell sorter determination of 2′-7′-dichlorofluorescin diacetate fluorescence and regrowth assays were as described previously. Each figure with histograms is a single experiment, most often assayed in duplicate, and representative of at least three such experiments. Reagents Cyclosporin A, thapsigargin, and 1,2-bisethane- N, N, N′, N′ -tetraacetic acid were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Stock solutions of CsA were prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide, Tg in pure ethanol, and BAPTA in 0.3 N sodium bicarbonate NaHCO 3. Each reagent was added to starved cells in Lab-Tek chambers at the indicated final concentrations, at the same time as DIF or 30 min before DIF. After the indicated duration of incubation, cells were analyzed by microscopy and/or flow cytometry. Random Insertional Mutagenesis and Developmental Screening For each transfection, 2 × 10 7 exponentially growing vegetative JH10 cells were electroporated with 10 μg of BamHI-linearized pUCBsrΔBamHI vector in ice-cold electroporation buffer in the presence of 12 U of the DpnII restriction enzyme using a Bio-Rad Gene Pulser. Cells were incubated in HL5 medium at 22°C for 24 h, and then 10 μg/ml blasticidin was added to select transformants during a further period of culture of 5–10 d. After selection, 12 × 10 6 transformants were subjected to cell death induction in monolayer in 75-cm 2 flasks. After 48 h, DIF-containing Soerensen buffer was removed and replaced with HL5 medium to enable growth of surviving cells. When enough cells had been obtained, a second similar round of cell death induction and selection was performed. After 48 h of incubation in DIF, the resulting surviving cells were plated on Klebsiella aerogenes bacterial lawns on SM/5 plates and incubated for 3–5 d at 22°C. Development of each clone as a separate plaque on the bacterial lawns was examined with a binocular photomicroscope. Clones with abnormal stalks were recovered from plates and grown in HL5 medium supplemented with antibiotics to remove remaining bacteria. This procedure led to the isolation of the 25A mutant. Figure 1. iplA and atg1 constructs and mutants in distinct Dictyostelium strains. Localization of the pUCbsrDBamHI insertion in the iplA gene. ClaI digestion yielded a 9.7-kb fragment encompassing the pUCBsrΔBamHI vector and its genomic flanking sequences. For rescue and recircularization of this plasmid with its flanking sequences, genomic DNA from 25A mutant cells was digested with ClaI, and an aliquot of this DNA was ligated and transfected into electrocompetent SURE bacteria. Transformants were selected on LB plates containing 100 μg/ml ampicillin. This rescued plasmid, called iplA vector, was purified from amplified transformants and sequenced using the reverse primers in pUCBsrΔBamHI vector. The corresponding sequences were used for BLASTn search on the National Center for Biotechnology Information site, identifying iplA sequences. Preparation and Validation of Further iplA Mutants, Including Double Mutants To obtain a deletion mutant in iplA, we prepared a homologous recombination construct bearing 5′ and 3′ arms made separately by PCR from genomic DNA. Restriction sites were generated at the ends of PCR products by inclusion of appropriate sequences in the primers. For the iplA deletion, the 5′ arm was from nucleotide 1341 to nt 2635, and the 3′ arm from nt 9722 to nt 10947 of the iplA gene. Both arms were ligated into pGEM-T Easy with BamHI. After linearization of the plasmid with BamHI, the cohesive ends were filled in and dephosphorylated. The pyr5-6 cassette was removed from pJB1 with ScaI and ClaI, filled in, and cloned between both arms by blunt end ligation to give the iplA vector. Cells from various strains were electroporated with either the iplA vector linearized by ClaI or the iplA vector digested by SacII-AccI, and resulting transformants were selected in HL5-modified medium containing blasticidin or in SIH medium, respectively. Resistant cells were cloned by limiting dilution in microplates. Putative iplA − clones were screened by PCR by using primers bsr5 and iplA13, and putative iplA − clones by using primers ura4 and iplA7. The corresponding mutation was then confirmed by Southern blot. HMX44A.atg1-3 Mutant Cells The homologous recombination construct for the deletion allele atg1-2 was described previously. Subsequently this construct was linearized with BamHI, the ends were filled in and dephosphorylated. The floxed blasticidin resistance cassette was removed from the targeting vector pLRBLP and ligated to the above-mentioned sequence. The resulting deletion construct was linearized and used for electroporation of the HMX44A cells. Transformants were selected with blasticidin in HL5 medium for 10 d, and then they were cloned and screened by PCR for homologous recombination of the deletion construct with the endogenous atg1 locus. One homologous recombinant clone was picked, expanded, and electroporated with the Cre expression vector pDEX-NLS-cre. Transformants were selected with neomycin 20 μg/ml in HL5 medium for 2 wk, cloned, and the clonal cell lines were subsequently picked in replica onto two different plates. In one plate, blasticidin was added. Clones the replica of which died in the presence of blasticidin were chosen, expanded, and allowed to grow in HL5 medium without any selection. These blasticidin-sensitive cells were cloned and replicated one more time. In one plate neomycin was added. The clones the duplicates of which died in the presence of neomycin were selected. These cells were now free of blasticidin- and neomycin-resistance cassettes, and this was confirmed by PCRs and Southern blot hybridizations. The blasticidin cassette was removed, but a 73-nt sequence remained that included the translational stop cassette and a single loxP site. Additionally, there was a deletion of 302 base pairs in the atg1 gene. Measurement of ATP Levels Quantification of ATP in cell populations was performed with the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay kit. For each sample, 3 × 10 5 cells/ml were centrifuged 5 min at 1500 rpm. Cells were resuspended in 100 μl of 2-ethanesulfonic acid and transferred into wells of opaque-walled 96-well plates. Cells were lysed by adding 100 μl of the CellTiter-Glo reagent and mixing on a shaker for 2 min. The plates were incubated at room temperature for 10 min. ATP levels present in the cellular extracts were measured by luminometry and expressed on a per cell basis. RESULTS A Genetic Screen for Altered Stalk Development Yielded a Mutant with an Insertion in the iplA Gene Dictyostelium cell populations were random mutagenized, enriched for mutants resistant to cell death by two rounds of DIF-induced cell death in monolayers, and spread on bacterial lawns, where each wild-type cell can multiply and develop into fruiting bodies. This allowed us to visually screen these clones, reject those where development did not take place at all, and select those where development took place, but the stalks were abnormal thus possibly made of death-resistant mutant cells. Using this approach in Dictyostelium strain JH10, we isolated a mutant clone called 25A. Clone 25A showed fruiting bodies generally smaller than those of wild-type JH10. On induction of cell death in monolayers, 25A mutant cells showed a defect in autophagic cell death with a clear-cut reduction in the proportion of vacuolated cells. This gene was identified by plasmid rescue, and its targeted mutagenesis in JH10 and DH1 cells led to the same phenotype qualitatively, demonstrating that the mutation in this gene accounts for the defect in autophagic cell death. In the rescued plasmid, the genomic sequences flanking the inserted plasmid pUCbsrDBamHI were entirely sequenced and compared with the sequence of the Dictyostelium genome. The 5′ and 3′ flanking sequences corresponded to segments 6144-7355 and 7362-7610, respectively, of the iplA gene. The mutagenizing pUCbsrDBamHI plasmid had inserted in the DpnII site at position 7361 of this gene. The iplA gene, encodes a 3177-amino acid protein that is the only IP3R in Dictyostelium. This IP3R governs Ca 2+ fluxes from the ER to the cytosol. IP3R Is Required for Autophagic Cell Death The rescued plasmid with flanking sequences corresponding to the iplA gene, called thereafter iplA − vector, was used to inactivate this gene by homologous recombination in three genetic backgrounds: JH10, DH1, and HMX44A. The corresponding mutant cells were designated JH10. iplA −, DH1. iplA −, and HMX44A. iplA −. The insertional mutation at position 7361 of the iplA gene in each of these cases was validated by PCR and Southern blots. These mutants and the corresponding wild-type cells were tested for ACD and NCD upon starvation and addition of DIF in monolayer experiments. The iplA mutation, thapsigargin, BAPTA and cyclosporin A, which had marked effects on DH1 cells as reported below, had only intermediate effects on JH10 cells and little detectable effects on HMX44A cells. These results suggest that there are differences between the HMX44A and DH1 backgrounds as to Ca 2+ fluxes or Ca 2+ requirements, through alternative or redundant pathways leading from DIF to death. We will describe in detail below only the results obtained in the more revealing DH1 background. Starved DH1 wild-type cells showed massive vacuolization after 24 h in the presence of DIF. In sharp contrast, similarly treated DH1.iplA − cells did not vacuolize, were highly mobile in particular at the edge of cell clusters, and resembled emergent paddle cells. After 48 h in DIF, the clusters of DH1.iplA − cells were completely dissociated, and the resulting single cells still did not vacuolize and showed paddle cell morphology. Even at later times, DH1.iplA − cells usually did not vacuolize, and they ended up dying after several days in starvation medium similar to the control without DIF. Altogether, in 14 of 14 experiments checking vacuolization by phase-contrast microscopy there was marked DIF-induced vacuolization of control DH1 cells, and in 12 of these 14 experiments there was no detectable vacuolization of DH1.iplA − cells. Whereas in the presence of DIF DH1 cells synthesized cellulose shells, reflecting the induction of the cellulose synthesis machinery, DH1.iplA − cells did not, suggesting that iplA may act upstream of this induction. Figure 2. iplA mutant cells showed almost complete inhibition of DIF-induced autophagic cell death. Vacuolization was inhibited in DH1. iplA − mutant cells subjected to DIF. Wild-type and DH1. iplA − mutant cells were starved for 8 h,... Wild-type and iplA − mutant cells were subjected to regrowth tests to quantify DIF-induced ACD in terms of multiplication of surviving cells. As expected, compared with control without DIF the number of DH1 wild-type cells was much less after incubation with DIF, reflecting cell death triggered by starvation and DIF. In contrast, the number of DH1. iplA − cells was the same whether treated with DIF or not, showing resistance of these mutant cells to DIF-induced death. In six of six experiments, there was marked DIF-induced death of control DH1 cells, but no significant DIF-induced death of DH1. iplA − cells. Altogether, in DH1 cells iplA inactivation led to apparent arrest of DIF-induced events at the paddle cell stage. IP3R was required for subsequent autophagic vacuolization and death. IP3R Is Required for Necrotic Cell Death in a Variable Fraction of the Cells In cells mutated for the atg1 autophagy gene, starvation and DIF led to absence of vacuolization and to NCD. To determine whether a mutation of the iplA gene could affect, not only ACD, but also NCD, we carried out double targeted mutagenesis in each of the DH1 and HMX44A backgrounds. Four atg1 − mutant cells were obtained and checked for NCD. The iplA − mutant cells HMX44A.atg1-3.iplA − and DH1.atg1-1.iplA − were compared with their respective iplA + counterparts HMX44A.atg1-3 et DH1.atg1-1. Again, only results obtained in the DH1 background will be shown. Both iplA + and iplA − cells starved in the absence of DIF were round and refringent. After addition of DIF, compared with iplA + controls, mutant iplA − cells tended to show less DC-FDA–positive cells and less ATP depletion at 20 min, a mixture of cells with perinuclear condensation and round and refringent cells at 60 min and with time less cells with plasma membrane rupture in two independent iplA − clones. However, compared with its clearcut and well-reproducible effect on ACD shown above, the iplA mutation only partially impaired NCD, and the degree of impairment was variable from one experiment to the next. Of 18 experiments, compared with the percentage of cells with plasma membrane rupture in control cells, that of iplA − cells was lower than one third in five experiments, but higher than half in 11 experiments. We looked for but could not identify experimental parameters accounting for this variability. We speculate that under limiting conditions, even moderately elevated Ca 2+ levels due to IP3R might “nonspecifically” aggravate starvation-induced mitochondrial sensitization to DIF. Cells may need or not need IP3R and the corresponding extra Ca 2+ for optimal mitochondrial uncoupling, which may reflect a preexisting heterogeneity between developing Dictyostelium cells with regards to cytosolic Ca 2+ concentrations. Figure 3. iplA mutant cells showed partial inhibition of DIF-induced necrotic cell death. Some DH1. atg1-1.iplA − cells did not show necrotic cell death morphological features in response to DIF. DH1. atg1-1 and DH1. atg1-1.iplA − cells... Altogether, the iplA − mutation impaired ACD, showing that IP3R was required for this death, and impaired NCD only partially. These results contributed to define a DIF-triggered pathway involving IP3R strictly required for ACD, but only partially required for NCD. Thapsigargin Induces and BAPTA and Cyclosporin A Impair Autophagic Not Necrotic Cell Death The experiments mentioned above showed that IP3R was required for at least ACD in Dictyostelium DH1 cells, strongly suggesting a key involvement of Ca 2+. Tg, an inhibitor of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ ATPase pumps at the ER membrane, would prevent Ca 2+ flux from the cytosol into the ER, resulting in an increase in cytosolic Ca 2+ concentration as shown in particular in Dictyostelium. Although starved DH1 cells by themselves showed no vacuolization, a high proportion of vacuolated cells could be observed 24 h after addition of Tg, similar to that observed after addition of DIF. Also, similar to DIF, addition of Tg led to death of DH1 cells as evaluated in a regrowth test. Tg or DIF triggered much less vacuolization or death in iplA − cells. Also, in the presence of 1 mM Ca 2+ chelator BAPTA, DIF-triggered DH1 cells showed far less vacuoles. BAPTA also partially inhibited DIF-induced cell death as shown in a regrowth test. In contrast, in starved DH1. atg1-1 cells Tg was not able to trigger NCD without DIF, and the Ca 2+ chelator BAPTA did not alter perinuclear condensation and membrane rupture. Altogether, the Tg and BAPTA results indicated that given cytosolic Ca 2+ concentration thresholds may be required and sufficient for further vacuolization and ACD events, but not or less so for NCD. Figure 4. Effect of thapsigargin or BAPTA on autophagic or necrotic cell death. Tg could induce vacuolization without exogenous DIF in DH1 but not in DH1. iplA − mutant cells. DH1 and DH1. iplA − mutant cells were starved for 8 h, washed,... The results mentioned above were in line with an IP3R-mediated release from ER stores into the cytosol of Ca 2+, which in starved cells might then be necessary for ACD. A prediction is that impairing downstream Ca 2+ -dependent steps may have the same effect as IP3R inactivation. A main Ca 2+ -binding protein is calmodulin. Ca 2+ /calmodulin activates kinases and the protein phosphatase calcineurin, which couples Ca 2+ signals to protein dephosphorylation. Calcineurin can be inhibited by the small protein cyclophilin bound by the drug CsA. CsA indeed markedly delayed DIF-induced vacuolization in DH1 cells, but it did not modify the aspect and time of appearance of paddle cells. This showed that the delay in vacuolization was due to a CsA-sensitive event occurring at or after the paddle cell stage, or on a pathway independent of paddle cell formation. Inhibition by CsA of vacuolization but not paddle cell formation was due to a late effect of CsA, because vacuolization was impaired when CsA was added as late as 5 h after DIF. This confirmed similar earlier observations and indicated that a required CsA-sensitive event took place on the autophagic cell death pathway several hours after addition of DIF. Regrowth experiments showed that CsA delayed not only vacuolization, but also ACD, because CsA rescued some DH1 cells from DIF-induced ACD when rich HL5 medium was added at 14h but not 17h after DIF. Also, importantly CsA did not delay or inhibit NCD in DH1. atg1-1 cells. Thus, although CsA did not impair NCD, it markedly delayed at a postpaddle stage vacuolization and death on the ACD pathway. These and previous results suggested that a DIF/IP3R pathway governed ACD but only partially NCD. A CsA-inhibitable moiety, likely calcineurin, was more downstream on the path to ACD. Figure 5. Cyclosporin A markedly delayed autophagic cell death. Cyclosporin A delayed DIF-induced vacuolization. Starved DH1 wt cells were incubated with DIF in the absence or presence of 1 μg/ml CsA. Phase-contrast microscopy pictures... DISCUSSION In animal cells, the involvement of IP3R in some cases of apoptosis is well documented. However, there are only a few demonstrations of involvement of IP3R in nonapoptotic cell death. Importantly, in C. elegans mutations of the ER Ca 2+ release channels unc-68 or itr-1 inhibited necrotic-like neuronal death. In the protist Dictyostelium, we showed by random mutagenesis that a mutation of the iplA gene encoding the only IP 3 receptor in this organism inhibited ACD, suggesting that Ca 2+ flux from ER to cytosol through the activation of IP3R was necessary to signal this caspase-independent cell death. Traynor et al. previously inactivated by targeted mutagenesis in the AX2 strain the iplA gene through a deletion of ∼7 kb. The mutant cells showed less Ca 2+ influx in response to cAMP, with only minor consequences on development, signal transduction, reorganization of actin cytoskeleton or chemotaxis. Schaloske et al. subsequently showed that entry of extracellular Ca 2+ and Ca 2+ release from internal stores in response to cAMP were much lower in the very same mutant than in wild-type AX2 cells. These data showed that the IP3R is important to ensure Ca 2+ flux in response to stimulation in Dictyostelium cells. Ca 2+ fluxes governed by IP3R and SERCAs would condition cytoplasmic Ca 2+ levels. A role for Ca 2+ flux in ACD was supported not only by the genetic arguments above but also by pharmacological manipulations of intracellular Ca 2+ levels: 1) Tg, used to increase cytosolic Ca 2+, could lead to ACD in agreement with previous observations. Of note, we used starvation buffers not supplemented with Ca 2+. This suggested that extracellular Ca 2+ influx was not necessary for ACD and NCD, but also made it more difficult to detect Ca 2+ flux. 2) BAPTA, a potent Ca 2+ chelator, inhibited ACD, in further support of a requirement for Ca 2+ in this pathway. 3) CsA had an effect similar to that of the iplA mutant in terms of inhibition of ACD. CsA is a classical inhibitor of the Ca 2+ /calmodulin-dependent phosphatase calcineurin, but it could also operate otherwise, for example, by interfering with mitochondrial cyclophilin D. We favor in this case an effect on calcineurin, because decreased expression of the regulatory B subunit of calcineurin led to the formation of short stalks and incomplete vacuolization of stalk cells in Dictyostelium AX2 strain. Because IP 3 is the major ligand of IP3R, it is tempting to speculate that DIF may activate the opening of these calcium channels through induction of IP 3 production. Of note, a third signal essential for ACD in this system is cAMP. We cannot exclude that both cAMP and DIF contribute to the triggering of the IP3R pathway. Strikingly, the same developmental and cell death phenotypes were independently found in IP3R knockouts, calcineurin knockdown, and addition of cyclosporin A. These consistent observations reinforced the notion of a Ca 2+ -dependent pathway for ACD in Dictyostelium, and they strongly suggested that similar mechanisms operated in vivo and in vitro. They also suggested that IP3R, Ca 2+ and calcineurin acted in the same pathway, upstream of a critical postpaddle or paddle-independent step toward vacuolization and ACD. Figure 6. Schematic representation of pathways leading to cell death in Dictyostelium cells (see 