 Cell motility is a fundamental process with relevance to embryonic development, immune response, and metastasis. Cells move either spontaneously, in a nondirected fashion, or in response to chemotactic signals, in a directed fashion. Even though they are often studied separately, both forms of motility share many complex processes at the molecular and subcellular scale, e.g., orchestrated cytoskeletal rearrangements and polarization. In addition, at the cellular level both types of motility include persistent runs interspersed with reorientation pauses. Because there is a great range of variability in motility among different cell types, a key challenge in the field is to integrate these multiscale processes into a coherent framework. We analyzed the motility of Dictyostelium cells with bimodal analysis, a method that compares time spent in persistent versus reorientation mode. Unexpectedly, we found that reorientation time is coupled with persistent time in an inverse correlation and, surprisingly, the inverse correlation holds for both nondirected and chemotactic motility, so that the full range of Dictyostelium motility can be described by a single scaling relationship. Additionally, we found an identical scaling relationship for three human cell lines, indicating that the coupling of reorientation and persistence holds across species and making it possible to describe the complexity of cell motility in a surprisingly general and simple manner. With this new perspective, we analyzed the motility of Dictyostelium mutants, and found four in which the coupling between two modes was altered. Our results point to a fundamental underlying principle, described by a simple scaling law, unifying mechanisms of eukaryotic cell motility at several scales. Introduction Cell motility plays key roles in health and disease. Two forms, directed and nondirected motility, are commonly studied. Directed motility, the best-understood example of which is chemotaxis, occurs when the motility of cells is directionally biased as the result of a spatial signal. When experimentally removed from external signals, cells remain motile, yet move in no particular direction. The two forms of motility are often studied separately and from different perspectives. Chemotaxis is often studied with the intent of elucidating the signal transduction pathways, by allowing cells to sense direction in the gradient, a process called “directional sensing”. Indeed, directional sensing is remarkable for its sensitivity to weak, noisy concentration gradients. Nondirected motility is often approached from the physical perspective of spontaneous “symmetry breaking”. This is because the cell must choose a direction in which to move, despite having no external signal to influence this choice. A cell with no polarity and in the absence of a directional cue is in a high symmetry state, in that all directions are equally favorable. As the cell chooses a direction from these symmetric possibilities, the cell polarizes and begins to move in that direction, thus breaking the symmetry. Once the cell begins to move, its range of motion is restricted and therefore the cell is in a lower state of symmetry. Despite the apparent differences between nondirected and chemotactic motility, they share many processes at the molecular, subcellular, and cellular level. Most generally, all cell movements require actin polymerization. Furthermore, signaling pathways first described to regulate directional sensing downstream of the chemoattractant receptor in Dictyostelium and fibroblasts were subsequently shown to be spontaneously activated during nondirected motility, independent of receptor signaling. Both forms of motility share the subcellular processes of protrusion, retraction, and cell polarization, which occur as the result of spatial and temporal coordination of molecular processes. Finally, at the cellular level, the displacements of all eukaryotic cells during nondirected motility are not truly random but instead contain periods of directional persistence in which the cell moves more or less in a straight line. Therefore, the movements of the cells during nondirected motility are often described as a persistent random walk. Conversely, the movements of cells undergoing chemotaxis are not perfectly directed but contain random reorientations and therefore are best described as a biased random walk. Both forms of motility, therefore, contain directional persistence and elements of randomness that give rise to reorientations. Because of these commonalities, it is desirable to identify an analytical framework applicable to both forms of motility and therefore potentially capable of revealing unifying principles that govern the full range of eukaryotic cell motility. The persistence and randomness present in both forms of motility prompted us to apply bimodal analysis, which segregates the movements of a cell into alternating directional and reorientation modes based on the direction in which the cell is traveling. Bimodal analysis offers several advantages over existing methods of analyzing cell motility, most particularly that being the estimation of persistence time from the persistent random walk model. First, bimodal analysis is based on the simple assumption that cells move for some time with directional persistence and with the lack of persistence. Although an applicable theoretical model of motility is highly desirable, a recent study has cast doubt on the general applicability of the original PRW model, and even suggests that one may be required to derive a model specific to the properties of each individual cell line. Such a conclusion makes a model-free method, such as bimodal analysis, attractive. Second, by treating directional and reorientation modes independently, bimodal analysis offers a measurement not only of some characteristic time for persistent motility but also for reorientation. We exploited these advantages to compare the average time spent in directional mode to the average time spent in reorientation mode for wild-type Dictyostelium cells during both nondirected and chemotactic motility. Despite the fact that the mean reorientation mode time is free to vary independently of mean directional mode time, we found them to be locked into a nonlinear negative correlation. On a log-log scale, the relationship between the mean mode times appears linear, revealing that all forms of motility are described by a simple scaling law. To generalize our findings, we show the same scaling law to describe the nondirected motility of three human cell lines. We propose this scaling law to be the signature of a mechanism that gives rise to the full range of nondirected and chemotactic cell motility. Methods Cell motility assays and cell tracking The imaging of Dictyostelium cells and the particulars of the micropipette and microfluidic assays was previously described in Gruver et al.. All assays in a microfluidic device used the same flow rate as in Gruver et al.. Using a Rayleigh test, there was no evidence that the presence of flow directionally biased the movements of cells. For wt cells and mutants, developed nondirected and micropipette assays were performed after 5 h pulsing with cAMP. The exceptions to this were gα2 − and aca − mutants, which were allowed to develop for longer periods. Upon the onset of streaming and aggregation, time-lapse imaging initiated and cells were tracked as they approached the aggregation center. All time-lapse images were obtained every 3 s using 20× differential interference contrast optics and MetaMorph. Given the size of the data set, we elected to use an automated tracking routine to track Dictyostelium cells. Care was taken to adjust the tracking parameters to reduce obvious errors in centroid estimation. Dictyostelium cells were tracked for a minimum of 10 min but were often tracked for up to 1 h. Blebbistatin was used to inhibit myosin II function at a concentration of 16 μ M and nocodazole was used to disrupt microtubules at a concentration of 15 μ M. For neutrophils, substrates were pretreated with 100 μ g/mL FN for 1 h. MCF10A cells were imaged every 0.5 min and were tracked manually as previously described in Potdar et al.. Fibrosarcoma cells were plated on culture dishes coated with 2.5 μ g/mL FN. HT1080 cells were imaged every 2 min over a 4–6 h experiment with 10× objective. HT1080 cell centroids were manually tracked using the “Measure XYZ distance” function in MetaMorph. The size of the data set and the experimental parameters varied between each cell line and we chose our tracking methods pragmatically. We elected to use automated tracking in the analysis of Dictyostelium and neutrophils where relatively high frame rates appeared necessary to capture details. Cells were imaged using differential interference contrast optics, which allows for subpixel determination of the cell centroid and automated tracking in MetaMorph. Although the exact nature of the tracking error is unknown, we expect the relative error in the displacements obtained by automated tracking to be inversely proportional to the magnitude of displacement. MCF10A and HT1080 cells were imaged using phase contrast which prevented the use of automated tracking. Therefore, these slower moving cells were tracked manually with pixel resolution. Care was taken to increase the sampling interval so that the typical movement was considerably larger than the resolution. This, in conjunction with the larger size of these cells, increased the accuracy of manual tracking. Bimodal analysis Bimodal analysis, which segregates a cell path into alternating directional and reorientation modes, is fully described in Potdar et al.. Briefly, the first step in isolating directional and reorientation modes requires the determination of the instantaneous direction change, ϕ, for every time point, t. The values of ϕ are then compared to an empirically defined cutoff angle, ϕ cut, with time points with values of ϕ < ϕ cut becoming candidates for a directional mode. A second criteria is then applied, requiring at least three successive time points with ϕ < ϕ cut before defining a directional mode. All other movements belong to reorientation modes. A range of values for ϕ cut were tested. In this article, the value for ϕ cut was set to 45°. In all four cell lines used in this study, all parameters used in bimodal analysis were determined to be optimal at consistently isolated apparent modes according to visual inspection. The reorientation angle, θ, is computed as the angle between two successive directional modes. The overall direction of a directional mode was determined using a multipoint linear regression of all the data points in that particular mode. Software performing bimodal analysis is available upon request. Statistical analysis All statistical analyses were done in MATLAB. Correlation coefficients, r, and their associated p values were computed using the function corrcoef.m. Slopes were estimated and compared by analysis of covariance. If significant differences within the entire dataset were detected by ANCOVA, pairwise multiple comparisons were then made by a t statistic. This statistic was defined as the ratio of the difference of the slopes estimates to the pooled standard error for each estimate. With the exception of pi3k1 / 2 −, the residuals from all fits were shown to be normally distributed by the Lilliefors test. Comparisons of the probability distributions of and for different assays were compared using a Kolmogorov-Smirnoff test for two identical distributions. The dispersion of the turn-angle distributions were compared using a custom randomization test. Simulation of persistent random walk Cell migration is most commonly and widely described as a persistent random walk motion, which is emergent from the Langevin equation for a passive particle, m d v → d t = − ξ v → + f →, where m is the particle mass, v → is the velocity, ξ is an effective friction coefficient, and f → is random force acting on the particle. The first term on the right-hand side denotes the friction force that the particle experiences due to the motion in a given medium. The second term denotes the random stochastic force, which has two characteristic properties: 1), a mean of zero 〈 f → 〉 = 0 ; and 2), δ -functional correlations, 〈 f → × f → 〉 = 2 n ξ k B T δ, where k B is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and n is the dimensionality. Although the model was developed to describe the motion of passive particles, it has long served as the starting point for the development of mathematical models for the motion of cells, which are the result of active processes. Uhlenbeck and Ornstein showed that mean-squared displacement, 〈Δ r 2 〉, can be obtained by integrating the simplified stochastic differential equation to yield 〈 Δ r 2 〉 = 2 m k B T ξ 2 ). Using the equipartition theorem, k B T = m 〈 v 2 〉, and redefining m / ξ as P, we obtain the equation 〈Δ r 2 〉 = 2〈 v 2 〉 P ), where P is the persistence time. In Fig. S1, we numerically solved Eq. 1 to perform a PRW simulation of a range of persistent times and speed. Results In an effort to understand the subcellular processes that give rise to directional persistence during both nondirected and chemotactic motility in Dictyostelium, we examined the dynamic localization of mRFP-labeled F-actin-binding domain of LimE in wild-type cells. Interestingly, during nondirected motility, oscillations between two distinct patterns of localization were clearly seen within a single cell. For periods of time, a cell would polymerize actin in brief pulses leading to protrusions at random locations around its cortex, leading to multiple competing protrusions and little net translocation of the cell. Occasionally, polymerization would occur within one region of the cell, allowing for the accumulation of polarity and persistent motility. A similar relationship between the dynamics of spontaneous PI3K signaling and directional persistence has been seen in fibroblasts during nondirected motility. Over time, the polarity and the persistent motility dissipated and the cell returned to its more disorganized state. Similar oscillations between organized and disordered actin polymerization were seen during chemotaxis, although they were less pronounced. These observations led to a conceptual model of motility as repeated symmetry breaking, i.e., a repeated transition between a reorientation mode with spatially disorganized protrusions and directional mode associated with higher cell polarity and efficient motility. Figure 1 The application of bimodal analysis to directed and nondirected eukaryotic cell motility. Images of a single wt cell expressing mRFP-LimE-Δ-coil. A cell with actin polymerization randomly distributed around its cortex. A later image... The presence of two motility modes prompted us to apply bimodal analysis to classify the displacements of individual wt Dictyostelium cells as belonging to either a directionally persistent or a reorientation mode. Dictyostelium cells move rapidly because of constant remodeling of the actin-rich cortex and concomitant changes in morphology. An example of the analysis on nondirected motility of a wt cell is shown in Fig. 1, C and D. The analysis identifies directionally persistent movements which are associated with the spontaneous cell polarization. Also identified are reorientation modes, which consist of movements in which the cell has temporarily lost a degree of polarity and therefore lost directional persistence. It should be noted that, in addition to consisting of movements that reorient the cell, our reorientation modes consist of movements that do not necessarily dramatically reorient the cell but, according to our model, possess the capacity to do so. To look for general principles potentially underlying the wide range of motility available to Dictyostelium, we analyzed data from both nondirected and chemotactic motility. In contrast to the estimation of overall persistence time, bimodal analysis treats directional and reorientation modes as separate processes, and therefore provides independent measurements of the mean time spent in both directional mode, 〈 t d 〉, and in reorientation mode, 〈 t r 〉. The brackets indicate taking the average over the entire trajectory for a single cell. Despite the fact that 〈 t d 〉 and 〈 t r 〉 are free to vary independently, as evidenced by a PRW simulation, we found a strong inverse relationship between them. The relationship between 〈 t d 〉 and 〈 t r 〉 has an immediate biological consequence: it suggests the subcellular processes that govern the eruption and the dissipation of directional mode are coupled, inasmuch as an increase in 〈 t d 〉 requires a reduction in 〈 t r 〉. We attempted to fit the data to several common models. For example, an exponential model fit poorly. A log-log plot transforms the data, revealing a scaling relationship such as is commonly seen in complex systems near critical points. The inverse scaling relationship seen here for cells directly contrasts with the positive scaling relationship between search and motion phases in animal foraging. Neither the estimate of β, nor the quality of the model fit, were drastically dependent on the value of the cutoff angle, ϕ cut. Remarkably, this representation allows for an elegantly simple description of the data from both nondirected motility and chemotaxis by a single scaling exponent of β = −1.11. Figure 2 A scaling law between mean mode times. A nonlinear relationship exists between mean directional time, 〈 t d 〉, versus mean reorientation time, 〈 t r 〉, from 446 wt Dictyostelium cells from six different motility assays.. Likewise, developed cells are known to move faster when undergoing chemotaxis as compared to nondirected motility. Additionally, we recently showed that wt cells performed chemotaxis with greater efficiency in the microfluidic device compared to the micropipette assay. Consistent with these expectations, as the coordination of the motility is increased from vegetative nondirected motility to chemotaxis, the position of the cells on the curve slides to the right, indicating increased directional time and decreased reorientation time. The mean mode time for cells undergoing chemokinesis were essentially the same as developed cells undergoing nondirected motility. Because all aspects of nondirected motility arise from intrinsic cell processes, the observation of a scaling relationship during nondirected motility reveals the mechanism relating 〈 t d 〉 to 〈 t r 〉 to be an intrinsic property of the cell. When considered separately, the presence of the same scaling law in each assay, even in nondirected motility, indicates that cell-to-cell variability is also described by this law. Exactly what intrinsic processes are varied from cell-to-cell or from vegetative to developed cells during nondirected motility is not clear. However, the fact that cells undergoing chemotaxis also fall on this scaling curve suggests that chemoattractant-driven signal transduction harnesses these intrinsic processes while tuning their specific properties, to increase directional persistence and reduce reorientations. If a particular molecular pathway is responsible for coupling 〈 t d 〉 to 〈 t r 〉, genetic or pharmacological perturbation of that pathway might be expected to eliminate directional persistence, and therefore 〈 t d 〉, during nondirected motility. Additionally, a perturbation might sever or differentially tune the coupling of 〈 t d 〉 and 〈 t r 〉, and thereby eliminate or alter the scaling relationship. To address the effect of perturbations on the mechanism relating 〈 t d 〉 to 〈 t r 〉, we examined the relationship between 〈 t d 〉 and 〈 t r 〉 for a total of 17 genetic mutants or cells treated with pharmacological inhibitors in vegetative-nondirected and developed-nondirected motility in pipette-chemotaxis assays. We chose cells lacking signal transduction molecules reported to be important for chemotaxis and established cytoskeletal regulators. We were unable to find a mutant whose directional persistence was eliminated, suggesting the cycling between directional and reorientation modes to be a robust property of the cell. Perhaps more surprisingly, all perturbations retained a significant scaling relationship between 〈 t d 〉 and 〈 t r 〉. However, four perturbations, i.e., loss of GSK3, PTEN, or WASP, and inhibition of myosin II by blebbistatin, resulted in statistically different values for β. We note that each of these perturbations has been reported to reduce the cytoskeletal and morphological polarity thought to be critical for efficient, coordinated motility. Figure 3 Analysis of scaling in mutants. The values of the scaling exponent β plus the standard error of the estimates for all perturbations. Perturbations are grouped by signal transduction and cytoskeletal regulators. See... The scaling exponent β describes the behavior of the cells in three separate motility assays, i.e., vegetative-nondirected, developed-nondirected, and developed-chemotaxis. The steeper slope seen in the four perturbations with significantly altered scaling could come from an increase in 〈 t r 〉, decrease in 〈 t d 〉, or both. We examined the behavior of the four mutants that are different from wt in more detail in an attempt to isolate the defect to a single motility assay. To do this, we compared the mean mode time, 〈〈 t mode 〉〉 for each perturbation in each assay, to wt. The double brackets indicate first averaging over the trajectory for a single cell and then averaging over every cell in a given assay. The pten − cells had a higher 〈〈 t r 〉〉 during vegetative nondirected motility, while, during chemotaxis, both a lower 〈〈 t d 〉〉 and higher 〈〈 t r 〉〉 contributed to a steeper scaling relationship compared to wt. However, removal of either data from pten − vegetative-nondirected motility or chemotaxis failed to return the scaling exponent of pten − cells to the value of wt. This indicates that steeper scaling relationship cannot be attributed to a single developmental stage. BLEBB-treated cells during vegetative nondirected motility had a higher 〈〈 t r 〉〉and lower 〈〈 t d 〉〉 compared to wt, suggesting that myosin II might be required for higher persistence in vegetative cells. Furthermore, the removal of vegetative BLEBB-treated cells from the statistical comparison of scaling exponents brought the scaling exponent of BLEBB-treated cells up to the level of wt. When compared in this fashion, 〈〈 t r 〉〉 and 〈〈 t d 〉〉 for both gsk3 − and wasp TK cells were not significantly different from wt in any single assay. Thus, additional highly-detailed experiments will be required to identify the source of the difference in the coupling of 〈〈 t r 〉〉 and 〈〈 t d 〉〉 in these perturbations. The fact that both nondirected and chemotactic motility can be described by the same quantitative law suggests that chemotactic gradients serve to quantitatively tune the inherent cycling between the directional and reorientation mode. It is important to examine the nature of the cell's ability to switch between these two modes to understand the molecular mechanisms that give rise to these two modes. The probability that a cell in vegetative or developed nondirected motility and chemotaxis in the micropipette and microfluidic device will have a directional or reorientation mode of a given duration is shown in Fig. 4, A and B. The probability distributions for all four assays in Fig. 4 are qualitatively identical. In fact, the only difference revealed in Fig.4, A and B, is quantitative—i.e., an increase in typical directional mode time and a decrease in reorientation time as the cells go from vegetative to developed to chemotaxis. This strongly argues that the mechanism governing the switching between directional and reorientation modes is the same for both nondirected motility and chemotaxis. The distributions appear to be exponential, suggesting that the switching between modes occurs via a Poisson process. However, statistical support for this hypothesis was weak indicating that perhaps a more complex mechanism is at work. This conclusion supports the conjecture that the core mechanisms governing the switching between modes are present in their most rudimentary form in vegetative cells, and that development or chemotaxis quantitatively tune these mechanisms to increase directional persistence. Figure 4 The probability distributions of directional time and reorientation angles reveals similarities and differences between directed and nondirected motility. The probability distribution of the duration of directional modes or reorientation modes of wt Dictyostelium. As expected, the reorientation angle distributions for both nondirected motility and chemotaxis were symmetrical. During vegetative and developed nondirected motility, the turn-angle distributions were peaked at ∼0°, indicating that even during nondirected motility, eukaryotic cell motility has a degree of directional correlation lasting through successive directional modes. The distributions for reorientation angle also appear to be exponentially distributed, indicating that reorientation angle might follow a Poisson process. However, here too we found little statistical support for this suggestion. According to our model, the transition from reorientation mode to directional mode requires the development of a comparatively ordered, subcellular polarization from a disordered state. One expectation of the bimodal model is that the magnitude of the reorientation angle would depend on the length of time the cell spent in reorientation mode, with longer reorientation modes having wider reorientation angles. Accordingly, we found that the wide turn angles were indeed associated with longer reorientations, especially for nondirected motility. The reorientation angle distribution for chemotactic wt cells, in contrast, is less broadly dispersed despite having similar mean values. Chemotactic gradients, therefore, result in the cell spending more time in directional mode, less time in reorientation mode, and an increased correlation in the direction of travel between successive directional modes. Given the apparent generality of the mechanism relating and in Dictyostelium, we applied bimodal analysis to three motile human cell lines undergoing nondirected motility—i.e., neutrophils, mammary epithelial cells expressing two mutant forms of the Her2 oncogene, and fibrosarcoma cells. It should be noted that each cell was imaged with different sampling frequencies as described in Methods. Not surprisingly, these cell lines possessed different mean mode times, presumably reflecting the diversity of the timescales inherent in the molecular and subcellular processes underlying motility for each cell line. All three cell lines produced significant scaling relationships with exponents similar to Dictyostelium. Statistical comparison of the scaling exponents revealed no significant differences between the human cell lines and Dictyostelium, which allowed for the estimation of a common scaling exponent for all cell lines of β = −0.94. The presence of an identical scaling exponent in these diverse cell lines indicates the work of a very general mechanism, operating across phyla and at different spatial and temporal scales, related to that in eukaryotic cells. Figure 5 The generalization of the scaling mechanism to human cells. Comparison of Dictyostelium cells, human neutrophils, mammary epithelial, and fibrosarcoma cells. ANCOVA analysis of the scaling exponents for each cell line. The scaling exponents for... The possession of long directional time was proposed to increase the search efficiency of Dictyostelium nondirected motility, while efficient chemotaxis, by nature, also requires long persistence times. The ratio of 〈 t d 〉 to 〈 t r 〉, revealing the excess of time spent in directional mode, then, might serve as for a measure of motility efficiency. Indeed, the ratio of 〈 t d 〉/〈 t r 〉 is a strong statistical predictor of mean cell speed over its entire trajectory for fast-moving Dictyostelium and neutrophils, further supporting this suggestion. Here, for a cell with N displacements, the mean speed is defined as 〈 s 〉 = f N ∑ i = 1 N | d i |, where f is the sampling frequency, and d i is the i th displacement vector. However, the ratio failed to be a significant predictor of mean speed for both mammary epithelial cells and fibrosarcoma cells, suggesting that speed in these slower moving cells is regulated in a different manner from the faster-moving Dictyostelium and neutrophils. Mean speed in either directional mode or reorientation mode for each individual trajectory, 〈 s mode 〉, where “mode” equal directional or reorientation, also correlated strongly with mean cell speed, 〈s〉 for all cells. The mean directional mode speed for a cell was obtained simply by estimating the mean speed of the cell during every directional mode and then taking the average over the entire trajectory. The mean reorientation mode speed was defined similarly but adjusted accordingly to represent reorientation modes. Interestingly, for Dictyostelium, neutrophils and fibrosarcoma cells, 〈 s d 〉 was found to be significantly greater than 〈 s r 〉, indicating that higher speeds were associated with directional mode. This is consistent with a saltatory model of nondirected motility in vegetative cells as suggested in Shenderov and Sheetz, and by our model of polarized and coordinated cytoskeletal dynamics in directional mode. However, inasmuch as there was no difference between mode speeds in the mammary epithelial cells, it is evident that not all motile cells regulate their speed simply by dependence upon their motility mode. Given that the speed of Dictyostelium, neutrophils, and fibrosarcoma cells is higher in directional mode than in reorientation, it is important to examine the relationship between speed in reorientation and speed directional modes. We found that there was a strong correlation between 〈 s d 〉 and 〈 s r 〉 for cells examined here. In fact, all the cells studied here that were relatively fast in reorientation mode were also fast in directional mode. As a result, the overall mean speed of the cell appears to be largely set by factors extrinsic to the regulation of directional and reorientation modes, despite the fact that speed can vary between modes. Discussion With increased understanding of the detailed mechanisms regulating cell motility comes a new challenge: to integrate the findings from these diverse systems into a unified framework. Our approach provides a simple, unified description of both nondirected and chemotactic eukaryotic cell motility, and is equally applicable to other forms of directed motility. Previous attempts to unify our understanding of both directed and nondirected motility were based on the concept of receptor noise. However, it has since been shown that nondirected motility can take place in the absence of conventional constitutive receptor activation, indicating the presence of other mechanisms governing spontaneous symmetry breaking and directional persistence. Scaling laws are often seen in complex systems near equilibrium-phase transitions and in self-organizing, nonequilibrium systems tuned near their critical points. The dynamics of the actin-myosin cytoskeleton have been shown to possess hallmarks of complex, nonequilibrium, self-organizing systems: scaling of mechanical behaviors ; spontaneous symmetry breaking ; and traveling waves in the form of actin polymerization and membrane protrusion. The identification of scaling behavior in a system provides significant motivation for the development of quantitative theories that start with system dynamics, attempting to explain the higher-order scaling behavior in a mechanistic fashion. The presence of a scaling law in four eukaryotic cell lines, from different phyla and tissues and each with different motility characteristics, suggests the existence of a general mechanism regulating the directional persistence in eukaryotic cell motility. The challenge now is to understand the dynamic molecular processes that give rise to directional persistence and this scaling relationship. Our conceptual model for the formation of spontaneous polarity is similar to the model recently introduced by Weiger et al.. A biosensor for PI3K activity in motile fibroblasts showed that, at any given time, the cells were capable of producing multiple PI3K signaling hotspots. The dynamics of these hotspots were stochastic and the production of dominant hotspots well-correlated the directional persistence during nondirected motility. The birth and death of the hotspots were related, and they proposed a stochastic model to describe the dynamics based on a limited pool of an unknown regulator. It would be interesting to see whether a similar model, coupling stochastic dynamics to receptor-driven signaling during chemotaxis, could reproduce the relationship between nondirected and directed motility in Fig. 2. Recent work by Bosgraaf and van Haastert has focused on the dynamics of pseudopod extension during motility. They found that nearly all pseudopodia produced fall into one of two categories: 1. Split pseudopodia, or those that form by splitting from existing pseudopodia. 2. De novo, or those that are produced at apparently random positions around the cell cortex. They further argue that directionally persistent motion is the result of successive split pseudopodia, whereas the interruption of directionally persistent motion is the result of de novo pseudopodia. It is an exciting possibility that our measurements of directional persistence and reorientation might be related to pseudopodia dynamics. A cursory examination of the data suggests that as cells transition from vegetative to developed, they do increase the ratio of split/de novo pseudopodia in a manner consistent with our results. In such a scenario, the scaling law would be a high-order principle that governs the ratio of split/de novo pseudopodia. However, there are a few concerns regarding any attempt to explain our scaling law strictly in terms of pseudopod production. First, the speculation about pseudopodia being the sole determinant of amoeboid motility needs to be carefully examined. Second, we succeeded in generalizing our scaling law to human epithelial and fibrosarcoma cells. It is well appreciated that such cells move slowly, with a broad and relatively stable lamella, limiting application of the idea of split/de novo pseudopodia to all motile cells. However, a more general concept of dynamical cell polarity—in which efficient, persistent motility is the result of organized, spatially restricted F-actin-based protrusion complemented with retraction—is generally applicable to all the cell lines in our study. In this scenario, the split pseudopodia are the method used by Dictyostelium, once the polarity has been established. Other cell lines, such as epithelial cells, utilize a more stable lamella and move at a different timescales. The presence of persistence during vegetative nondirected motility suggests that the most basic form of spontaneous cell polarity exists in this form of motility. It seems likely that in the vegetative state, the cellular concentrations of the key polarity components and the rate constants that govern their interaction are tuned to allow for a basic form of spontaneous polarity and directional persistence. We suggest that, in its most basic form, the ability to spontaneously polarize lies within the F-actin/myosin cytoskeleton itself and perhaps a few key regulators that initiate F-actin regulation. It is possible that these core mechanisms that give rise to spontaneous polarity are very simple given that synthetic vesicles containing F-actin have been shown to spontaneously produce pseudopodlike protrusions. It is here that we are likely to identify core mechanisms of spontaneous cell polarity. Our identification of four perturbations that quantitatively modify the scaling relationship provides a window into the molecular mechanism that give rise to the coupling of directional and reorientation modes. The other forms of motility, i.e., those with more stable polarity and greater directional persistence, are then likely to result from the tweaking of this core system by either altering the concentrations or rate constants to further encourage spontaneous cell polarity and directional persistence or by the addition of new layers of regulation through receptor-driven or feedback-driven signal transduction. Our results lead to the proposition that cell motility, including both directed and nondirected, results from a cycle of repeated spontaneous cell polarity. During nondirected motility, small fluctuations are amplified due to the unstable nature of the actin cytoskeleton and its core regulatory accessory molecules. These amplified fluctuations lead to cell polarity and directionally persistent motility. This cell polarity, consisting of the spontaneously orchestrated activity of numerous molecular processes distributed throughout the cell, is volatile and eventually dissipates while the underlying processes of actin regulation become uncoordinated. This lack of subcellular coordination is revealed in the lack of directional persistence during reorientation mode. During chemotaxis, concentration gradients harness this polarization-depolarization cycle to result in highly persistent, directed motility. We propose that chemoattractant gradients, in addition to orienting the direction of polarization, either stabilize the directional mode, increase the frequency of the transition into directional mode, or both, to result in motility that appears highly directed and persistent. In this scenario, fluctuations in key F-actin regulators, such as WASP, SCAR, or Formins initiate F-actin polymerization. Single knockouts of all three of these actin polymerization initiators show defects in chemotaxis and nondirected motility. In our study, we showed that loss of WASP function, but not SCAR function, leads to a quantitatively altered scaling relationship between persistence time and reorientation time. Dictyostelium cells are capable of detecting extremely weak gradients of chemoattractant. It has been shown that they can sense gradients in the nM range with an estimated difference in receptor occupancy from anterior to posterior in the range of 130 receptors. Based on the assumption that the directional persistence in chemotaxis results from instructions to the cytoskeleton from signal transduction, analyses of the sensory processes concluded that chemotaxis occurs near the limit set by noise. However, feedback between the actin cytoskeleton and the gradient sensory system has been demonstrated in both Dictyostelium and neutrophils. Moreover, the treatment of Dictyostelium with Latrunculin, which reduces F-actin and eliminates morphological polarity, also eliminates the spontaneous activation of Ras and production of the second messenger PIP3 in the absence of chemoattractant receptor signaling. Thus it appears that the signal transduction system, rather than controlling, works in conjunction with cytoskeletal dynamics to produce efficient cell motility. Supporting Material Seven figures, five tables, and one movie are available at. Supporting Material Document S1. Figures and Tables: Click here to view. Movie S1: Ax3/mRFP-LimE-Δ-coil: Click here to view. 