DupA: a key regulator of the amoebal MAP kinase response to Legionella pneumophila You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF DupA: a key regulator of the amoebal MAP kinase response to Legionella pneumophila Cell Host Microbe. 2009 Sep 17; 6: 253–267. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Cell host & microbe Author Manuscript HHS Public Access DupA: a key regulator of the amoebal MAP kinase response to Legionella pneumophila Zhiru Li, Aisling S. Dugan,, and Ralph R. Isberg Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials 01. NIHMS148025-supplement-01.pdf GUID: B15DA755-4BA8-44CC-A8E2-589C1A53FE42 02. NIHMS148025-supplement-02.xls GUID: A1C30F4A-9DA7-4B4A-A51C-F8A4D5F6D49F 03. NIHMS148025-supplement-03.xls GUID: A0728C01-839D-47C9-A0B5-FAB33363A1EE 04. NIHMS148025-supplement-04.xls GUID: 04B585D3-AC42-459D-A014-9259B76F7B69 05. NIHMS148025-supplement-05.xls GUID: FD457CA7-AC96-4B8B-A310-344547049831 06. NIHMS148025-supplement-06.xls GUID: 018D2356-C87B-4C9E-9C49-563FE78DEF86 07. NIHMS148025-supplement-07.xls GUID: D19BB84E-33A4-42DC-A142-A186533DEC25 08. NIHMS148025-supplement-08.xls GUID: CD753329-AB2D-46D9-BC77-6D5558B102E8 09. NIHMS148025-supplement-09.xls GUID: 40E322E6-6E93-4F88-ADB1-6AFBAC0DF516 SUMMARY The dupA gene, encoding a putative tyrosine kinase/dual specificity phosphatase, was identified in a screen for Dictyostelium discoideum mutants altered in supporting Legionella pneumophila intracellular replication. The absence of dupA resulted in hyperphosphorylation of ERK1, consistent with the loss of a phosphatase activity, as well as degradation of ERK2. ERK1 hyperphosphorylation mimicked the response of this protein after bacterial challenge of wild type amoebae. Similar to Dusps in higher eukaryotic cells, the amoebal dupA gene was induced after bacterial contact, indicating a response of Dusps that is conserved from amoebae to mammals. A large set of genes was misregulated in the dupA − mutant that largely overlaps with genes responding to L. pneumophila infection. Some of the amoebal genes appear to be involved in a response similar to innate immunity in higher eukaryotes, indicating there was misregulation of a conserved response to bacteria. INTRODUCTION Legionella pneumophila is a facultative intracellular bacterium that causes Legionnaires' disease, initiated after inhalation of aerosols from contaminated water supplies. The ability of L. pneumophila to cause disease is dependent on its ability to modulate the biogenesis of its replication vacuole and grow within host cells. After avoidance of the host cell endocytic pathway, the Legionella -containing vacuole matures into an endoplasmic reticulum -like compartment. Formation of the LCV requires the function of the L. pneumophila Dot/Icm type IV secretion system, a 27 protein complex that translocates a large number of protein substrates into the host cell. It is believed that amoebae, such as Hartmannella vermiformis and Acanthamoeba castellanii, maintain the reservoir for bacteria that come in contact with the human population. Replication of the bacteria within amoebae appears to require a similar, although not identical, set of bacterial proteins as those involved in growth within macrophages. Several host proteins have been identified that contribute to L. pneumophila replication. These include factors involved in secretory traffic and ER dynamics, such as vesicle budding factors Sar1 and Arf1 as well as the fusion and tethering factor Rab1. In addition, lowered expression of the amino acid transporter slc1a5 interferes with L. pneumophila growth. Most of the studies that have identified these factors have targeted a subset of proteins for analysis. Thus, the total repertoire of host proteins that modulate intracellular growth is unknown. Dictyostelium discoideum has been used as a model to dissect the amoebal factors that modulate intracellular growth because there are extensive genetic tools available for this organism. D. discoideum is a free-living organism that has both a vegetative amoebal stage and a dormant stage. Using the amoebal stage of the organism, it has been shown that L. pneumophila trafficking to an ER-bound compartment appears identical to that in macrophages and other amoebal species. Furthermore, the global transcriptional response of D. discoideum to L. pneumophila also bears some similarity to that observed in higher cells. Various classes of stress response genes are induced in response to the L. pneumophila, with upregulation of genes encoding proteins associated with ubiquitin-dependent degradation processes. A variety of D. discoideum mutants defective in cytoskeletal functions show increased yields of L. pneumophila relative to wild type amoebae. Similarly, there is enhanced replication in amoeba having disrupted Nramp1, consistent with this channel acting as an active antimicrobial protein. Analysis of D. discoideum interactions with another intracellular microorganism, Mycobacterium marinum, have uncovered host factors involved replication vacuole maintenance as well as a novel pathway for cell-to-cell spread of the microorganism. In the following study, we performed a non-targeted screen for D. discoideum mutants that have altered ability to support L. pneumophila growth. Among the mutants identified was an insertion in the gene for a putative tyrosine kinase/dual specificity phosphatase, which we call dupA. RESULTS Identification of D. discoideum mutants with altered susceptibility to L. pneumophila infection The strategy for isolation of D. discoideum mutants altered in support of L. pneumophila growth is diagramed in Fig. 1. Individual Restriction Enzyme Mediated Insertion strains were challenged with L. pneumophila- GFP at MOI=0.1 for 72 hours. Wells containing the live cells were then visually screened using fluorescence microscopy and quantitive analysis of captured images. Out of about 7000 original mutants screened, 10 reproducibly yielded Legionella- containing vacuoles that were altered relative to wild type AX4. These alterations were in the size and number of LCVs present as well as the density of bacteria within the LCV, based on quantitation of fluorescent foci of bacterial replication in grabbed images. 2A ). Ten mutants exhibiting a significant change in L. pneumophila growth were chosen for further investigation. Additional mutants with subtle enhancement of growth of L. pneumophila were observed, but due to their mild phenotype, they were not analyzed further. Figure 1 D. discoideum mutants altered in supporting L. pneumophila intracellular replication Figure 2 D. discoideum REMI mutants altered in bacterial growth show a spectrum of phenotypes Representative fluorescence images of 5 mutants incubated with L. pneumophila -GFP for 72 hrs are shown in Fig. 2A. Compared to growth in the wild type AX4 strain, mutant strains RI4 and RI11 contained greater numbers of LCVs that were also larger in volume based on increased pixel area, while mutant strains RI18 and RI10 contained fewer, but larger phagosomes. In contrast, the F6 mutation in strain RI6 showed fewer and dimmer L. pneumophila phagosomes than those in AX4 cells. Measurement of intracellular growth rates over a 3 day period showed a correspondence to the visual assays, with the yield of bacteria in the RI6 strain at least 10X lower than AX4. Identification of sites disrupted by REMI The integration site of the mutations was determined and the resulting products were searched versus DictyBase.org ). Southern blotting confirmed that there was only a single insertion of the plasmid into the genome for each of the mutants. Of the six mutants mapped, three showed enhanced intracellular growth and will be detailed elsewhere. Of the three that showed depressed growth, one was a predicted transmembrane protein with a haemaglutinnin repeat. The second had a mutation in gene predicted to encode a regulator of heterotrimeric G protein signaling, resulting in a modest reduction L. pneumophila intracellular growth. The third mutant, F6, had a plasmid insertion site that was mapped to an Orf that predicted to encode a eukaryotic protein kinase domain and a downstream du al- s pecificity protein p hosphatase domain. As the gene predicts two functional domains, the putative protein will be referred to as DupA and the strain RI6 REMI insertion mutant called dupA. Interestingly, the mutant also was defective for supporting intracellular growth of Mycobacterium marinum, another intravacuolar pathogen. To confirm the connection between the absence of the dupA gene and increased resistance to L. pneumophila infection, a complete dupA − deletion mutant was constructed. The deletion of the dupA gene was examined by genomic DNA PCR, which showed the predicted deletion, and qRT-PCR which showed that there was no detectable expression of dupA. When the ΔdupA − mutant was challenged with L. pneumophila, the phenotype of the deletion mutant appeared very similar to the REMI insertion. In each case, there were fewer viable, cell-associated bacteria at early timepoints, followed by a period of growth kinetics similar to wild type. Bacterial replication, however, eventually slowed relative to the wild type AX4 strain. We attempted to isolate a full-length dupA gene to perform complementation analysis, but we were unable to isolate an intact expressed gene. Instead, fragments containing the Dsp domain, the kinase domain, or both were expressed in D. discoideum. None of the partial gene fragments could complement the mutation. Nevertheless, the ability to reconstruct the mutant phenotype using an independent strategy is consistent with depressed intracellular replication of L. pneumophila being the result of dupA deletion. Figure 3 Reduced intracellular growth and developmental defects in a reconstructed dupA mutant DupA is necessary for D. discoideum development The dupA − mutants displayed slower growth rates in axenic medium than did wild type and grew as microcolonies, instead of spreading evenly on tissue culture plates as seen with AX4 cells. When D. discoideum AX4 and dupA cells were plated on the bacterial lawn of Klebsiella aerogenes AM2515, both strains could form plaques. However, unlike AX4 cells, the dupA mutant could not form fruiting bodies. To gain insight into the developmental defect of the mutant, a standard development assay was performed on a solid substrate. AX4 cells formed fruiting bodies typical for a wild type strain after 30 hr incubation. In contrast, dupA cells were arrested at the pre- aggregation stage, the initial event in development of fruiting bodies. The absence of DupA leads to increased phosphorylation of Dictyostelium ERK1 The Dsp domain of DupA indicates that DupA may function as a dual specificity phosphatase for a MAP kinase. Dictyostelium has two MAPKs similar to members of the mammalian ERK family: ERK1 and ERK2. Elimination or overexpression of each of these ERK proteins results in developmental and/or chemotactic defects. The similarity of the developmental defects of the dupA − and ERK overexpression prompted us to determine if MAP kinases are possible targets of DupA, by measuring phosphorylation levels of the D. discoideum ERKs. The levels of ERK phosphorylation in dupA − mutant cells were examined by anti-phospho-ERK antibody directed against Thr202/Tyr204 of human p44 MAP kinase ). There were small amounts of a species predicted to comigrate with phospho-ERK1 protein in vegetatively growing AX4 cells, consistent with previous reports. In contrast, a much higher level of phospho-ERK1 was detected in dupA − cells. To confirm that ERK1 was the protein that was highly phosphorylated in dupA − cells, we expressed Myc tagged D. discoideum ERK1 on a plasmid. The Myc-tagged ERK1 showed a phosphorylated band that migrated slightly slower than ERK1 with significantly more phosphorylation of the mycERK1 band in dupA − cells. Similar results were observed with the ΔdupA strain. In contrast to ERK1, the anti-phospho-ERK reacting band that comigrated with the predicted molecular weight of ERK2 totally disappeared in the dupA − strain. The absence of this species apparently resulted from degradation, as stripped blots showed there was a loss of the comigrating band that cross-reacted with anti-human ERK2, in spite of the fact that transcription of erk2 in the dupA − mutant appeared to be normal. Figure 4 Control of ERK1 activation by DupA To investigate whether the hyperactivation of ERK1 observed in the dupA − strain mimics the response of wild type amoebae to bacteria, the phospho-ERK1 level was measured in D. discoideum cells in response to L. pneumophila. ERK1 was phosphorylated rapidly after contact with L. pneumophila. At 60 min post-infection, maximum phosphorylation of ERK1 was observed, with 12 fold higher activation than prior to infection. The activation of ERK1was transient, as ERK1 phosphorylation returned to low levels by 240 min post-infection. The dupA − mutant cells, in contrast, showed high levels of ERK1 phosphorylation throughout infection, with only a 2 fold increase approximately 30 min after challenge with bacteria. Even so, at all timepoints there was still more phospho-ERK1 in the dupA − mutant than observed in the wild type. The elevated level of phospho-ERK1 in the dupA − strain was due to increased phosphorylation of the protein and not due to enhanced expression. Similar to what was observed with ERK2, the dupA − strain showed reduced amounts of 70 kDal antigen that comigrated with the hyperphosphorylated band and cross-reacted with anti-ERK. This indicates that the fraction of ERK1 that was phosphorylated relative to the pool of ERK1 present in the dupA − strain was even higher than displayed in Fig. 4E, which was normalized to unrelated protein levels. These results indicate that ERK1 phosphorylation is negatively regulated by DupA and responds to the interaction between L. pneumophila and D. discoideum. The fact that the dupA − mutant appears hyperactivated in a fashion that seems to mimic the response to L. pneumophila raises the possibility that phosphorylation of ERK1 is the result of a general pathway for recognition of bacteria. To test this idea, the AX4 wild type strain was challenged either with L. pneumophila dotA −, which is unable to translocate type IV substrates, or with the laboratory strain E. coli K12. There was a robust response of ERK1 phosphorylation in AX4 to the dotA − mutant that appeared similar in intensity and kinetics to that observed with wt L. pneumophila, a result that mirrors previous observations with mouse bone marrow macrophages. Challenge with E. coli K12 also caused an increase in ERK1 phosphorylation, although the intensity of this response was markedly lower than that observed with L. pneumophila. Therefore, ERK1 appears to be phosphorylated in response to multiple strains of bacteria, but the intensity of this response is not uniform. Expression of dupA is induced upon L. pneumophila challenge The defect in intracellular growth exhibited by amoebae deranged for MAPK regulation brings up an important link to the mammalian response to L. pneumophila. In a human phagocytic cell line, the dual specificity phosphatases dusp1, dusp2 and dusp6, which are negative regulators of the MAPK response, are highly induced genes after L. pneumophila challenge. The phenotype of the dupA − mutant indicates that downmodulation by Dusps may be an evolutionarily conserved response to bacteria. The expression of the dupA gene in response to L. pneumophila, therefore, was carefully examined by analyzing the subset of cells harboring bacteria and comparing them with uninfected cells in the same population. D. discoideum AX4 was incubated at low MOI with L. pneumophila expressing GFP, the infected GFP positive cells were sorted by flow cytometry and subjected to qPCR. Consistent with the results from mammalian cells, the dupA gene was induced 10 fold in the infected GFP + D. discoideum cells compared to cells from uninfected cultured or to the uninfected sorted GFP − population. This is consistent with the notion that downmodulation of MAPK activation is a conserved response to L. pneumophila. Amoebal genes misregulated in absence of DupA are regulated in response to L. pneumophila challenge As the absence of DupA caused constitutive activation of a MAP kinase cascade which should control global regulatory circuits, the transcriptional profile of the dupA − mutant was compared to the wild type AX4 in the presence or absence of L. pneumophila. The wild type and dupA − mutant were challenged with L. pneumophila expressing GFP at MOI = 1.0, at 6 h. post-infection cells were collected, and RNA was isolated from infected amoeba as well as uninfected cells otherwise treated identically. The RNA from each sample was used to probe an array of 9320 D. discoideum orf segments, and the four conditions were compared to each other. There were three readily apparent properties of these bacterial challenges: A) In wild type amoebae, there was a large transcriptional response to the presence of L. pneumophila at 6 hrs. post-infection that involved alterations in genes encoding proteins involved in translation and transcriptional regulation ; B) a large cadre of genes induced in the wild type amoebae in response to L. pneumophila were overexpressed in the dupA − mutant prior to bacterial infection, while many of the genes that were reduced in expression in response to L. pneumophila were underexpressed in the dupA mutant prior to exposure to bacteria ; and C) several of the genes that were induced in response to L pneumophila and overexpressed in the dupA − mutant encoded proteins that show similarity to proteins involved in the innate immune response in higher eukaryotes. To confirm the microarray gene expression, qRT-PCR was used to verify that several of the genes upregulated on the arrays including tirA, gefN, pdiA, discoidin I, and nod3 were also strongly induced as measured by qRT-PCR. The amount of altered expression was consistent with that observed on the array. Figure 5 Microarray analysis of dupA mutant compared to L. pneumophila challenged AX4 strain Figure 6 Upregulation of genes associated with an amoebal innate immune response after incubation with L. pneumophila Table 1 Disruption of dupA results in misregulation of genes that respond to L. pneumophila infection. A. The presence of a large transcriptional response to L. pneumophila Incubation of the wild type AX4 to L. pneumophila for 6 hrs resulted in altered expression of a large number of genes, many of which have been described in a previous microarray study. As observed previously, there was upregulation of tRNA synthetase genes in response to L. pneumophila. In contrast, almost every ribosomal protein gene was downregulated in response to L. pneumophila. Although these may appear to be counterproductive responses, this phenomenon has some similarity to the E. coli stringent response, in which the charging status of tRNAs modulates the rate of protein synthesis. B. Genes misregulated in the dupA − mutant showed altered expression in wild type AX4 after L. pneumophila challenge In the absence of added bacteria, the dupA − mutant showed altered expression of a large number of genes, many of which were found to be differentially expressed in response to bacterial challenge of the wild type AX4 strain. 64% of the genes overexpressed in the uninfected dupA − mutant were upregulated after L. pneumophila was incubated with the wild type amoebae, while 48% of the underexpressed genes were downregulated. 521 genes that were differentially expressed when AX4 was challenged by L. pneumophila- challenged AX4 also showed misregulation in the uninfected dupA − mutant when compared to AX4. 244 of these genes were upregulated in both comparisons and 261were downregulated in both comparisons; only 16 genes were significantly upregulated in one comparison and downregulated in the other. This association is far greater than one would expect by chance alone. Table 1 shows a summary of an annotated set of genes that were altered in expression in uninfected dupA − and which were regulated after challenge of the wild type with L. pneumophila. When the dupA − mutant was challenged with L. pneumophila there was very little change in expression of most of the differentially expressed genes. Key among the misregulated genes in the dupA mutant was an apparent switch in the nature of the protein degradation pathways present in the mutant, with several cysteine and serine proteases underexpressed in the mutant, and enhanced expression of the ubiquitin-proteosome machinery. These changes predicted the response of the wild type amoebae to L. pneumophila, as the proteasome-ubiquitin pathway genes were induced after bacterial challenge. C. Hyperexpression of genes similar to immune response genes Several genes that encode proteins with sequence similarities to host innate immune response proteins found in higher eukaryotes were overexpressed in the dupA mutant and were upregulated in response to L. pneumophila. Cosson and Soldati had hypothesized that many of these genes may be involved in the amoebal response to bacteria. Most notable, the TIR domain containing protei n tirA carries out sensor or adaptor functions in the detection of pathogens, and mutations in this gene were previously shown to confer hypersensitivity of D. discoideum to high multiplicity infection by L. pneumophila. Another gene associated with this response is slrA, encoding a leucine rich repeat protein, but it was not differentially expressed by microarray analysis, perhaps due to weak spotting of this gene on the array. As both these proteins appear to be involved in a hypothesized amoebal innate immune response to pathogens, tirA and slrA gene expression was carefully monitored in infected wild type D. discoideum using qPCR. AX4 cells were incubated with L. pneumophila -GFP at MOI= 1.0, and 1h, 4h, 6h or 18h after infection, RNA was isolated from sorted cells harboring fluorescent bacteria. Both the tirA and slrA genes were induced shortly after L. pneumophila infection. In the case of tirA, expression increased to more than 130 fold compared to the uninfected control at 6h post infection. In the uninfected dupA − mutant, there was also overexpression of tirA in the absence of bacteria. A similar pattern of induction was also observed for slrA gene. The induction of tirA, slrA, as well as other potential immune response genes, and their overexpression in the dupA − mutant suggest that DupA plays an important role in a putative D. discoideum innate immune response by negatively regulating a subset of these genes. DISCUSSION We have identified a mutant disrupted in the regulation of a large number of amoebal genes that respond to Legionella pneumophila infection. As bacterial replication was reduced in this mutant, the regulatory circuit partially controlled by DupA appears to be an important determinant of the fate of L. pneumophila after it encounters amoebae. Furthermore, some common elements of this amoebal response to pathogens may control the intracellular replication of a broad swath of microorganisms, given that the unrelated Mycobacterium marinum was defective for either uptake or initiation of replication in dupA mutants. The regulatory circuit controlled by DupA is also evolutionarily conserved. Mutations in dupA resulted in hyper-phosphorylation of the D. discoideum ERK1 protein as well as apparent degradation of ERK2. The predicted gene product of dupA encodes both a kinase and a dual specificity phosphatase domain, making it the most likely candidate to be the direct negative regulator of ERK1 that is missing in the mutant. Although we do not know that the DupA phosphatase domain acts directly on ERK1, there is likely to be at least one important phosphatase activity that is misregulated in the mutant, as a large number of organisms use Dusps as the primary negative regulators of MAP kinases. Consistent with a function that is similar to Dusps in higher eukaryotes, the DupA gene was shown to be upregulated in the wild type D. discoideum AX4 in response to L. pneumophila infection. This is identical to observations in mammalian cells, in which three of the most highly upregulated genes in response to L. pneumophila are MAP kinase phosphatases. At least some of the phenotypic changes associated with the dupA − mutant can be attributed to hyperphosphorylation of ERK1. We have analyzed a D. discoideum strain that overproduces a constitutively active MEK1 protein, which causes hyperphosphorylation of ERK1 and has no effect on ERK2 phosphorylation or stability. Intracellular growth of L. pneumophila was mildly reduced in such a strain, but this result is tempered by the fact that ERK1 phosphorylation levels were significantly lower in the constitutively active strain than in the dupA − mutant. Furthermore, we were unable to demonstrate that the phosphorylation phenotype was due to overproduction of MEK1 rather than due to constitutive activity. At any rate, this result is consistent with ERK1 hyperactivation interfering with intracellular growth, but does not eliminate the possibility that loss of ERK2 or an uncharacterized property of the dupA − mutant make additional contributions to this phenotype. Although in the dupA − mutant there was altered regulation of a large group of proteins that respond to L pneumophila infection, this did not result in an absolute block on intracellular growth. It is not clear that in every instance, the consequence of the altered gene expression is intended to restrict the pathogen. For instance, there appears to be global reduction of ribosomal protein gene expression after L. pneumophila challenge of wild type. This is similar to what was observed in a previous array analysis of D. discoideum challenged with L. pneumophila, but very different from the response of D. discoideum to E. coli. Slowing ribosomal protein synthesis in host cells, which probably leads to slowed growth of the amoebae, may be a response to intracellular pathogens that is counterproductive for the amoebae. In support of this point, L. pneumophila growth within D. discoideum is enhanced in suboptimal growth medium or by plating amoebae at high culture densities. Furthermore, L. pneumophila encodes several Dot/Icm translocated substrates that interfere with host protein synthesis, possibly blocking the host cell cycle. Therefore, the dupA − mutation causes a deranged amoebal response to pathogens, with the consequence that the sum of transcriptional activity of the host cell does not efficiently support intracellular growth under the conditions tested. The MAP kinase signaling pathways in D. discoideum are simplified versions of what is found in mammals, with ERK1 and ERK2 being the only terminal kinases. ERK2 is involved in oscillatory cAMP signaling during development, while ERK1 controls events associated with chemotaxis and aggregation. In parallel to the work described here, it has been demonstrated that mouse macrophages challenged with L. pneumophila undergo phosphorylation of multiple MAPKs. Interestingly, the pattern of ERK phosphorylation in macrophages is reminiscent of our observations, as activation of ERK is independent of the dot / icm system. Surprisingly, the response in macrophages also did not require known pattern recognition receptors. Perhaps there is an evolutionarily conserved response to bacterial adhesion that is shared in both amoebae and mammalian cells that modulates microbial interaction. The ability of the pathogen either to manipulate or defend against such host responses in amoebae could be one of the critical selective pressures that also allow bacterial survival and growth in mammalian phagocytic cells. A number of genes that may encode a primitive amoebal innate immune response showed altered expression in response to L. pneumophila, and many of these are misregulated in the dupA − mutant. Most striking is the altered regulation of the slrA, tirA and tirC genes. It has been previously reported that tirA expression was increased 16 fold in newly identified Sentinel Cells, which are hypothesized to be immune-like cells generated by the slug form of amoebae. Furthermore, D. discoideum tirA − is more sensitive than wild type to killing after high multiplicity challenge with L. pneumophila, indicating that the protein may promote enhanced cell survival in the presence of bacteria. Consistent with this hypothesized role, we observed a large increase in expression of both slrA and tirA in amoebae harboring L. pneumophila, and slrA is severely overexpressed in the dupA mutant. We have found that a tirA − mutant still is able to support L. pneumophila replication with similar efficiency to wild type strains using low MOI challenge with the bacterium. However, the requirement of the tirA product for supporting host cell viability in the presence of high doses of pathogen, as well as the regulatory profile of this gene, are properties that are consistent with the protein playing a role in a global response that modulates D. discoideum protection from pathogens. In conclusion, disrupted DupA function is associated with profound misregulation of a group of genes that respond to association of L. pneumophila with amoebae. That several of the genes upregulated in response to the bacterium had been suggested previously to encode proteins involved in a form of amoebal innate immunity is consistent with their proposed role in the biology of D. discoideum. In fact, this primitive form of immune surveillance may be part of a larger regulatory circuit controlled by ERK1 and DupA. Most intriguing is the possibility that there are important parallels between macrophages and amoebae, the natural host for L. pneumophila, as negative control of host cell MAPKs appears to be a conserved response in these disparate cell types worthy of further investigation. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Bacteria strains, plasmids and media L. pneumophila Lp01 is proficient for intracellular growth and was grown on AYE liquid medium or CYE agar plate. The GFP-encoding plasmid pAM239 was described previously. The L. pneumophila strains were grown to post-exponential phase, at which time motile bacteria were added to amoebae at the noted multiplicities of infection. The approximate concentration of bacteria was determined by assuming that A 600 = 1.0 is equivalent to 10 9 bacteria/ml. Growth assay of L. pneumophila in D. discoideum D. discoideum strains were routinely grown axenically in HL-5 liquid medium supplemented with penicillin and streptomycin at 21.5°C. Amoebae in logarithmic stage were prepared by plating 1 to 1.25 × 10 5 cells 2 days prior to use in fresh HL-5 medium. Cells were harvested and washed once with phosphate-buffered saline and pelleted for 5 min at 200× g, resuspended at 10 6 cells/ml in MB medium ethanesulfonic acid), 0.7% yeast extract, 1.4% BBL thiotone E peptone). 0.5 ml or 0.1 ml were added to each well in 24-well or 96-well plates prior to incubation at 25.5°C for 2 h. to allow adherence before the bacterial infection. Infections with L. pneumophila were performed as described. REMI mutagenesis, mutant mapping and construction of mutants REMI mutagenesis was performed as described. 1μg of Bam HI linearized plasmid pBsrΔBglII and 5units of Dpn II were transformed into AX4 cells by two consecutive electroporation pulses at 0.85kv, 25μF, applied 5 seconds apart. Cells were then serially diluted in HL-5 medium to 10 cells per ml and 100μL of cell were plated in tissue culture treated 96-well plate immediately following electroporation. Transformed cells were allowed to recovery for 24 h before selection in HL-5 media containing 5 μg/ml blasticidin S. Drug-resistant cells were collected, counted and plated. To map the insertion site of plasmid,s we used plasmid rescue or reverse PCR. Plasmid rescue was performed as described. Briefly, DNA from the mutant was digested with ClaI, which does not cut the integrated vector, or with another enzyme determined by Southern blot to generate a fragment of <15kB, circularized by ligation, and transformed into Escherichia coli. Plasmid DNA isolated from E. coli was sequenced commercially with primers: TGAGCGCAACGCAATTAA and CCATTTTTTTTTTTAAAGATTTGATGG that correspond to plasmid sequences. For inverse PCR isolation, 10 μg of genomic DNA from AX4 was treated with restriction enzymes that digest the plasmid close to the end of the insertion position, such as Afl III or Nla III. The DNA was set up for self-ligation in a volume of 100 μl. One μl of the ligation mix was used for inverse PCR using the 5′ primer CCAATCAATGATAATGATCCTCCC and the 3′primer AAAGTGAATCCTCGACAAG. The resulting sequences were used to BLAST search DictyBase.org. To knock out the dupA gene, 1kb genomic DNA fragments located upstream, Blasticidin S resistance cassette and 1kb downstream of the targeted gene were generated by PCR to transform D. discoideum AX4 cells as described above. The transformants were selected on blasticidin S for 7 days, single cell cloned, and screened for their phenotypes. The correct insertion of the genomic fragment was determined by DNA sequencing. D. discoideum screen Single D. discoideum REMI clones in a 96 well microtiter dish were harvested and replated into two 96 well plates having optically clear bottoms. D. discoideum mutants were incubated with L. pneumophila - GFP for 72 h. at MOI=0.1 and individual wells containing infected D. discoideum were visually screened using fluorescence microscopy. 3 images were grabbed from each well and inspected later. Images were analyzed using IP lab software. Segmentation was first applied for each image to separate the target pixels from background pixels. Thresholds for size and brightness of the fluorescence for each LCV were established for AX4 cells and used as a comparison for REMI mutants. Clones that deviated from wild type were retested in triplicate, and were retained for further analysis, as displayed in Fig. 2. Quantitative PCR Total RNA was isolated from 10 7 Dictyostelium cells using the Qiagen RNeasy mini kit or Trizol. The first strand of cDNA were reverse transcribed from 2 μg of DNA-free RNA using the Superscript TM First-strand Synthesis System containing DNase/Rnase-free water and buffer suggested by the manufacturer in a total reaction volume of 30 μl. 2 μl of the resulting cDNA reaction mix was then used for real-time quantitative PCR analysis. Quantitative PCR was performed using the GenAmp5700 system with the SYBR Green PCR reagent. For each quantification, triplicate samples were performed in parallel, quantification results were normalized based on the β-actin control and average values were calculated. D. discoideum development assay Briefly, 5×10 7 of vegetative cells were harvested by centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 5 min at a density = 1–2 × 10 6 cells/ml and washed twice with PDF buffer. Cells were resuspended in 500μl of PDF buffer and dispersed on nitrocellulose membrane on top of a PDF-soaked pad. Extra PDF buffer was added to the side of the Petri dish and left on the bench for 5 min. Cells were then developed at 21.5°C in humid container and observed microscopically. Western blot analysis and antibodies To avoid potential post-lysis modification or degradation of proteins of interest, 1×10 6 of D. discoideum cells were harvested and pelleted by centrifugation at 1000rpm at 4°C for 5 min and directly lysed in 100 μl of 1×SDS sample buffer followed by heat denaturation at 95°C for 5 min. Total protein extracts were separated by SDS–PAGE electrophoresis. Proteins were then transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane followed by blotting and probing. For immunoblot quantification, appropriately nonsaturated film exposures were selected and scanned, and the images were quantified by densitometry using a Kodak ImageStation. Anti-ERK was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Anti-phospho-p44/42 MAPK was from Cell Signaling Technology. Anti-tubulin was from Serotech. All antibodies were used following manufacture’s instructions for Western blot. Micoarray analysis D. discoideum cells were infected with Lp01 at an MOI=1 for 6 h. and compared to D. discoideum in the absence of infection. RNA was then isolated from the cells and prepared for microarray analysis. The RNA samples were prepared by Trizol extraction. For array analysis, three independent biological experiments were performed infecting wild-type and mutant RI6 ) with L. pneumophila. 25 μg RNA was extracted and labeled by incorporation of Cy3-or Cy5-conjugated dCTP in a reverse transcription reaction catalyzed by Superscript III. For each biological replicate, labeled cDNA samples with complementary dyes incorporated were paired so that the comparisons of direct interest were made: WT 0h was paired with WT 6h, WT 0h with mutant 6h, mutant 0h with mutant 6h, and WT 6h with mutant 6h. In this loop design, each sample was labelled twice, once with each dye. In total twelve microarrays were used; four for each biological replicate. The samples thus paired were hybridized to custom DNA microarrays. Background fluorescence was subtracted from the scanned images, the data then normalized using the print-tip Loess algorithm, linear models were fitted and the significance of apparent changes in expression was assessed using limma. P-values obtained from limma's moderated t statistics were adjusted to control the false discovery rate and genes with adjusted values < 0.05 taken to show significant evidence of differential expression. We filtered the data further to exclude genes with low-magnitude changes using a fold-change cutoff of 2. The array design is available from ArrayExpress under the accession A-SGRP-3. The full data for this experiment has been submitted to the same database under the accession E-TABM-509. Supplementary Material 01 Click here to view. 02 Click here to view. 03 Click here to view. 04 Click here to view. 05 Click here to view. 06 Click here to view. 07 Click here to view. 08 Click here to view. 09 Click here to view. 