 We investigated the link between cell movement and plasma membrane recycling using a fast-acting, temperature-sensitive mutant of the Dictyostelium SecA exocytic protein. Strikingly, most mutant cells become almost paralysed within minutes at the restrictive temperature. However, they can still sense cyclic-AMP gradients and polymerise actin up-gradient, but form only abortive pseudopodia, which cannot expand. They also relay a cAMP signal normally, suggesting that cAMP is released by a non-exocytic mechanism. To investigate why SecA is required for motility, we examined membrane trafficking in the mutant. Plasma membrane circulation is rapidly inhibited at the restrictive temperature and the cells acquire a prominent vesicle. Organelle-specific markers show that this is an undischarged contractile vacuole, and we found the cells are correspondingly osmo-sensitive. Electron microscopy shows that many smaller vesicles, probably originating from the plasma membrane, also accumulate at the restrictive temperature. Consistent with this, the surface area of mutant cells shrinks. We suggest that SecA mutant cells cannot move at the restrictive temperature because their block in exocytosis results in a net uptake of plasma membrane, reducing its area, and so restricting pseudopodial expansion. This demonstrates the importance of proper surface area regulation in cell movement. Keywords: Cell motility, SecA, Exocytosis, Contractile vacuole, Dictyostelium, cAMP relay Introduction The plasma membrane, in cooperation with the cytoskeleton, has a vital role in cell movement. It receives and processes guidance signals from the environment and also supplies attachments to the substratum. In neutrophils, these attachments are essential for migration on 2D surfaces, and their endocytosis and return to the cell surface at the leading edge might create membrane flow, which in turn could provide motive force for the cell or assist in its polarisation. The plasma membrane also represents a physical constraint to cell movement because, although fully flexible, it is barely extensible. The surface area of moving amoeboid cells is unlikely to remain constant, as such cells often progress by cycles of expansion and rounding up, and can extend a pseudopod without first withdrawing their tail. Measurement from confocal reconstructions confirms that the surface area of moving Dictyostelium cells continuously fluctuates, with increases of 30% sometimes occurring over a few minutes ; even greater increases are found in spreading mammalian cells. As these changes are much greater than membrane stretching allows, it seems likely that cells have evolved mechanisms to increase their surface area on demand, such as membrane ‘unwrinkling’, or by regulation of their endocytic cycle. Dictyostelium cells maintain an active endocytic cycle, taking up their surface area once every 5–10 minutes, even when starving. To test the importance of the endocytic cycle in cell movement, we previously created temperature-sensitive mutants of the essential nsfA gene, and found that they become paralysed within 30 minutes at the restrictive temperature. This is in stark contrast to most mutations of the actin cytoskeleton, which have only a minimal impact on cell motility. NSF is required for resolving SNARE complexes after vesicle fusion, and impairment of its function is expected to inhibit all membrane fusion events in the cell, resulting in severe perturbation in organelles such the Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum, as well as blocking exocytosis. Since these perturbations might indirectly affect cell motility, we sought a more specific tool to better dissect the role of exocytosis in cell movement. SecA is the Dictyostelium homologue of the yeast Sec1p and mammalian Munc18 proteins. These proteins interact with exocytic SNARE proteins during vesicle docking and fusion and so are essential for exocytosis, but they do not appear to function at other points in the secretary pathway. A library of temperature-sensitive secA mutants was previously created by replacing the endogenous gene with randomly mutated variants using homologous recombination, and screening for lack of growth at the restrictive temperature. Many of these mutants develop poorly at the permissive temperature, but here we have identified a mutant that does develop and becomes chemotactic to cyclic-AMP. This mutant shows a striking movement defect at the restrictive temperature and has a second defect in contractile vacuole discharge. However, cells can still polarise in response to cAMP, and relay a cAMP signal, showing that many other cellular functions continue unimpaired; we argue that the movement defect is due to surface area constriction. Results A temperature-sensitive secA mutant that is developmentally competent The Dictyostelium homologue of the Munc18/Sec1p proteins was identified bioinformatically. The SecA primary structure is very similar to its homologues in higher eukaryotes and is devoid of the low complexity repeats found in many Dictyostelium proteins. Temperature-sensitive mutants of SecA were obtained previously by mutagenic replacement of the endogenous gene using homologous recombination. We found that that most of these are impaired in early development even at the permissive temperature, making them unsuitable for investigating chemotaxis to cAMP, which is a developmentally acquired property. By re-screening this pool, we found one strain, which carried the secA2 allele, where development was relatively normal at the permissive temperature. The secA2 allele is fast acting, with visible effects on cell morphology within 30 minutes at the restrictive temperature and was reconstituted in the Ax2 wild-type background by homologous recombination. Cells of the resulting strain grew normally on suspensions of bacteria at the permissive temperature of 18°C, though they did not grow in shaken axenic culture. However, at the restrictive temperature of 27.5°C, growth completely stopped, both on bacterial lawns and in suspension, thereby demonstrating that the gene is essential. This growth defect was completely rescued in parasexual diploid strains harbouring one copy of the wild-type gene, showing that the secA2 allele is recessive. This indicates that the effect of the mutations is through loss of SecA function, rather than through an indirect dominant inhibitory effect of the mutant protein on other proteins. Fig. 1. A temperature-sensitive mutant of SecA. secA is an essential gene. The temperature-sensitive mutant strain HM1325 carrying the secA2 allele grows normally at the permissive temperature of 18°C, but not at the restrictive temperature... The mutant cells remained intact at the restrictive temperature, but rapidly rounded up and acquired prominent vacuoles, which we show later to be undischarged contractile vacuoles. Crucially, they did not lose viability for at least 4 hours at 27.5°C, which is longer than used in subsequent experiments, indicating that the acute effects on motility are not due to cell death, and are reversible. Cell motility requires SecA function We compared the motility of mutant and wild-type cells at the permissive and restrictive temperatures. Vegetative mutant and wild-type cells move similarly at the permissive temperature, but movement of the mutant is strongly suppressed at the restrictive temperature. Only around 20% of the mutant cells move more than 20 μm from their initial positions and, because the average diameter of a Dictyostelium cell is approximately 10 μm, this means that most mutant cells still overlapped their original position at the end of the experiment, contrasting starkly with the highly motile wild type. This is reflected in the average speed distribution, which peaked at 1.8 μm/minute in the mutant, whereas the mean for the much broader wild-type distribution was 8.5 μm/minute. Fig. 2. Random motility of vegetative SecA mutant cells is almost abolished at the restrictive temperature. Tracks of wild-type and SecA mutant cells at 27.5°C. The tracks of 100 randomly sampled cells are shown centred at the... Similarly, chemotaxis to cAMP was strongly impaired in the mutant at the restrictive temperature. In these experiments, mutant and wild-type aggregation-competent cells were placed on opposite sides of a Dunn chamber and filmed in parallel using a motorised stage, so that they experienced the same gradient and temperature conditions. It was apparent that the mutant was barely motile in comparison with the wild type. Fig. 3. Cells of the SecA mutant can sense chemotactic gradients at the restrictive temperature, but barely move. Tracks of wild-type and SecA mutant cells in a cAMP gradient at the restrictive temperature of 27.5°C. Tracks of aggregation-competent... Conceivably, the poor motility of mutant cells at the restrictive temperature might be due to a failure to deploy their actin cytoskeletons effectively. We first tested their ability to polymerise actin in response to a uniform cAMP stimulus, using the F-actin reporter ABP120-GFP. The initial actin response was very similar in mutant and wild-type cells, with F-actin levels robustly peaking at 5–10 seconds and then falling off. F-actin levels peaked for a second time in the wild type at 1–2 minutes, but this peak was much reduced in the mutant. The second peak correlates with pseudopod projection, but in our hands it was very variable and often barely discernable even in the wild type. Similarly, both mutant and wild type responded to a cAMP gradient by polymerising actin on the up-gradient side of the cell. In the wild type, this resulted in extension of a pseudopod and movement up the gradient, whereas the mutant generally could not produce a distinct pseudopod or move ( Fig. 3D ; supplementary material Movies 2 and 3); in the extreme example, the mutant cell remained rounded and could do no more than slightly bulge towards the needle, despite appropriate actin polymerisation. We also considered two more trivial explanations for the movement defect: that it might be due to the presence of the undischarged contractile vacuole, or loss of adhesion to the substratum, as a result of cell rounding. We found that placing cells in solutions of increasing osmolarity reduced the size of the contractile vacuole, but did not restore wild-type motility. Similarly, pressing cells against the substratum with an agarose overlay, which can restore motility to at least one poorly adhesive mutant, also did not rescue motility of the SecA mutant. cAMP relay does not require SecA function As well as performing chemotaxis, aggregation-competent cells respond to cAMP by producing and releasing more cAMP. This relay response depends on many of the same signal transduction components as chemotaxis and we therefore used it as a more global test for impairment of mutant cell function. Since the mechanism of cAMP release from the cell is not known, we also asked whether release depends on SecA function. It is clear from the measurements at the restrictive temperature that SecA was not required for cAMP production. More surprisingly, it was also dispensable for cAMP release, which might reasonably have been assumed to be by vesicle exocytosis. We microscopically checked the integrity of the cells at the end of the experiments and found no difference from the wild type. To confirm these findings, the same experiment was repeated with the NSF temperature-sensitive mutant, with the same result. Fig. 4. cAMP relay by aggregation-competent cells. Cells were stimulated with 15 μM 2′-deoxy cAMP and total cAMP produced over 5 minutes and the proportion released determined. SecA mutant, stained the plasma membrane of vegetative cells and puncta within them. Cells chemotaxing to cAMP stained in patches at the front and rear, often in the same cell, but also independently. Cells with a knocked in SecA C-terminal GFP fusion were viable, but did not grow in axenic medium, showing that the fusion was only partially functional, and unfortunately the GFP was too faint to detect. Overexpressed N- or C-terminal fusion proteins showed similar localisation patterns, often strongly staining the plasma membrane at the rear of moving cells. These results reveal a complex SecA localisation pattern in vegetative cells and a variable one in chemotaxing cells, where SecA can also be at the front or back. Neither pattern is especially informative. We next investigated membrane trafficking. SecA is required for normal plasma membrane circulation Plasma membrane circulation was measured in a continuous assay using the lipophilic dye FM1-43, which becomes intensely fluorescent when it partitions into the membrane. The initial fluorescence produced upon mixing dye and cells gives a measure of collective cell surface area, and the subsequent increase a measure of exocytosis, because previously internal membrane becomes available for binding. From Table 1 it is apparent that at the permissive temperature, the wild-type and SecA mutant cells circulate their plasma membrane at similar rates, taking approximately 10 minutes to exocytose the equivalent of their surface area, with no statistically significant difference between them. At the restrictive temperature, the mutant circulates its plasma membrane more slowly than the wild type: if no corrections are made, the rate is approximately half that of the wild type; but if allowance is made for the increase in fluorescence that occurs even in azide-poisoned cells, then it appears that the endocytic cycle is almost completely suppressed in the mutant. This indicates that normal plasma membrane circulation requires the function of SecA. Table 1. Exocytic rate of wild-type and SecA temperature-sensitive cells a SecA is required for discharge of the contractile vacuole The most visible perturbation of the mutant membrane system at the restrictive temperature is the presence of one, or more, large translucent vesicles in each cell. Cells of the temperature-sensitive NSF mutant similarly round up at the restrictive temperature, but do not produce these characteristic vesicles. We investigated the origin of these vesicles using standard markers for subcellular compartments. They were not stained by markers for ER, Golgi, late endosome or plasma membrane, nor was the distribution of these markers visibly disturbed in the mutant. The markers used were: calnexin-GFP and calreticulin-GFP for the ER ; GFP-golvesin, GFP-Δgolvesin, Δgolvesin-GFP for the Golgi ; vacuolinB-GFP for late endosomes ; and ACA-YFP and cAR1-GFP for the plasma membrane ; although the latter did faintly stain the vesicle. The only exception was the Dajumin-GFP construct, an integral membrane protein that strictly defines the contractile vacuole system ; this was found to strongly stain all the large vesicles and virtually no other structure. Fig. 5. Contractile vacuole discharge requires SecA activity. The large vesicles formed at the restrictive temperature are undischarged contractile vacuoles. SecA mutant cells, expressing Dajumin-GFP as a contractile vacuole marker, were incubated for 30... The contractile vacuole fills with fluid and periodically discharges by fusion with the plasma membrane. At this point it becomes accessible to the external medium and can be back-filled with a small dye, such as Alexa Fluor 594. When dye was added to mutant cells at the start of their incubation at the restrictive temperature, the contractile vacuole was accessible to the label; but if addition was delayed for 30 minutes, the vesicle remained unstained, indicating that SecA activity is required for fusion of the contractile vacuole with the plasma membrane. As the contractile vacuole is the organelle of osmoregulation, we tested whether the SecA mutant is osmosensitive. Cells were transferred to distilled water before or after incubation at 27.5°C. Wild-type cells, or the SecA mutant at the permissive temperature were able to effectively resist this osmotic shock, but not the mutant at the restrictive temperature, where approximately 90% of the cells died after 30 minutes. Thus we conclude that the large vesicles are undischarged contractile vacuoles. Small vesicles accumulate, which might originate from the plasma membrane Electron microscopy reveals a second perturbation of the SecA mutant membrane system at the restrictive temperature: an increased number of small vesicles in the cytoplasm. In central sections of the cell – those containing at least part of the nucleus – their number nearly doubles from 0.68±0.42 per μm 2 of cytoplasm in the wild type to 1.22±0.40 μm 2 of cytoplasm in the mutant, accompanied by a marginal increase in average diameter. The smaller vesicles are often found in the proximity of the plasma membrane and sometimes in close juxtaposition with it. Apart from these vesicles, other cellular compartments were not visibly changed in the mutant. Fig. 6. Ultrastructure of SecA mutant cells. Electron micrographs of representative wild-type and mutant aggregation-competent cells at the restrictive temperature. wild-type cell morphology. This is unchanged by the temperature... To investigate the origin of the small vesicles, we used a phosphotungstic acid and chromic acid stain. Although the basis for the selectivity of this stain is not known, it strongly stains the plasma membrane of the wild type and other membranes to a lesser extent, but the contractile vacuole system is not stained at all. Staining of the mutant plasma membrane was reduced at the restrictive temperature, whereas a number of internal vesicles became intensely stained. The simplest explanation for this is that components from the plasma membrane are sequestered into these vesicles when SecA is inactivated. Loss of SecA function results in reduced plasma membrane area Two features of the mutant phenotype seem particularly relevant to understanding its movement defect: the cells round up at the restrictive temperature, and the number of small vesicles, apparently originating from the plasma membrane, increases. Both features suggest that the plasma membrane area decreases, and we supposed that such a constriction might physically restrict the ability of a cell to extend pseudopodia and therefore to move. We therefore measured the surface area of cells after transfer to the restrictive temperature, using cAR1-GFP as a surface marker, and reconstructing the surface from confocal stacks. As is apparent from Fig. 7, the surface area of mutant cells shrunk by 20–30% during incubation for 30 minutes at the restrictive temperature, whereas wild-type cells showed a transient increase, before returning gradually to their initial value. Mutant cells also decreased in volume, although to a lesser extent. Since the surface to volume ratio of a sphere increases as it shrinks, these measurements imply that the mutant cells shrink from a shape with a higher surface to volume ratio than a sphere towards a more sphere-like ratio. Fig. 7. Changes in surface area and volume of mutant cells at the restrictive temperature. Vegetative cells expressing the membrane marker cAR1-GFP were imaged at 27.5°C, taking confocal stacks every 5 minutes. The volume and surface area measurements... Discussion There is now a powerful genetic case that a functional endocytic cycle is required for Dictyostelium cell motility. Cells of both the NSF mutant studied previously, and the SecA mutant studied here, rapidly become essentially immotile at the restrictive temperature. Since the appearance of the movement defect is so rapid – it is apparent within minutes and complete in around 30 minutes – it cannot be due to long-term changes in gene expression, nor is it probably due to defects in trafficking of newly synthesised proteins. Rather, it seems likely that the endocytic cycle is directly required for movement. In both the SecA and NSF mutants, chemotactic signalling to the cytoskeleton appears to be normal, and both can polymerise actin at the up-gradient side of the cell. Therefore it is unlikely that their movement defects are caused by a failure of signal transduction, or of cytoskeletal mobilisation. By contrast, the endocytic cycle of both mutants is substantially blocked and they rapidly round up at the restrictive temperature, resulting in the significant reduction in surface area shown here for the SecA mutant. Although NsfA and SecA have very different roles membrane trafficking – NsfA is expected to be essential for all membrane-fusion events, whereas SecA is specifically required in exocytosis – neither is directly required for endocytosis, at least in yeast. We therefore suggest the following interpretation of the NsfA and SecA phenotypes. At the restrictive temperature, exocytosis is substantially blocked, but endocytosis runs on for a while, resulting in a net uptake of plasma membrane and a decrease in surface area. As the surface area decreases, membrane tension increases, so physically restricting the extension of pseudopodia and inhibiting cell movement. It is notable that the few mutant cells that do move at the restrictive temperature seem to ‘shuffle’ with greatly reduced pseudopodia, presumably reflecting the limited slack in the plasma membrane. In the converse situation, where membrane tension is artificially decreased, cell extension is correspondingly stimulated. Our attempts to understand how SecA is required for cell movement revealed two other aspects of SecA biology. First, neither SecA nor NSF is required for cAMP release into the medium during cAMP relay. Relay is fundamental to aggregation, because it allows cAMP waves to propagate from signalling centres through a field of responsive cells, and guide their inward movement. Electron microscopy reveals that signalling cells accumulate and release small vesicles, suggesting that cAMP is released by a conventional exocytic mechanism. Our work contradicts this idea and is consistent with other work showing that cAMP is completely released from cells by lysis in conditions not expected to break small vesicles and that there is a build-up of free cAMP in the cytoplasm during cAMP relay. It seems likely that cAMP is released by a non-exocytic mechanism, possibly through a membrane transporter. The small vesicles might have some other function, perhaps serving as a membrane reservoir for the regulation of surface area. Second, SecA appears to be essential for discharge of the contractile vacuole. The contractile vacuole cycle involves filling, fusion with the plasma membrane, and emptying. When SecA function is impaired, the cells carry a prominent, engorged contractile vacuole, which does not empty, suggesting that fusion with the plasma membrane requires SecA and thus resembles other exocytic processes. Fusion is believed to be ‘kiss and run’ and is not thought to involve intermingling of the contractile vacuole and plasma membranes, so it is unlikely that the contractile vacuole normally contributes to surface area regulation, except perhaps in specific cases. This work confirms the importance of a functional endocytic cycle for cell movement. At the very minimum, the cycle must be regulated to provide the cell with sufficient plasma membrane area to project pseudopodia. The nature of this regulation remains open, but we favour a model that involves membrane tension: if tension becomes too high, extra membrane is supplied by exocytosis, increasing the surface area and decreasing the tension; if it is too low, membrane is withdrawn by endocytosis. The link between membrane tension and the endocytic cycle might involve stretch-operated receptors in the plasma membrane, or perhaps direct inhibition of endocytosis by increasing tension. Finally, the availability of a fast-acting temperature-sensitive mutant in the essential secA gene will be invaluable for future studies of exocytosis and contractile vacuole discharge. Materials and Methods Cell procedures Cells were grown with bacteria on SM agar plates at 18°C, freed of bacteria by centrifugation in KK 2 and used immediately or made aggregation competent by pulsing shaken cells with 50–90 nM cAMP every 6 minutes for 4–5 hours, starting at 1 hour of starvation. The secA2 allele was identified from a library of mutants and recreated by homologous recombination in the Kay laboratory stock of Ax2 wild-type cells, which has minimal duplications. Three independent strains all had the same secA2 allele of the secA gene, resulting in 7 amino acid changes: M250L, A296V, M427L, S435R, K505N, V552D, H570Q. All behaved similarly and HM1325 was studied further. It was transformed with ABD120-GFP and GFP-SecA using G418 selection. Diploid strain DM246 was created by crossing HM1325 and HM2068, a G418-resistant strain expressing GFP, and diploids selected with 10 μg/ml each of blasticidin and G418. Growth was measured in shaken suspension cultures of heat-killed bacteria in KK 2 and viability by plating cells clonally on bacterial lawns at 18°C. Osmotic shock was produced by shifting cultures from growth medium to de-ionised water. Membrane exocytosis was measured from the initial rate of change in fluorescence of cells incubated with 5 μM FM1-43 in a stirred cuvette, normalised to the initial value on mixing. cAMP production was measured with 5 mM dithiothreitol to inhibit breakdown ; total cAMP is that produced in 5 minutes following stimulation with 15 μM 2′-deoxy cAMP minus that present at t 0, and released cAMP is the proportion in the supernatant after the cells are rapidly centrifuged. Live cell imaging and analysis Cells were imaged at ~2×10 5 cells/cm 2 in Lab-Tek chambered coverglasses in axenic medium or KK 2, on a Nikon Eclipse TE300 inverted microscope with a Bio-Rad confocal system, or an Axiovert S100 with a motorised stage. Temperature was controlled by an ASI 400 Air Stream Stage Incubator plus a heated stage on the confocal system ; cells were pre-incubated at 27.5°C for 30 minutes as necessary. Randomly moving cells were imaged every 20 seconds for 30 minutes. Cells were stimulated uniformly with 10 μM cAMP or with a microneedle containing 1 μM cAMP. Dunn chambers had 1 μM cAMP in the chemoattractant reservoir and two cell populations on opposite sides of the same coverslip were imaged in parallel. Films were processed by threshold binarisation and centroid tracking with ImageJ and MTrack2. Only tracks lasting for the entire movie were analysed for random motility, and only those of at least 30 frames for chemotaxis. Parameters and trajectories were extracted using custom scripts in the R statistical language. Stacks for 3D reconstruction were acquired on an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope equipped with a Perkin Elmer Ultra View RS spinning disk confocal system, using a 60× 1.20 NA water objective and piezoelectric focusing device, taking images at 0.5 μm intervals, and thus allowing a single volume to be imaged in 2–4 seconds. Stage temperature was regulated as above. Images were processed and reconstructed using Volocity. Immunofluorescence Cells were fixed with formaldehyde and picric acid, blocked with 0.1% BSA in phosphate saline buffer, 0.05% Tween-20, incubated with affinity-purified rabbit polyclonal antibody against SecA followed by a secondary anti-rabbit conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488. Phalloidin-TRITC was used 1:500. Electron microscopy Aggregation-competent cells were prepared in NS and fixed overnight on ice with 1% glutaraldehyde in the same buffer. Cells were washed, embedded in 2% agar and osmicated, then washed in deionised water and dehydrated in an ascending graded ethanol series. Ethanol was replaced with propylene oxide before embedding in low viscosity resin. Sections of 60-80 nm were post-stained with saturated aqueous uranyl acetate washed in deionised water, then with Reynolds lead citrate and washed. Alternatively, they were stained with phosphotungstic acid and chromic acid for 30 minutes. Sections were viewed on a Philips EM200 transmission electron microscope with an 80 kV beam; vesicle quantification was carried out with ImageJ. Supplementary Material Click here to view. 