 We describe a rapid method for creating Dictyo stelium gene disruption constructs, whereby the target gene is interrupted by a drug resistance cassette using in vitro transposition. A fragment of genomic DNA containing the gene to be disrupted is amplified by PCR, cloned into a plasmid vector using topoisomerase and then employed as the substrate in an in vitro Tn 5 transposition reaction. The transposing species is a fragment of DNA containing a Dictyostelium blasticidin S resistance cassette linked to a bacterial tetracycline resistance cassette. After transposition the plasmid DNA is transformed into Escherichia coli and clones in which the bs r -tet r cassette is inserted into the Dictyostelium target DNA are identified. To demonstrate its utility we have employed the method to disrupt the gene encoding QkgA, a novel protein kinase identified from the Dictyostelium genome sequencing project. QkgA is structurally homologous to two previously identified Dictyostelium kinases, GbpC and pats1. Like them it contains a leucine-rich repeat domain, a small GTP-binding domain and a MEKK domain. Disruption of the qkgA gene causes a marked increase in growth rate and, during development, aggregation occurs relatively slowly to form abnormally large multicellular structures. INTRODUCTION With the completion of a large number of genome projects there is a need for high throughput methods of generating mutants in specific genes. In vitro transposition of a selectable marker into an individual gene, or into the members of a group of clustered genes, offers just such a method and we describe its application to the social amoeba Dictyostelium. Dictyostelium is a favoured organism for studying cell biological processes such as chemotaxis, pinocytosis, phagocytosis and cellular differentiation. The Dictyostelium genome sequencing and EST sequencing projects are both well advanced, so there are large numbers of genes awaiting functional analysis. The organism is haploid and, provided that a gene is not essential for cell viability, its function can be studied by creating a null mutant via homologous recombination. Many hundreds of Dictyostelium genes have been inactivated using disruption constructs, in which a drug resistance cassette is inserted into a DNA fragment containing the gene to be inactivated. Creation of the disruption cassette is normally achieved by some combination of PCR amplification, restriction enzyme digestion and ligation. In some strategies the resistance cassette simply interrupts the target gene, while in others a fragment of the target gene is deleted and replaced by the resistance cassette. There is also a PCR-based method that significantly reduces the time required to generate a disruption construct. While this is an elegant and useful technique, it does entail a specialised PCR procedure and there remains a need for a high throughput, ‘generic’ method of creating disruption constructs. We describe such a method and illustrate the utility of the technique using a putative protein kinase identified in the genome sequencing project. MATERIALS AND METHODS Construction of a transposable bs r cassette We first generated a transposable bs r cassette containing the Dictyostelium blasticidin S resistance cassette from Actin15ΔBamBsr and the bacterial tetracycline resistance cassette from pBR322, linked in tandem. pBR322 was digested with AvaI and, after blunt-ending the AvaI site, it was digested with EcoRI to produce an AvaI –EcoRI fragment containing tet r. Actin15ΔBamBsr was digested with BamHI and HindIII to produce a fragment containing bs r. The transposon construction vector, EZ:: TNpMOD-2MCS, was digested with HindIII and BamHI and ligated with the bs r -containing fragment prepared in the previous step. The resulting construct was digested with SmaI and EcoRI and, finally, the vector was ligated to the tet r fragment to yield EZTN:tet r -bs r PCR cloning of target genes from Dictyostelium genomic DNA Dictyostelium Ax-2 cells were cultured axenically in HL-5 medium. Then 5 × 10 7 cells, at a density of 5 × 10 6 cells/ml, were harvested and genomic DNA was isolated from the cells by phenol/chloroform extraction. The target gene was PCR amplified using the genomic DNA as template and, after gel purification, the amplicons were cloned into the vector pCR2.1-TOPO by topoisomerase cloning. Insertion of the transposable bs r cassette into the target gene The transposable bs r cassette was excised from the EZTN:tet r -bs r vector 1 ) by PvuII digestion and gel purified. The final concentration of the isolated transposon DNA was adjusted to 100 µg/ml in TE buffer. The transposon DNA was mixed with the genomic target, cloned in pCR2.1-TOPO as described in the previous section and in vitro transposition of the cassette was achieved by incubating with EZ::TN Transposase, following the manufacturer’s instructions. After the transposition reaction, Escherichia coli DH5α cells were transformed by electroporation and the cells were cultured on L-agar plates containing 15 µg/ml tetracycline, 50 µg/ml ampicillin and 50 µg/ml kanamycin. After 24 h of incubation at 37°C, 20–40 colonies were picked for mini-preps and the insertion point of the bs r cassette was determined by restriction enzyme digestion. Figure 1 The gene disruption method. Map of the plasmid EZTN:tet r -bs r. The EZTN:tet r -bs r plasmid generates a transposable blasticidin resistance cassette that can be used to create Dictyostelium gene disruptants. In order to create EZTN:tet r -bs r, the... Transformation of Dictyostelium cells and selection of mutants Plasmid DNA, containing an insertion of the transposable bs r cassette, in the target DNA, was linearised by restriction digestion, usually with NotI, and used to transform Dictyo stelium Ax-2 cells by electroporation. The transformed clones were grown in HL-5 medium containing 10 µg/ml blasticidin S. Subsequently, the cell suspension was diluted and co-cultured with Klebsiella aerogenes on agar plates in order to obtain separate clones. The colonies were collected from the plates and individually transferred to 24-well culture plates containing HL-5 medium with blasticidin S. Insertion of the bs r cassette into the genomic DNA was confirmed by PCR analysis. The sequence of one of the two primers was derived from one end of the blasticidin resistance cassette while the second primer sequence was chosen from a region of the target gene outside the area that was used to produce the disruption construct. Depending upon the orientation in which the transposon had inserted into the target for disruption, one or other of the sequences 5′-ataaagcattgtaatcttctctgtcgc-3′ or 5′-aaactacgattgaagaactcattccactc-3′ was used. A gradient-PCR machine was used to ensure optimal amplification. The typical program used for the PCR reaction was 94°C for 10 min, 30 cycles of 94°C for 1 min, 52–66°C for 1 min and 68°C for 3 min, followed by 68°C for 10 min. Phenotypic analysis of the mutants Selected qkgA gene disruptants were tested for several phenotypic characteristics. The rate of cell growth was monitored by growing the cells in shaking culture in HL-5 medium at 22°C. For morphological analysis of development, washed cells were spotted on a 1.5% water–agar plate at a density of 5 × 10 5 per cm 2 and the progress of development was monitored by time-lapse recording with a CCD camera. After filming, quantitative analyses, such as measurement of the average slug length, were performed using NIH Image software. RESULTS Construction of a transposable Dictyostelium gene disruption cassette In order to use transposition for the production of Dictyostelium gene disruption constructs, a transposable blasticidin resistance cassette was created. 1 A). The cassette contains a bacterial tetracycline resistance cassette linked to a Dictyostelium blasticidin resistance cassette. The method utilises a commercially available, hyper-activated form of the Tn 5 transposase that directs the in vitro insertion of transposons into a target DNA at a high frequency. 1 B). The target, normally 2–3 kb in length, is cloned using topoisomerase into a vector that contains both an amplicillin and a kanamycin selection cassette. In order to maximise the number of clones with the transposable bs r cassette in the target gene, rather than elsewhere in the plasmid, transformants are triply selected on plates containing ampicillin, kanamycin and tetracycline. Clones which have the transposable tet r -bs r cassette inserted in either of the two resistance cassettes, or in the origin of replication, will be eliminated by this selection. Characteristics of the qkgA gene The putative kinase that was disrupted, QkgA, 2 A), was selected as part of a bio-informatic based search for receptor tyrosine kinases. The sequence encoding QkgA is listed in the NCBI database as a RTK, a homologue of the mammalian focal adhesion kinases. However, we believe this to be the result of erroneous automatic annotation during the chromosome II sequence analysis. This conclusion stems from detailed bio-informatic analysis of the protein. Figure 2 Domain analysis of the qkgA gene. Schematic of the domain structure of QkgA. The qkgA gene contains a domain comprised of four copies of the leucine-rich repeat sequence, a ras domain and a kinase domain. The approximate boundaries of each... In a BLAST search, the two proteins showing highest homology to QkgA are the Dictyostelium GbpC and pats1 proteins. Homology extends across most of GskgA, with a region of non-homology near the N-terminus of QkgA and with two short insertions near the centre of QkgA. 3 ). GbpC contains a leucine-rich repeat domain, a ras domain, two rasGEF domains, a kinase domain and two cGMP-binding domains. pats1 contains LRRs, WD40 repeats, a tyrosine phosphatase domain, a rho domain and a kinase domain. The regions of homology between GbpC, pats1 and QkgA include the LRRs, the ras domain and the kinase domain. Figure 3 In a BLAST search at NCBI using the QkgA sequence, GbpC and pats1... Alignment with the consensus sequence for LRRs confirms the presence of four copies of the LRR in QkgA. 2 B). The region of QkgA showing homology to the ‘ras domain’ of GbpC and ‘rho domain’ of pats1 shows a slightly better fit to a ras domain. 2 C). However, both the ras and rho domains are highly related, small GTP-binding domains. After GbpC and pats1, the next most closely related hits in a BLAST search with QkgA are the kinase domains of CTR1-like, ethylene-responsive kinases of various plant species. These are mitogen-activated, extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase kinase kinase family members that, although hybrid in sequence between serine-threonine and tyrosine kinases, phosphorylate only serine and threonine. GbpC and pats1 were also putatively designated as MEKKs, based on the same criteria. Disruption of the qkgA gene A 2.6 kb sequence from the predicted open reading frame of qkgA was cloned, by topoisomerase cloning of a PCR fragment of genomic Dictyostelium DNA, into the pCR2.1-TOPO vector. The resultant plasmid, pQkgATOPO, 4 A), was then used in an in vitro transposition reaction. 1 B). In order to determine whether the transposable cassette was inserted in the target, DNA from colonies growing on the selection plates was analysed by restriction enzyme digestion. Figure ​ Figure4B 4 B shows an example of such an analysis, performed using HindIII. Figure 4 Transposition of the bs r cassette into qkgA. A 2.6 kb fragment of qkgA was PCR amplified and cloned into pCR2.1-TOPO, to create the target for disruption. The orange line represents the cloned qkgA fragment... Analysis of the restriction enzyme mapping data showed that 22 out of 30 clones, i.e. about 70% of clones, contain the transposable cassette inserted into the qkgA target sequence. This is close to expectation. The vector’s non-essential sequence content is ∼0.5 kb. Hence, assuming an equal probability of insertion in all parts of the DNA and with a ‘target’ fragment of X kb, the expected rate of insertion in the target gene is X / × 100. Therefore, in the case of a 2 kb target, 80% of the total number of clones would be expected to carry the transposable cassette in the target. This construct, pQkgATOPO, seems to be typical in this respect, because in a series of disruption experiments using a number of different targets, we have found very similar frequencies. 1 ). The expected values range from 71 to 84%, while the measured values range from 63 to 77%. 1 ). There is a weak, imperfect correlation between target size and frequency of insertion into target, but the range of expected values is too small to be reliably tested with this sample size. Table 1. Summary of disruption constructs generated using transposition Although we have not analysed this issue statistically, the position of insertion of the transposon does appear to be random with respect to position within the coding region. Also, in a large number of experiments using genomic DNA fragments of 1–3 kb that give a final plasmid size of 8–10 kb, we have not observed any clones with a rearrangement. Disruption of the genomic copy of the qkgA gene In the particular case described here a mixture of five qkgA disruptant constructs with the cassette inserted at different points was linearised and used to transform Dictyostelium cells. A mixture was used to increase the chance that one of them might have an optimal configuration for gene disruption. In other studies we have instead successfully used a single disruptant plasmid, with the cassette inserted at a selected position in the target gene. After electroporation, the transformed Dictyostelium cells were selected by growth on blasticidin. Purified genomic DNA of the individual transformed clones was tested for homologous insertion of the blasticidin resistance cassette into the genomic target by PCR. A pair of primers was used; one located outside the target sequence, the second complementary to a sequence within the blasticidin resistance cassette. 5 A). The presence of a band in PCR confirms successful insertion of the transposon cassette into the qkgA gene and the fact that the band is 3 kb in size shows that this particular disruption construct has the approximate structure shown in Figure ​ Figure5 5 C. Figure 5 PCR confirmation of insertion of the transposable bs r cassette in the qkgA locus and determination of the transposon insertion point. A schematic diagram of the qkgA locus and the inserted bs r cassette. The orange line indicates that part of the... qkgA – mutants grow more quickly than parental cells Two separate qkgA null clones with different vector insertion points, qkgA – 1 and qkgA – 2, 5 C), were characterised in parallel. The growth rates of both mutant strains were first tested in semi-defined medium. Both mutants grow substantially faster than parental Ax-2 cells. 6 ). The doubling time of parental Ax-2 cells under these conditions is 14 h and the qkgA disruption strains have a doubling time that is approximately 3 h faster than this. In order to determine whether qkgA null cells also grow quicker on bacteria, we examined the colony size of qkgA null clones on bacterial culture plates. The sizes of the plaques of cleared cells were significantly larger than for parental, control cells. Figure 6 Growth rate comparison of qkgA – and parental Ax-2 cells. Cells growing in HL-5 medium. The vertical axis represents the common logarithm of cell number and the horizontal axis represents the time of culture in hours starting from the first... qkgA – strains display delayed development and aberrant size regulation Time-lapse filming of developing cells showed that the aggregation stage of qkgA – strains is extended by ∼2–3 h relative to parental cells. Thereafter, the rate of development is relatively normal. Also, qkgA – cells produce fewer aggregation centres, that are considerably larger than wild-type aggregates. 7 A). These larger aggregates retain their size, rather than splitting into smaller masses. This results in the formation of very large slugs and culminants. 7 B). We also analysed pattern formation in the mutants, using the pre-stalk-specific lacZ markers ecmAO:lacZ and ecmB:lacZ, but expression of these markers displays the normal, parental patterns. Figure 7 Parallel development of qkgA – mutant and parental Ax-2 cells. qkgA – mutant strain QkgA-2 and the wild-type control Ax-2 were monitored side-by-side with time-lapse recording. The figure shows two frames of the recorded film. The left-hand... DISCUSSION Dictyostelium is a widely used ‘model’ organism and one of its principal attractions is the ease with which genes can be inactivated by homologous gene disruption. The transposon-based method of generating a disruption construct we describe significantly accelerates the process and renders it routine; all that changes from construction to construction are the two PCR primers used to clone the target DNA from the genome. As such, it lends itself to high throughput analysis and we have successfully used it to inactivate a number of other Dictyostelium genes. The fact that a set of disruption constructs is generated, which contain the blasticidin cassette inserted at different positions, is a potential further bonus, because it is possible to choose a clone with the insert at a particular position within the target gene or with particular lengths of genomic DNA sequence flanking the cassette. As an illustration of the method, we describe the disruption of a novel kinase identified in the genome sequencing project, qkgA. This has as its closest homologues the Dictyostelium GbpC and pats1 proteins. A double null strain, mutant in both gbpC and in a related gene gbpD, is defective in myosin phosphorylation and chemotaxis, while the null mutant for pats1 is defective in cytokinesis. Disruption of qkgA affects the speed of both growth and development. As might be expected, several Dictyostelium mutants show reduced growth rates compared to their parental cells. Interestingly, however, qkgA – cells grow significantly faster than wild-type Ax-2 cells. A previously described mutant that grows more quickly than parental cells is the null mutant for DGAP1. This seems unlikely, however, to be of significance here because DGAP1 is a homologue of the rasGTPases that inactivate ras proteins. Upon development, the qkgA – mutant shows a marked increase in the territory size of the aggregates. A number of other Dictyostelium mutants also make larger aggregates. However, in most of these mutants, the aggregates produce multiple tips that split the mass into smaller slugs. This does not occur in the aggregates formed by qkgA – cells. In this respect they resemble null mutants in the countin gene. Countin is a secreted, hydrophilic protein that seems to form part of a size determination mechanism for the multicellular organism; in the countin null mutant giant slugs and fruiting bodies are formed. It will be of interest to determine whether there is any mechanistic link between qkgA and the countin system. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank C. Schilde for helping in the preparation of the manuscript and M. K. Nelson for critical reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by Wellcome Trust Program Grant 039899/Z to J.G.W. Article information Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Sep 15; 31: e107. doi: 10.1093/nar/gng095 PMCID: PMC203333 PMID: 12954783 Tomoaki Abe, Judith Langenick, and Jeffrey G. Williams * School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Wellcome Trust Biocentre, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 1382 345823; Fax: +44 1382 345386; Email: ku.ca.eednud@smailliw.g.j Received 2003 May 15; Revised 2003 Jun 25; Accepted 2003 Jun 25. Copyright © 2003 Oxford University Press Articles from Nucleic Acids Research are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press 