 We screened 26 bisphosphonates against a farnesyl diphosphate synthase from Plasmodium vivax, finding a poor correlation between enzyme and cell growth inhibition. To better predict cell activity data, we then used a combinatorial descriptor search in which pIC 50 = a pIC 50 + bB + cC + d, where B and C are descriptors, and a—d are coefficients. R 2 increased from 0.01 to 0.74. The method was then further validated using data for nine other systems, including bacterial, viral, and mammalian cell systems. On average, experimental/predicted cell pIC 50 correlations increased from R 2 = 0.28 to 0.70, while predictions based on scrambled cell activity had no predictive value. These results are of interest since they represent a general way to predict cell from enzyme inhibition data, with in three cases, R 2 values increasing from ∼0.02 to 0.72. Introduction Malaria causes ∼10 6 deaths annually, so there is considerable interest in developing novel drugs to treat this disease. One pathway of interest is that involved in the isoprenylation of signaling proteins, where protein-farnesyl transferase inhibitors have shown promise, 1 since they act by preventing the post-translational modification of proteins such as Ras. A second potential target involves inhibition of the enzymes that produce the isoprene diphosphates used in protein prenylation, and in recent work we showed that bisphosphonates, drugs that target FPPS and are widely used in treating bone resorption diseases, 2 had both in vitro and in vivo activity against Plasmodium parasites. 3, 4 There were, however, some puzzling aspects to the results; 4 in particular, the most active species against Plasmodium falciparum had little activity against a variety of expressed FPPS enzymes, while other known potent FPPS inhibitors had low activity against the parasite. There are several possible explanations for these observations. First, it might be that FPPS is not the actual target. Second, there might be surprising differences in the sensitivity of Plasmodium FPPS and human FPPS enzymes, since Plasmodium FPPS can also produce geranylgeranyl diphosphate, due to a smaller barrier to chain elongation at the end of the binding site. Third, it might just be difficult to obtain good correlations between enzyme and cell inhibition data, due to neglect of “transport” issues. This latter point is an exceptionally important one 5 and is of very broad general interest for drug development, since while enzyme inhibition assays can generally be carried out very rapidly, cell based assays are more expensive and take much longer. Indeed, in some cases, cell data may be essentially uncorrelated with enzyme inhibition. A good recent example of this is that of the inhibition of undecaprenyl diphosphate synthase from Streptococcus pneumoniae reported by Peukert et al., 6 in which an R 2 = 0.03 is found from the reported cell/enzyme pIC 50 results, obviously complicating lead optimization using enzyme based assays. In this work, we report the inhibition of a Plasmodium FPPS by a library of 26 bisphosphonates whose activity against P. falciparum cell growth in vitro was reported previously. 4 The P. falciparum and P. vivax enzymes have very similar sequences and catalytic site residues, but we find that there is essentially no correlation between the cell and enzyme pIC 50 values. We find, however, that regression of cell, enzyme, and two other descriptors leads to a remarkable improvement in the correlation between experimental and predicted cell pIC 50, suggesting that small descriptor sets might be used to predict cell activity results in many other systems, nine of which are investigated in this work. Overall, our results show that cell activity in 10 very varied systems can be well predicted by using enzyme inhibition data, when combined with the combinatorial descriptor search approach. Results and Discussion We show in Figure 1 the structures of the 26 bisphosphonates investigated previously. 4 These compounds have IC 50 values in P. falciparum growth inhibition varying from 1.43 to 222 μ M 4 with the most active species also having in vivo activity in a Plasmodium berghei ANKA suppressive test. The IC 50 /pIC 50 values in FPPS inhibition are presented in Table 1, together with the previously published cell growth inhibition results. 4 When the cell pIC 50 and enzyme pIC 50 values are compared, we see that there is essentially no correlation between the two data sets, Figure 2a, resulting in a leave-2-out set of predictions having an R 2 = 0.01. For example, the most active species in FPPS inhibition is 15, but this compound has poor activity in vitro. It might therefore be thought that FPPS is not the actual target for these bisphosphonates or that there are small but significant differences in structure between the P. falciparum and P. vivax enzymes. However, on further inspection of Figure 2a, there appear to be several possible “clusters” of compounds, with the more active species in cells having more hydrophobic features. For example, in cluster A, known bisphosphonates such as risedronate, ibandronate, zoledronate, and minodronate all have very poor cell activity, even though they have good activity in the enzyme assay. Since these compounds are among the most hydrophilic ones investigated, it is possible that their poor cell based activity is due to poor transport. This idea receives support from the observation that a second class of bisphosphonates that have improved hydrophobicity also exhibit improved cell activity, and compounds which have the highest cell-based activity also contain the most hydrophobic side chains. How can we put these qualitative observations on a more quantitative footing? Can we predict cell activity from the enzyme inhibition results? Also, if this turns out to be possible in the Plasmodium system, can the method be generalized to other systems, something that would be of very broad, general interest? Figure 1 Structures of the 26 compounds investigated in cell and enzyme assays. Figure 2 Correlation plots for cell and enzyme assays and predicted cell activities from the training and test set data, obtained by using the combinatorial descriptor search method. Plot showing correlation... Table 1 Experimental IC 50 and pIC 50 Values for P. falciparum Growth Inhibition and P. vivax FPPS Inhibition The results shown in Table 1 and Figure 2a clearly indicate that there is essentially no correlation between the cell pIC 50 and enzyme pIC 50 values. Why is this? While, as noted above, there are several possibilities, the observation that cell based activity appears to increase as hydrophobicity increases suggests the possibility that cell permeability may be particularly important in governing overall cell activity. To test this hypothesis, we chose to represent the cell based activity ) mathematically as pIC 50 = a pIC 50 + b SlogP + c where SlogP is a computed oil/water partition coefficient. 7 We chose SlogP without any particular basis, a point we return to shortly. Data were analyzed by using linear regression, from which we find a = 1.26, b = 0.62, and c = −0.34. Now, when the pIC 50 results are correlated with the predicted pIC 50 results, we find a good correlation between experiment and prediction, with an R 2 = 0.66. Given this promising result, we then sought to find other descriptors and descriptor combinations that might give improved predictivity, rather than restricting ourselves to SlogP. In some initial calculations we used enzyme pIC 50 values together with three descriptors, or four random descriptors chosen from MOE, 7 that gave the best experimental versus predicted R 2 values. However, this approach was found to lead to overfitting, since some predictions using randomized cell activity data had R 2 values of ∼0.5. We thus eventually chose the following equation: pIC 50 = a pIC 50 + b B + c C + d in which two additional descriptors were chosen from a combinatorial search, performed on a large set of descriptors in MOE. 7 We chose to fix pIC 50 as one descriptor, since the objective is to predict cell activity from enzyme activity, where standard QSAR and structure-based methods can be employed to optimize enzyme inhibition. There are 230 descriptors available in MOE, and a full search and cross-validation of all two-descriptor combinations for a data set containing 26 compounds is lengthy. However, we found that it was not necessary to use all the 230 descriptors, for two reasons: first, because some descriptors are linear combinations of other descriptors in the database, and second, because some descriptors are Boolean and do not contribute significantly in the linear regression. In the set of 26 P. vivax FPPS inhibitors, after eliminating redundant and Boolean descriptors, we obtained 150 descriptors, of which all combinations of two were investigated, the coefficients being determined via linear regression. The 10 descriptor combinations giving the highest R 2 values are shown in Table 2. Table 2 Top 10 “Enzyme Plus 2-Descriptor” Combinations with Coefficients and Relative Contributions for P. falciparum Growth Inhibition Predictions As can be seen in Table 2, the best experimental/predicted pIC 50 correlation has an R 2 = 0.77, a major increase over the cell/enzyme correlation alone. For the top 10 predictions, 9/10 contain a SlogP or logP term, indicating the importance of hydrophobicity in cell based activity. Also, in 6/10 cases, this SlogP or logP term has the largest relative contribution to the correlation. In the four cases where this term does not dominate, enzyme activity dominates, but as can be seen in Table 2, both enzyme pIC 50 and logP-like terms are important in all cases, and the R 2 range is very small, 0.74−0.77. So, both enzyme and “logP” contribute to cell activity, with the cell activity results apparently being well predicted based on the enzyme inhibition and two-descriptor model. Of course, considerable care needs to be taken in order to not overfit data when using this approach. We tested this in several ways: First, we used a leave-two-out method in which we systematically left out all possible pairs of data points, re-evaluating the a—d coefficients for all possible B and C descriptors. The results of this L2O test set of predictions are shown graphically in Figure 2c, where we find an R 2 = 0.74 for the experimental/predicted pIC 50 test set correlation, close to the R 2 = 0.77 for the training set. Second, we scrambled the cell pIC 50 values and repeated the L2O test set prediction, 10 times. On average, the R 2 value was 0.16 for this scrambled test set, strongly supporting the idea that the approach, when applied to real cell growth inhibition data, is highly predictive. Using larger numbers of descriptors increased the R 2 value for both the unscrambled and scrambled L2O data sets and is not recommended, at least for relatively small data sets. These results encouraged us to see to what extent this approach might enable us to improve cell activity predictions, based on enzyme activity and the combinatorial descriptor search, for a variety of other systems. We first chose to investigate two other systems we reported on previously: Dictyostelium discoideum 8 and Leishmania donovani, 3, 9 a causative agent of visceral leishmaniasis. Both systems have been shown by knockouts or overexpression to require FPPS and that FPPS is the target for bisphosphonate drugs or inhibitors. For Dictyostelium discoideum growth inhibition, 8 the cell/enzyme R 2 value is 0.49 or R 2 = 0.46 for a L2O enzyme only test set, and this increases to R 2 = 0.70 for the training set, using two additional descriptors, with pIC 50 being the most important contributor to the correlation. This is not unexpected since, unlike the Plasmodium results, we do see a correlation between cell and enzyme data, Figure 3a. The leave-two-out test set results are likewise good and as with the Plasmodium results, the scrambled data set has essentially no predictivity. Slightly improved results are obtained for Leishmania donovani cell growth inhibition. Here, the raw cell/enzyme correlation is R 2 = 0.55, translating to a L2O enzyme-based test set R 2 = 0.47. The experimental /predicted cell pIC 50 correlation increases to R 2 = 0.87 for the training set using two additional descriptors and 0.80 for the L2O test set results, while using scrambled cell data yields R 2 = 0.11. We should also note here that in both Dicytostelium discoideum and L. donovani, FPPS inhibition results for the specific organisms were not available so we used a composite data set of Trypanosoma brucei, 10 Trypanosoma cruzi, 11 Leishmania major, 12 and human 13 FPPS results to model the D. discoideum and L. donovani data, just as we used P. vivax data to interpret the P. falciparum results. Naturally, it is reasonable to believe that using, e.g., L. donovani FPPS to model L. donovani growth inhibition will be preferred to using, e.g., L. major FPPS inhibition data. However, the predictions are still good, with for P. falciparum, D. discoideum, and L. donovani, the average R 2 value increasing from 0.37 to 0.75, using pIC 50 plus two descriptors, while the average R 2 for the scrambled cell activity data sets is R 2 = 0.11. However, given that all of the inhibitors studied here are bisphosphonates and the targets protozoa or a unicellular eukaryote, it is fair to ask, is this method robust? Does it apply to other types of cell and inhibitor? Is it, in short, a general method for probing cell activity based on enzyme inhibition? Figure 3 Correlation plots for the cell and enzyme assays, and predicted cell activities from the training and test set data in Dictyostelium discoideum, Leishmania donovani, and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Plot showing... Table 3 Results for 10 Different Systems Showing the Correlations between Enzyme and Cell Activities and the Correlations between Experimental and Predicted Cell Activities Antibacterial and Antiviral Systems To test the generality of this approach, we investigated two bacterial and two viral systems. In each case, the enzyme targeted in the enzyme assay was the same as that targeted in the cell based assay. In one recent study, workers at Novartis 6 reported the discovery of a series of novel inhibitors of the enzyme undecaprenyl diphosphate synthase that also had good cellular activity. 6 These inhibitors are of interest since UPPS is a potentially important target for anti-infective development, because undecaprenyl diphosphate is used in lipid A biosynthesis, and UPPS inhibition is expected to block bacterial cell wall biosynthesis. Also, the structures of some UPPS enzymes are now known. 14, 15 Streptococcus pneumoniae enzyme and cell growth inhibition results were reported, but as with our Plasmodium results, there is little correlation between the cell growth and enzyme inhibition data sets, even though in this case the enzyme target is thought to be exactly the same as that present in the bacterium, Streptococcus pneumoniae. 6 The small range in cell activity combined with the limited precision of the cell data makes this a challenging case. Even so, using the reported enzyme pIC 50 results together with two descriptors yields a considerable improvement, with R 2 increasing from 0.10 for the L2O test set using enzyme data only, to R 2 = 0.69 for the L2O test set predictions using two extra descriptors, with R 2 for the L2O test set using scrambled data being 0.14, Table 3. As can be seen in the Supporting Information, descriptors such as SlogP and logS are again found here and, when combined with enzyme inhibition data, enable greatly improved predictions of the cell activity results. Another set of antibacterials are glutamic acid analogues that inhibit S. pneumoniae glutamate racemase. 16 In this case, there is a moderate correlation between cell growth and MurI inhibition, and this increases to 0.72 or 0.68 test set predictions using the combinatorial descriptor search, Table 3 and Supporting Information, Figure S1 and Table S5, with the R 2 for scrambled cell activity test set data being 0.13. In addition to these results with antibacterial systems, we find good predictivity in an antiviral assay using hepatitis C virus protease inhibitors. 17 Here, there is again a very poor correlation between enzyme and cell pIC 50 values with R 2 = 0.03. This increases to R 2 = 0.78 and R 2 = 0.77 test set results with incorporation of two additional descriptors. In this case, the best results were obtained by using PAMPA as one of the descriptors. In these calculations, we added reported PAMPA, Caco-2, logP-neutral, logD-pH 7.4, clogP, and mlog P values to the 230 potential descriptor fields in MOE, with PAMPA being selected in the descriptor search as the most important descriptor, followed by the enzyme p K i. So, the predictivity of the method can be improved when experimental data on permeability is available. We also investigated a second series of antivirals, novel phthalimide-analogue inhibitors of HIV-1 integrase. 18 The results of enzyme pIC 50, HIV-1 replication in a cell-based assay, as well as cell-based toxicity have been reported. 18 There is only a very poor correlation between the enzyme pIC 50 and cell-based replication activity, with R 2 = 0.12. Using the combinatorial descriptor search, we find that pCC 50 is the most important descriptor, enabling an experimental versus predicted pIC 50 R 2 = 0.69. That is, pCC 50 makes the major contribution to the apparent cell replication results, an observation of interest for further optimization of this class of compounds. Also on average, for the four antibacterial/antiviral systems, we see that R 2 increases from 0.20 to 0.70 on addition of two descriptors, about the same as that found for the protozoal/primitive eukaryote systems with scrambled cell data, R 2 = 0.13, about the same as the R 2 = 0.11 found with the protozoa/simple eukaryotes. Mammalian Cell Lines: Antidiabetic and Anticancer Drugs Finally, we wanted to test the method described above on three mammalian cell lines, in diabetes and cancer assays, as opposed to the primarily anti-infective drugs/targets described in the preceding sections. We investigated three systems: acyl urea inhibitors of human liver glycogen phosphorylase 19 having activity in rat hepatocytes; 1,4-dihydroindenopyrazoles targeting a KDR kinase in NIH3T3 cells; 20 and an indazole-pyridine series of protein kinase B/Akt inhibitors, active in pancreatic cancer cells. 21 In the case of the acyl urea inhibitors of human liver glycogen phosphorylase, the enzyme/cell correlation was already evident, and this improved to R 2 = 0.74 for the L2O test set of 35 compounds, Table 3 and Supporting Information, Figure S2a—c and Table S8. The scrambled data was, as expected, not predictive, with an R 2 = 0.19. Results for the KDR kinase were slightly worse, while results with the Akt kinase were good, with an R 2 = 0.68 for the test set. Conclusions The results described above are of interest for several reasons. First, we screened a library of bisphosphonates against a P. vivax FPPS enzyme. The results were surprising since we found that inhibition of the P. vivax enzyme was essentially uncorrelated with growth inhibition by these same bisphosphonates of the malaria parasite, P. falciparum. However, when pIC 50 results together with two additional descriptors were regressed against cell growth inhibition pIC 50 results, we found good predictivity of the cell results, with an R 2 = 0.77. This observation then led to a general method for predicting the cell-based activity of a compound from its activity in an enzyme assay, in which we use a combinatorial descriptor search to choose two descriptors that, in combination with the enzyme pIC 50 results, enabled relatively good cell activity predictions. For the 10 diverse systems investigated here, which cover antiparasitic, antibacterial, antiviral, antidiabetes, and anticancer drug candidates, the average R 2 value increases from 0.28 for the leave-two-out test set predictions using solely enzyme inhibition data to 0.70 for the leave two-out test sets with two additional descriptors, to be compared with 0.13 for predictions based on randomized cell activity data. This approach should be particularly useful in optimizing cell activity when target structures are known, since structure-based methods can be used to optimize enzyme inhibition, with the combinatorial descriptor search then being used to make good predictions of cell based activity. Also, when experimental data on permeability is available, this can be included in the descriptor field as another potential descriptor, to be used in cell activity predictions. A larger number of descriptors than the 124 we employed can also of course be used, at the expense of computational time, which can become large. The approach described above should thus enable the use of both crystallographic and enzyme QSAR data for enzyme inhibition optimization, with cell growth inhibition activity being described using the combinatorial descriptor approach. The method should also be applicable in some cases to modeling toxicity and in vivo results as well, when sufficient data is available. Experimental Section P. vivax FPPS Expression and Inhibition A clone encoding P. vivax FPPS with an N-terminally His 6 -tagged fusion protein and a TEV protease site was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21-codon Plus RIL at 20 °C in baffled flasks. Cells were lysed in the presence of lysozyme, Benzonase Nuclease, and a protease inhibitor cocktail, and protein purified chromatographically by using a Ni-NTA resin. The P. vivax FPPS assays were carried out by using 96-well plates with 150 μ L of reaction mixture in each well. The condensation of geranyl diphosphate with isopentenyl diphosphate was monitored at room temperature by using a continuous spectrophotometric assay for phosphate releasing enzymes in a reaction mixture containing 25 mM Hepes and 2.5 mM MgCl 2 at pH 7.4. The inhibitors were preincubated with the enzyme for 30 min at room temperature. The IC 50 values were obtained from fitting the dose—response curve using Prism 4.0. 22 Computational Aspects We performed a complete combinatorial descriptor search in MATLAB 23, using linear regression of enzyme pIC 50 plus all possible two-descriptor combinations. For the leave-two-out cross-validation, the same exhaustive search was performed, using a training set obtained by leaving out two compounds from the initial data set. This process was repeated for all pairwise combinations of the compounds. So, if there are 26 compounds, then each compound is left out 25 times. In this way, for P. vivax FPPS we obtained 25 predicted values for each compound in the data set, and these were then averaged to give the overall leave-two-out predicted value, for each compound. To test whether the correlations obtained might occur by chance, we randomly scrambled the cell activities, then performed the leave-two-out validation on the scrambled data. The process was repeated 10 times, and the mean R 2 values are reported. For the 10 systems investigated, each scrambling analysis requires ∼10−90 h, depending upon the number of descriptors and the number of compounds in the data set. Linearly dependent descriptors were eliminated based on the occurrence of rank deficiency in the descriptor correlation matrix. Supplementary Material Suppl Data Click here to view. Acknowledgment We thank Raymond Hui of the Structural Genomics Consortium for providing the P. vivax protein expression system. This work was supported by the United States Public Health Service. Footnotes a Abbreviations: FPPS, farnesyl diphosphate synthase; GGPP, geranylgeranyl diphosphate; L2O, leave-two-out; UPPS, undecaprenyl diphosphate synthase; PAMPA, parallel artificial membrane permeability analysis; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; hlGP, human liver glycogen phosphorylase; QSAR, quantitative structure activity relationship; GPP, geranyl diphosphate; IPP, isopentenyl diphosphate. Supporting Information Available: List of descriptors, additional tables of enzyme plus 2-descriptor combinations, and correlation plots for the cell and enzyme assays. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at. Article information J Med Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 Oct 21. Published in final edited form as: J Med Chem. 2008 Dec 25; 51: 7827–7833. doi: 10.1021/jm8009074 PMCID: PMC2765246 NIHMSID: NIHMS134688 PMID: 19053772 Dushyant Mukkamala, † ‡ Joo Hwan No, † ‡ Lauren M. Cass, § Ting-Kai Chang, ∥ and Eric Oldfield * † ∥ Center for Biophysics and Computational Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana—Champaign, 600 South Mathews Avenue, Urbana, Illinois 61801, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana—Champaign, 505 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, Illinois 61801, and Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana—Champaign, 600 South Mathews Avenue, Urbana, Illinois 61801 † Center for Biophysics and Computational Biology. ‡ These authors contributed equally to this work. § School of Molecular and Cellular Biology. ∥ Department of Chemistry. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Phone: 333−3374. Fax: 244− 0997. E-mail: ude.cuiu.scs.dahc@oe. PMC Copyright notice The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at J Med Chem 