 The contractile vacuole system is the osmoregulatory organelle required for survival for many free-living cells under hypotonic conditions. We identified a new CV regulator, Disgorgin, a TBC-domain-containing protein, which translocates to the CV membrane at the late stage of CV charging and regulates CV–plasma membrane fusion and discharging. disgorgin − cells produce large CVs due to impaired CV–plasma membrane fusion. Disgorgin is a specific GAP for Rab8A-GTP, which also localizes to the CV and whose hydrolysis is required for discharging. We demonstrate that Drainin, a previously identified TBC-domain-containing protein, lies upstream from Disgorgin in this pathway. Unlike Disgorgin, Drainin lacks GAP activity but functions as a Rab11A effector. The BEACH family proteins LvsA and LvsD were identified in a suppressor/enhancer screen of the disgorgin − large CV phenotype and demonstrated to have distinct functions in regulating CV formation. Our studies help define the pathways controlling CV function. Keywords: BEACH proteins, contractile vacuole, Dictyostelium, Rab, RabGAP Introduction The contractile vacuole complex is an osmoregulatory organelle of free-living amoebae and protozoa, which controls the intracellular water balance by accumulating and expelling excess water out of the cell, allowing cells to survive under hypotonic stress as in pond water. In the absence of a functional CV complex, cells cannot expel water, become highly swollen, and lyse. Significant work has been carried out to characterize the properties and function of the CV system. In Dictyostelium, the CV system consists of tubules and vacuoles that are interconvertible. The tubular structures function as collecting ducts to accumulate excess water, whereas the bladders fuse with the plasma membrane enabling the bladder's contents to be released into the extracellular medium thus expelling water from the cell body. When cells are in isotonic medium, the CV system exhibits limited activity, but when cells are placed in hypotonic medium, the CV system is rapidly activated: the bladders fill with water and then fuse to the plasma membrane, discharging their contents. Heuser has suggested that the CV does not disappear during the discharge stage but, instead, collapses, and flattens against the plasma membrane, maintaining its distinct membrane components. Although several putative regulatory components have been demonstrated to associate with the Dictyostelium CV system, including vacuolar-H + -ATPase, LvsA, Drainin, Rab11A, and Rab14, little is known about the regulation of the CV system and the pathways that control CV discharging. V-ATPase is a conserved enzyme in all eukaryotic cells that transforms the energy generated from ATP hydrolysis to active transport H +. This transmembrane electrochemical potential of H + is then used to transport other ions or macromolecules. Heuser et al has proposed that the Dictyostelium V-ATPase establishes a proton gradient to transport other ions into CVs, resulting in an inward flux of water. The BEACH protein LvsA is required for cytokinesis and phagocytosis and for proper water homoeostasis. LvsA translocates to the CV membrane after the vacuole reaches its maximum diameter and has been proposed to regulate CV biogenesis and discharge. Lastly, Becker et al demonstrated that Drainin, a TBC domain -containing protein, is required for proper CV discharge and localizes to CV bladders. drainin − cells exhibit enlarged CV bladders and are partially sensitive to low osmotic stress. Although Drainin has been proposed to be a potential RabGAP, no Rab has been linked to the function of Drainin. Rab GTPases belong to the Ras superfamily of small GTPase proteins, having central functions in regulating membrane trafficking, including vesicle transport, formation, movement, tethering, and fusion with target membranes. In total, 16 of the 54 Dictyostelium Rabs have been examined, and 2, Rab11A and Rab14, have been linked to the CV. Rab11A localizes to both CV bladder and tubular structures and cells expressing dominant-negative Rab11A exhibit abnormal, enlarged CV bladders in hypotonic buffer and are sensitive to low osmolarity stress. Rab14 localizes to the endo-lysosomal and the CV systems. Cells expressing dominant-negative Rab14 are defective in endocytosis, endosomal membrane flow, homotypic lysosome fusion, and hypo-osmotic regulation. Similar to other small GTPases, Rabs cycle between GDP-bound and GTP-bound states. The hydrolysis of GTP is stimulated by GTPase-activating proteins, most of which contain a conserved catalytic TBC domain. While examining the regulation of Dictyostelium CV function, we identified a novel Rab8A-GAP, Disgorgin, that along with Drainin and its regulator Rab11A control CV discharge. Drainin and Disgorgin/Rab8A sequentially localize to the CV membrane at the late charging stage and control different stages in the process. We show that two BEACH family proteins, LvsA and LvsD, exert an effect as a suppressor and an enhancer of disgorgin − phenotypes, respectively, to regulate CV formation. Through the examination of the cellular phenotypes of different mutant strains and the genetic and biochemical interactions of the different CV components, we provide new insights into the pathways regulating CV function and formation. Results Loss of Disgorgin causes the formation of large vacuoles In a genetic screen for cell morphology mutants, we identified a new CV regulator, which we named Disgorgin. Disgorgin contains an F-box domain near its N-terminus and a TBC domain with the conserved catalytic Arg and Gln residues required for GAP activity. disgorgin knockout strains, generated by homologous recombination and confirmed by Southern and Northern blot analyses, exhibit a large vacuole morphology that is easily observed under phase contrast or DIC microscopy, whereas no vacuole is observed in most wild-type cells. Figure 1 Sequence analysis of Dictyostelium Disgorgin and cell morphology of disgorgin − cells. Schematic diagram of the domain structure of Disgorgin and the relative position of the truncation constructs used in the study. Amino-acid sequence... Expressing full-length Disgorgin or Disgorgin lacking the F-box in disgorgin − cells complements the large vacuole phenotype and causes no overexpression phenotype when expressed in wild-type cells. However, Disgorgin carrying amino-acid substitutions in either of the conserved residues required for GAP activity does not complement the null phenotypes and produces even larger vacuoles when expressed in disgorgin − or wild-type cells, suggesting that the mutant proteins exert an effect as dominant-negative mutants, possibly by further blocking the Rab intrinsic GTPase activity and/or competing for common substrates or essential components of the pathway. These findings indicate that Disgorgin RabGAP activity is required in the pathway regulating vacuoles and that the F-box domain is not essential for this process. Structure and activity of the CV is abnormal in disgorgin − cells To identify the properties of the large vacuoles, we labelled disgorgin − cells with markers for different types of organelles: TRITC-dextran, Lysotracker, or RFP–Dajumin. RFP–Dajumin, but not the other markers, clearly labelled the large vacuole structures corresponding to the ones observed under phase-contrast microscopy, indicating that the large vacuoles in disgorgin − cells are enlarged CVs. Interestingly, when we placed disgorgin − cells in low-salt buffer, the large vacuoles were no longer present; instead, we observed many smaller bladder structures, suggesting that the CV activity dramatically changed in disgorgin − cells under hypotonic stress. On the other hand, tonicity of the medium did not affect the CV structures in wild-type cells. Figure 2 Structure and activity of CVs are abnormal in disgorgin − cells. CV structure in Ax2 cells and disgorgin − cells in isotonic buffer or in hypotonic buffer. Localization of RFP–Dajumin represents a reconstruction of the 3D structure.... To understand the role of Disgorgin, we compared the CV cycle in wild-type and disgorgin − cells by labelling cells with RFP–Dajumin and placing the cells in water to activate the CV system. As previously described, when cells are placed in hypotonic conditions, the activity of the CV network dramatically increases and the dynamic charging and discharging of the vesicles can be readily monitored. After vacuole discharging, RFP–Dajumin is visible as a patch on the plasma membrane, suggesting that the CV membrane is flattened against the plasma membranes. Furthermore, new CV bladders preferentially form at these sites, suggesting that the collapsed CV bladder remains distinct from the majority of the plasma membrane whereupon it regenerates into a new CV. To examine this in more detail, we used the styryl dye FM4-64, which labels both the plasma membrane and CVs. In wild-type cells, we observed the complete collapse of the CV against the plasma membrane. Upon collapse, this region of the plasma membrane appears as a brighter domain compared with the surrounding region, suggesting a double layer of membrane. When placed in water, the large CVs in disgorgin − cells disappeared within 5 min by discharging their contents. After the initial discharging, the large vacuoles did not reform. Instead, we observed numerous smaller vacuoles, consistent with the RFP–Dajumin labelling. These smaller vacuoles discharged through an abnormal process in which the CVs round up and push out of the membrane forming a bleb. Then these vacuoles discharged, but the process was extended and incomplete with no observed flattening of the CV against the plasma membrane. At the end of this process, residual, small CV bladders remained, which then withdrew inside the cell, a process not observed in wild-type cells. Using FM4-64 to visualize the discharging of the CVs, we clearly observed the membrane protrusion caused by charged CVs in disgorgin − cells. In contrast to wild-type cells, we did not observe the collapse of the CVs onto the plasma membrane. Instead, the partially discharged CVs withdrew inside the cells. Given the strong discharging phenotype we observed in disgorgin − cells, we suggest that Disgorgin mediates CV discharging by regulating efficient fusion between the CV and plasma membranes. We hypothesize that the mechanism underlying the formation of large vacuoles in disgorgin − cells in isotonic medium is that the vacuoles continue to grow, as they are unable to fuse with the plasma membrane. Disgorgin localizes to the CV membrane at the late charging stage To determine the subcellular localization of endogenous Disgorgin, we created a Disgorgin knock-in strain in which a v5 tag is inserted upstream of the stop codon of the endogenous disgorgin gene by homologous recombination. By indirect immunofluorescence staining with anti-v5 and antibodies against the CV markers V-ATPase or calmodulin, we found Disgorgin localized to the CVs as well as being found in the cytosol. However, Disgorgin localized only to the vacuoles and not to the tubule components of the CV, and, interestingly, Disgorgin marked a subset of the CV vacuoles. Cell fractionation assays suggested that only 5% of the endogenous Disgorgin was associated with membranes. GFP–Disgorgin, which complements the disgorgin − phenotypes, exhibited a similar subcellular localization as endogenous Disgorgin and did not colocalize with either lysosomes or endosomes. Furthermore, Disgorgin overexpression did not change the localization of the V-ATPase as determined using the subcellular fractionation assay, suggesting that Disgorgin overexpression did not alter the CV system. We therefore used GFP–Disgorgin for our live-imaging studies. Under hypertonic conditions, GFP–Disgorgin localized to shrunken CVs. Figure 3 Disgorgin localizes to the CV membrane. Localization of endogenous Disgorgin and V-ATPase. Colocalization of Disgorgin and V-ATPase is indicated by arrows. Localization of GFP–Disgorgin with RFP–Dajumin in Ax2 cells. Colocalization... To understand the differences between the CVs with and without Disgorgin, we placed the cells co-expressing GFP–Disgorgin and RFP–Dajumin in water. RFP–Dajumin marked all of the vacuoles and tubules evenly, and we observed the charging and discharging of these CVs. However, we found that Disgorgin localized to the membrane of CVs only at the late charging stage. Coincident with the recruitment of additional Disgorgin, the CV stopped growing, became spherical, and initiated its discharge. We found that, in contrast to Dajumin, which remained on the CV patch, Disgorgin dissociated from the membrane immediately after vacuole fusion. The kinetics of Disgorgin association with CVs are consistent with Disgorgin's potential role in regulating CV–plasma membrane fusion. To determine the domains required for Disgorgin's vacuolar localization, we made a series of deletion mutants. GFP–Disgorgin ΔF-box, GFP–Disgorgin Q551A, and GFP–Disgorgin R515A showed a similar pattern of localization as wild-type Disgorgin, suggesting that the F-box domain and the catalytic residues are not required for CV membrane localization. We found that the TBC domain with its 70 upstream residues but not the TBC domain alone complements the disgorgin − cell large vacuole phenotype and localizes not only to cytosol but also weakly to the CVs and the plasma membrane, suggesting that this 70 -residue region upstream of TBC domain, which is Arg and Lys rich, is required for membrane localization. Sequence analysis suggests that Drainin, a previously identified CV association protein in Dictyostelium, and several human RabGAPs have a similar Arg/Lys-enriched region upstream of their TBC domains, indicating this may be a conserved localization motif. We also identified a nine-residue hydrophobic stretch within the TBC domain that is required for Disgorgin CV localization. Disgorgin lacking these nine residues is cytosolic, does not rescue the disgorgin − cell vacuole phenotype, and produces large vacuoles when expressed in wild-type cells. A similar hydrophobic region was found previously in Drainin, and shown to be required for Drainin vacuole localization. Further sequence comparison indicates that the TBC domains of RabGAPs from yeast and mammals also have at least five hydrophobic residues in this region, I/L/VXXXF/I/LLL/M/YXL/M/C. We suggest that this hydrophobic domain and the Arg/Lys-enriched domain are conserved membrane localization motifs that mediate vacuole targeting. Drainin functions upstream of Disgorgin Disgorgin shares some similarities with Drainin, another regulator of CV discharging. They both contain TBC domains and ablating either protein causes enlarged CV formation. However, the cell morphologies and the discharge of the CVs are different in the two null strains. The CVs are less enlarged and the vacuole sizes are more uniform in disgorgin − cells than in drainin − cells. drainin − cells are partially hypo-osmotic sensitive and exhibit two types of abnormal discharge, one of which is similar to that seen in disgorgin − cells. In disgorgin − cells, although active CV–plasma membrane fusion is absent as described above, cells can discharge and are insensitive to hypotonic stress. Figure 4 Drainin lies upstream of Disgorgin. Cell morphology of different strains. In GFP–Drainin/ disgorgin − cells, the cells expressing GFP–Drainin are indicated by arrows. Localization of GFP–Disgorgin and RFP–Drainin... To investigate the relationship between these two proteins, we performed an epistasis experiment. Overexpressing Disgorgin suppressed the large CV phenotype in drainin − cells. Although the discharging was still abnormal, the disgorgin − -type of bladder discharging was significantly reduced, suggesting Disgorgin is involved in one of the Drainin pathways. Overexpressing Drainin in disgorgin − cells, however, did not suppress the disgorgin − large CV phenotype and the discharging was unaltered, suggesting that Disgorgin might lie downstream of Drainin. We also found that Disgorgin still localized to CV bladders in drainin − cells and vice versa, indicating that the two proteins localize to the CVs independently. Time-lapse video microscopy of CV formation and discharge in wild-type cells co-expressing GFP–Disgorgin and RFP–Drainin showed that Drainin localized to the CV bladder prior to Disgorgin under hypotonic conditions. This result and the complementation data strongly suggest that Drainin lies upstream from Disgorgin in the CV discharge pathway. Consistent with this model, disgorgin − /drainin − cells exhibited cell morphologies and discharging defects similar to those observed in drainin − cells. Rabs involved in the Disgorgin and Drainin pathway As RabGAP activity is required for normal vacuolar size in the Disgorgin pathway, we expect that some disgorgin − cell phenotypes result from specific Rab GTPases remaining in the GTP-bound form for an extended time. Both Rab11A and Rab14 were shown previously to localize to CV structures in Dictyostelium. Rab11A localizes to both tubules and bladders, whereas Rab14 only localizes to the tubular structures. As expected, we discovered that Rab11A colocalizes with Disgorgin and, similar to Dajumin, is found constitutively on both CV tubules and bladders. We also examined nine other Rabs, all of which had been linked to vacuolar structures in Dictyostelium and/or other systems. Of these nine Rabs, two, Rab8A and Rab11C, localize to CV structures. Rab8A exhibits the same localization as Disgorgin and, to the limit of the resolution of our studies, localizes coincidently with Disgorgin on the CVs during CV-charging and -discharging cycles, whereas Rab11C exhibits localization similar to that of Rab11A, being found on all CV structures. Figure 5 The Rabs regulated by Disgorgin and Drainin. Colocalization of GFP–Disgorgin with RFP–Rab11A, RFP–Rab11C, and RFP–Rab8A. Arrows indicate the colocalization of Disgorgin and Rab11A or Rab11C. Scale bar, 5 μm.... To determine whether Rab8A, Rab11A, Rab11C, or Rab14 are the potential regulators or effectors of Disgorgin or Drainin, we performed a pull-down assay using GST-tagged Rabs and GST alone as a negative control. Figure 5B illustrates that Rab8A and Rab11A, but not Rab11C or Rab14 or GST alone, pulled down v5-tagged Disgorgin. However, Rab11A and Rab14 bound strongly with Drainin. Using GST-fused constitutively active or dominant-negative Rabs in pull-down assays, we examined the GTP or GDP specificity of the interactions. We found that Drainin bound the strongest to Rab11A CA and had little interaction with Rab11A DN. However, Drainin bound equally to all three forms of Rab14. These data suggested that Rab11A but not Rab14 interacted with Drainin in a GTP-dependent manner. Disgorgin bound both the Rab8A CA and Rab8A DN more strongly than the wild-type form of Rab8A. Surprisingly, Disgorgin bound the strongest to Rab11A DN. To determine whether Disgorgin is the bona fide GAP for any of the Rabs, we performed a Rab GTPase assay. As shown in Figure 5D, Disgorgin exhibited strong GAP activity to the Rab8A, and much less GAP activity to Rab11A, Rab11C, and Rab14, suggesting that Disgorgin is a specific RabGAP for Rab8A. Our sequence analysis suggests that Drainin lacks the putative catalytic residues. Consistent with this observation, Drainin did not exhibit GAP activity on any of the Rabs tested, suggesting Drainin is not a bona fide RabGAP. Although Disgorgin is a Rab8A-GAP, overexpression of Rab8A in disgorgin − cells suppresses the steady-state accumulation of large vacuoles, possibly by supplying a sufficient level of Rab8A-GDP to the CV system that might compete with Rab8A-GTP for sites on CV membranes. However, Rab8A does not suppress the abnormal discharge of CV in disgorgin − cells, indicating that the transition from the GTP-bound to the GDP-bound form of Rab8A is important to fulfill its function in CV–plasma membrane fusion. As Drainin interacts with Rab11A in a GTP-dependent manner and Drainin is not a RabGAP for Rab11A, we suggest that Drainin is a Rab11A effector. When we overexpressed GFP–Drainin alone, we observed Drainin vacuolar but not tubular localization. However, when co-overexpressed with Rab11A, Drainin localized to the CV tubules as well. Interestingly, co-expressing Drainin with Rab11A CA led to the plasma membrane localization of Drainin, possibly due to active fusion between the CV and the plasma membrane. Co-expression of RFP–Rab11A DN, which was found only in the cytosol, blocked Drainin localization to the CV or other membranes. Together with the pull-down assay and GAP assay data, these data suggest that Drainin is the effector of Rab11A and that Rab11A recruits Drainin to the CV membrane. We suggest that Rab11A DN blocks Rab11A activation and, in return, prevents Drainin CV localization. Consistent with this conclusion, expressing Rab11A did not rescue the large CV phenotype in drainin − cells, whereas Rab11A DN expression mimicked a drainin − cell phenotype. Rab8A, however, suppressed the large CV phenotype in drainin − cells, further supporting the hypothesis that Rab8A and Disgorgin lie downstream of Drainin pathway. REMI suppressor/enhancer screening of disgorgin − cells To identify other potential components in the Disgorgin pathway, we undertook an insertional mutagenesis screen for second site suppressors and enhancers of the disgorgin − cell vacuolar phenotype by identifying strains exhibiting a change in vacuolar size. Visual screening of ∼7000 clones yielded five candidates with a changed vacuolar morphology. After cloning the insertion site of the suppressor and enhancer clones, we found that lvsA had been disrupted in the strain that exhibited no vacuoles and lvsD was disrupted in the two strains exhibiting larger vacuoles. We were unable to clone the insertion site of the other two strains. To confirm the REMI clone phenotypes, we disrupted lvsA and lvsD in disgorgin − cells. As shown in Figure 6A, disruption of lvsA in disgorgin − cells suppressed the large vacuole phenotype of disgorgin − cells, whereas the phenotype of disgorgin − cells was enhanced when lvsD was disrupted. Figure 6 LvsA maintains the integrity of CVs. Cell morphology of different strains. Localization of RFP–Dajumin in different cell lines. Each picture represents a reconstruction of the 3D structure. Localization of GFP–Disgorgin in... LvsA and LvsD are BEACH family proteins, which contain an evolutionarily conserved domain and are involved in a range of cellular processes. We confirmed the results of De Lozanne, 2003 that disruption of lvsA causes a loss of visible CVs and tubules, whereas loss of lvsD does not produce a visible phenotype. An LvsA gene replacement strain in which the endogenous LvsA open reading frame fused to GFP is overexpressed from a more active actin promoter does not exhibit a vacuolar phenotype. Interestingly, disruption of Disgorgin in this background causes an enhanced, enlarged vacuole phenotype, similar to observations in cells lacking Disgorgin and LvsD. Overexpressing GFP–LvsD in disgorgin − cells, similar to disrupting lvsA, suppresses the large vacuole phenotype of disgorgin − cells. These results indicate that LvsA and LvsD regulate the CV system but have distinct and possibly opposite functions. LvsA maintains the integrity of the CV Using RFP–Dajumin to visualize the CV, we compared the CV structures in different mutant strains. We confirmed that no bladder or tubular structures were observed in lvsA − cells; only small punctate structures were seen, suggesting that a functional CV system was absent. lvsA − /disgorgin − cells exhibit a similar phenotype which explains how disrupting lvsA suppresses the large vacuole phenotype in disgorgin − cells. V-ATPase, which predominantly localizes to CVs, still localizes to these punctate structures, suggesting that in the absence of LvsA, immature CV structures form but cannot mature or enlarge. Thus, lvsA − /lvsD − and lvsA − /lvsD − /disgorgin − cells lack enlarged bladders and exhibit the punctate CV structures. Furthermore, these two strains exhibit all of the phenotypes of lvsA − cells, including sensitivity to hypotonic stress as well as phagocytosis and cytokinesis defects. As visualized using RFP–Dajumin, there is an increase in the number of CV bladder structures in LvsA OE cells compared with wild-type cells. Thus, the combination of overexpressing LvsA and disrupting disgorgin leads to extended enlargement of CVs. In lvsD − cells, the CV bladder size is comparable to wild-type cells. However, in lvsD − /disgorgin − cells, the CV bladder is greatly enlarged. Overexpression of LvsD in wild-type cells does not result in any observed change in the CV structure. In lvsA − cells, Disgorgin localized to punctate structures adjacent to the plasma membrane, which colocalized with RFP–Dajumin, indicating that these are CV structures. As Disgorgin only localized to the CV at the late charging stage, it suggests that the aberrant CV structures in lvsA − cells are remnants of CVs that stopped growing after the discharging. We suggest that LvsA functions to maintain the integrity of the CV during the discharging stage. As previous reports showed that LvsA translocates to the CV membrane after the vacuole reaches its maximum diameter, we examined the detailed kinetics of the LvsA association with the CV membrane to better understand LvsA's function. Time-lapse video microscopy of cells co-expressed GFP–LvsA and RFP–Dajumin revealed that GFP–LvsA translocated to the CV membrane only at the very last stage of discharge immediately prior to the flattening of the CV bladders against the plasma membrane. The period during which LvsA was associated with CVs was brief ) in contrast to the 57±18 s between the time of Disgorgin localization to CVs and the complete discharging of the vacuole. The full cycle from the start of CV growth to discharging is ∼100±22 s. The kinetics of LvsA association with CV membrane are consistent with a role for LvsA in maintaining the membrane integrity during the fusion process. This CV membrane localization of LvsA is Disgorgin independent. Surprisingly, LvsD did not localize to CV membranes and was always cytosolic in all cell lines tested, whether the cells were in isotonic or hypotonic medium. To identify possible regulators and effectors of Disgorgin, we purified a Disgorgin-containing complex and analysed it by mass spectrometry. None of the proteins discussed above was identified in the Disgorgin complex. We found SKP1 orthologues FpaA and FpaB, the components of the SCF ubiquitination complex, ubiquitin, and the vacuolar H + -ATPase A subunit VatA. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the in vivo interaction of Disgorgin, FpaA, and FpaB in an F-box domain-dependent manner. These findings are discussed in the Discussion and Supplementary data. Discussion A model for CV regulation In this study, we report four new regulators of the CV in Dictyostelium, Disgorgin, Rab8A, Rab11C, and LvsD. By the analysis of these and three previously described CV proteins, Drainin, Rab11A, and LvsA, our results revealed a new pathway for the control of CV function in Dictyostelium. On the basis of our findings, we propose that upon hypotonic stress, Rab11A is activated on the CV bladders and, in a GTP-bound form, recruits Drainin to the CV bladders. We discovered that Disgorgin colocalizes with Rab8A and exerts an effect as a Rab8A GAP in a pathway that lies downstream of Drainin. Our finding that Disgorgin GAP activity is required for Disgorgin function argues that the hydrolysis of Rab8A-GTP is required to mediate CV–plasma membrane fusion, possibly by releasing a Rab8A effector, maybe Disgorgin itself. As the interaction between Disgorgin and Rab11A DN is much stronger than the one between Disgorgin and other forms of Rab11A or Rab8A, we postulate that there may be a feedback pathway between Disgorgin and Rab11A. Figure 7 Model of the Disgorgin pathway. The signalling pathway of Drainin and Disgorgin to regulate the CV. CV development in Dictyostelium cells. For detailed description, see text. By examining the kinetics of different proteins' association with the CV system, we assigned different CV proteins along the CV-charging and -discharging cycles, which help define CV regulation. Under isotonic conditions, the CV is not very active and Disgorgin, LvsA, LvsD, Rab8A, and Drainin are predominantly cytosolic, whereas Dajumin, Rab11A, and Rab11C are associated with the CV tubular and vacuolar structures. In response to hypotonic stress, the CVs charge and enlarge by water uptake. Late in this process Drainin is recruited to the CV membrane. We propose this is mediated by Rab11A-GTP, as this does not occur in cells expressing Rab11A DN. Drainin recruitment is followed, contemporaneously, by Disgorgin and Rab8A recruitment. Once Disgorgin and Rab8A are associated with the CV membrane, the vesicles stop charging and become spherical. Shortly before CV–plasma membrane fusion, LvsA is recruited to CV whereupon the CV bladder and plasma membranes fuse forming a hole, which allows the CV contents to be released into the extracellular medium. Rab8A, Disgorgin, Drainin, and LvsA dissociate from the plasma membrane, whereas Dajumin, Rab11A, and Rab11C remain on the CV patches, which become re-filled with water, and the next charging begins. The regulation of CV activity by Disgorgin and Drainin pathways In wild-type cells, we suggest, as has Heuser, that CV vacuoles are discharged through the fusion of the CV and plasma membranes. In disgorgin − cells, CV discharge is defective, and we suggest that the bladder and plasma membrane fusion is mis-regulated. In the absence of Disgorgin, the fully charged bladders push against the plasma membrane, forming blebs under hypotonic conditions. As soon as some of the content is released from the bladder, the bladder retracts from the plasma membrane, even though the discharge is not completed. The formation and the kinetics of these blebs suggest that membrane tension may be involved in CV discharging in disgorgin − cells. We suggest that in disgorgin − cells, possible tension of the bladders against the plasma membrane may lead to localized, small ruptures in the plasma membrane allowing the release of the CV contents. Once some of the content is released, membrane tension may be reduced, the bladders then retract, and the cell reseals the gaps in the CV and plasma membranes. Such a resealing process was suggested previously. To date, there is no direct evidence whether membrane tension is required for the normal discharging process in wild-type Dictyostelium cells as suggested for Paramecium cells. Membrane tension has been suggested to be the primary force driving CV discharge. Our data, however, suggest that membrane tension alone is insufficient for CV discharging as large CVs accumulate in disgorgin − cells under isotonic conditions when CV activity is reduced and discharging is inefficient in the absence of Disgorgin under hypotonic conditions. Our data argue that Disgorgin-mediated Rab8A-GTP hydrolysis mediates the fusion event. Our findings indicate that Disgorgin is a GAP for Rab8A but not for other Rabs known to localize to the CV and that Disgorgin's GAP activity is required for its function. Further, Rab8A and Disgorgin contemporaneously localize to CV bladders. We suggest that CV–plasma membrane fusion, which permits the discharge of the CV bladder's content into the extracellular medium, is mediated by Disgorgin and Rab8A and this event requires the cycling of Rab8A from the GTP- to the GDP-bound state. In yeast, Sec4 binds to Sro7p, which interacts with the t-SNARE protein Sec9p and is involved in membrane fusion. Another Sec4 effector, Sec15p, is a component of the exocyst, which mediates the docking and fusion of exocytic vesicles to the plasma membrane and interacts with the Sro7p pathway. Rab8A may have a similar function in CV–plasma membrane fusion in Dictyostelium. Our proposed role for Rab8A is inferred by its colocalization with Disgorgin and the fact that Rab8A-GTP is a Disgorgin substrate. We were unable to obtain definitive genetic evidence that Rab8A is required for this process as we could not create a Rab8A null strain, most likely because Rab8A is essential for growth. Similarly, we were unable to test a dependency for Disgorgin's localization on Rab8A. Both Drainin and Disgorgin contain a TBC domain. However, Drainin lacks the conserved catalytic Arg and Gln required for Rab GAP activity. Consistent with this, we find that Drainin lacks GAP activity but does bind to Rab11A-GTP in vitro and is recruited to CVs by Rab11A. We suggest that Drainin acts as an effector of Rab11A, and functions upstream from Disgorgin and Rab8A. Evi5 is a mammalian TBC-domain-containing protein that binds Rab11 in a GTP-dependent manner. Instead of being a GAP for Rab11, Evi5 competes with the Rab11 effector FIP3 for Rab11 binding. Drainin might function similarly to compete with other Rab11A effectors. We suggest that Drainin and Evi5 represent a group of TBC-domain-containing proteins that lack GAP activity but bind Rabs and control Rab-mediated pathways. Harris et al found that Rab11A does not localize on the CV under hypotonic conditions. However, our studies demonstrate that Rab11A remains associated with the CV membranes under hypotonic conditions during both the charging and discharging stages. The different observations might be due to different expression levels of the proteins or sensitivities of the detection systems. Although constitutively activated Rab11A exhibits localization similar to that of wild-type Rab11A, Rab11A CA causes Drainin to localize to the plasma membrane. This suggests that whereas Drainin binds Rab11A in a GTP-dependent manner, an inability of Rab11A to cycle may result in active fusion between the CV and the plasma membrane. Cells expressing dominant-negative Rab11A are sensitive to hypotonic stress as described previously. We suggest this results from Rab11A DN blocking Drainin recruitment to the CV. The exocyst component Sec15p interacts not only with Sec4 but also with Rab11 in a GTP-dependent manner and mediates some of the phenotypes regulated by Rab11 in Drosophila. We suggest that exocysts may have a function in Dictyostelium CV–plasma membrane fusion. When expressed as a tagged protein, Rab11C also associates with the CV. However, Rab11C does not interact with Disgorgin or Drainin and overexpressing Rab11C only partially suppresses the large vacuole phenotype in disgorgin − cells. Whereas Rab11A is expressed at a high level during the vegetative stage, Rab11C is expressed mostly in 18-h developmental cells and may therefore not be relevant to CV function in vegetative cells. We know that GAP activity and membrane localization are required for Disgorgin function, but we do not know the function of the Disgorgin F-box domain. Loss of the F-box does not affect the ability of overexpressed Disgorgin to complement the disgorgin − phenotypes. We found two Dictyostelium SKP1 orthologues in Disgorgin-containing complexes and demonstrated that they interact with Disgorgin in an F-box-dependent manner. Both F-box-containing proteins and the SKP proteins are components of the SCF ubiquitin E3-ligase complex. Disgorgin is most likely either a target of ubiquitination or it functions as an adaptor to bring another protein to the SCF complex, which is then ubiquitinated. Alternatively, the Disgorgin F-box domain may mediate the formation of a non-SCF-containing complex. However, we do not have direct evidence for either model and were unable to detect Disgorgin ubiquitination. Regulation of the CV by BEACH proteins We identified the BEACH proteins LvsA and LvsD in a second site suppressor/enhancer screen for genes that genetically interact with Disgorgin to control CV morphology and function. We and Wu et al found that LvsA is required for the formation of a functional CV system. In lvsA − cells, what remains are small punctate structures that have Disgorgin, V-ATPase, and Dajumin. As Disgorgin only associates with the CV membrane at the discharge stage, these observations suggest that the punctate structures in lvsA − cells are post-discharge CVs that arrest at this stage. Our results suggest that LvsA is required to maintain the integrity of the CV presumably during the fusion and resealing process. We demonstrate that disrupting lvsA or overexpressing LvsD suppresses the large CV in disgorgin − cells, whereas overexpressing LvsA or disrupting lvsD leads to the extended enlargement of CVs in disgorgin − cells. We demonstrate for the first time that two BEACH proteins regulate same physiological process, which might be a general mechanism by which BEACH proteins function. LvsD's null and overexpression phenotype effects in a disgorgin − background are consistent with a model in which LvsD antagonizes the function of LvsA. As LvsD does not associate with the CV, we speculated that LvsD might interact with and inhibit LvsA to fulfill the regulation of the CV or these two proteins may compete for the same binding proteins in the cytosol. The connection between the two BEACH proteins and the Disgorgin protein strongly suggests that BEACH proteins and Rab proteins might function together. Another BEACH protein, Bchs, antagonizes Rab11 in synapse morphogenesis in Drosophila. Bchs has also been shown to genetically interact with another Rab, Rab-RP1. Future studies will be required to understand the role of the BEACH proteins at a biochemical level. Materials and methods Cell culture and constructs The cell culture and all the constructs were made using standard approaches. See Supplementary data for details. Indirect immunofluorescence staining Indirect immunofluorescence staining was performed as described. See Supplementary data for details. Microscopy Cells were plated in HL5 medium on glass-bottomed microwell plates for 15 min. The medium was then replaced by either hypotonic conditions such as water or Na/K phosphate buffer or isotonic buffer. The styryl dye FM4-64 was used at 1 μg/ml and the images were recorded between 2 and 15 min after staining to visualize both the CV and the plasma membrane. Z -Stack images or time-lapse videos were collected on a microscope with DIC and/or fluorescence imaging. The bright-field pictures were taken by a Hamamatsu C4742–95 camera with SimplePCI software under a 100 × 1.40 objective. We took the fluorescence pictures under a 60 × 1.40 objective with either a Hamamatsu ORCA-ER C4742–80 camera for monochrome images or a Hamamatsu c9100 camera for two-colour images. GST pull-down and GAP assays GST or GST-fused proteins were produced in BL21 bacteria and purified on glutathione-sepharose according to the manufacturer's instructions. The GST pulldown assay was a modified form of the Ras-binding assay described previously. Briefly, the cell extract from Ax2 cells expressing v5–Disgorgin or v5–Drainin was incubated with 10 μg of GST or GST–Rabs on glutathione-agarose beads at 4°C for 1 h. The beads were washed three times. Proteins were separated on an SDS–PAGE gel and immunoblotted with the anti-v5 antibody. We performed the GAP assay with or without 250 nM GAPs using the EnzChek ® Phosphate Assay Kit according to the protocol described previously. The absorbance at 360 nm was monitored with microplate detection system SpectraMax Plus384 using SoftMax Pro 4.3LS. Three independent experiments were performed. The kinetic data were analysed by simultaneously fitting to the pseudo-first-order Michaelis–Menten model function using MATLAB. REMI screening REMI suppressor/enhancer screening is a modification of the protocol used previously. See Supplementary data for details. Detection of the Disgorgin complex and mass spectrometry We performed the purification of the Disgorgin complex and mass spectrometry as described previously. See Supplementary data for details. Supplementary Material Supplementary Figure 1 Click here to view. Supplementary Figure 2 Click here to view. Supplementary Figure 3 Click here to view. Supplementary Figure 4 Click here to view. Supplementary Movie 1 Click here to view. Supplementary Movie 2 Click here to view. Supplementary Movie 3 Click here to view. Supplementary Movie 4 Click here to view. Supplementary Movie 5 Click here to view. Supplementary Information Click here to view. 