Predicting Allosteric Communication in Myosin via a Pathway of Conserved Residues You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Predicting Allosteric Communication in Myosin via a Pathway of Conserved Residues J Mol Biol. 2007 Nov 9; 373: 1361–1373. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Journal of molecular biology Author Manuscript HHS Public Access Predicting Allosteric Communication in Myosin via a Pathway of Conserved Residues Susan Tang, Jung-Chi Liao,, and Jeanette P. Schmidt Additional article information Summary We present a computational method that predicts a pathway of residues that mediate protein allosteric communication. The pathway is predicted using only a combination of distance constraints between contiguous residues and evolutionary data. We applied this analysis to find pathways of conserved residues connecting the myosin ATP binding site to the lever arm. These pathway residues may mediate the allosteric communication that couples ATP hydrolysis to the lever arm recovery stroke. Having examined pre-stroke conformations of Dictyostelium, scallop, and chicken myosin II as well as Dictyostelium myosin I, we observed a conserved pathway traversing switch II and the relay helix, which is consistent with the understood need for allosteric communication in this conformation. We also examined post-rigor and rigor conformations across several myosin species. Although initial residues of these paths are more heterogeneous, all but one of these paths traverse a consistent set of relay helix residues to reach the beginning of the lever arm. We discuss our results in the context of structural elements and reported mutational experiments, which substantiate the significance of the pre-stroke pathways. Our method provides a simple, computationally efficient means of predicting a set of residues that mediate allosteric communication. We provide a refined, downloadable application and source code on to share this tool with the wider community and relaxed. The two different states are characterized by different affinities for oxygen. According to the alternative sequential model by Koshland, Nemethy and Filmer, ligand binding alters the conformation of the bound subunit, which in turn, impacts ligand affinity in neighboring subunits. 4 Another well-studied allosteric protein is the bacterial chaperonin GroEL, a multi-subunit protein that harvests energy from ATP to fold proteins. GroEL’s internal cavity conformation, responsible for substrate binding, folding, and release, is coupled to ATP binding and hydrolysis at the physically distant apical domain. Significant conformational changes during repetitions of the chaperonin cycle are necessary to correctly fold a protein. 5 Myosin also uses allostery to mediate its function. Myosin is a motor protein that harvests and transforms ATP energy into movement along actin. X-ray crystallography and biochemical experiments have identified three major myosin motor conformations that correspond to discrete stages of the acto-myosin cycle. 6 The structure of the pre-stroke state is characterized by hydrolyzed ATP in the catalytic site, an open 50 kDa cleft between the catalytic site and the actin binding site, and the lever arm in its cocked, or “up” position. During the power stroke the lever arm swings to its “down” position. Release of phosphate and ADP results in the rigor state, characterized by a closed 50kDa cleft, strong binding to actin, and the lever arm in the “down” position. When the catalytic site is again occupied by ATP, myosin releases from actin and the molecule reaches its post-rigor conformation with its lever arm still in the “down” position and an open cleft. We examine the allosteric communication between the ATPase site and the lever arm for these conformations. Although numerous myosin classes are responsible for diverse cellular functions, the basic power-stroke mechanism is believed to be universal. As expected, the myosin motor domain shows significantly higher conservation than the myosin tail, which encodes cargo specification and/or localization. 7 Given the conserved catalytic mechanism across different myosin classes and species, we hypothesized that a pathway of allosteric communication from the ATP binding to the beginning of the lever arm could be identified through a set of highly conserved and physically proximate intermediate residues. Thus, we sought to compute a pathway of residues in each conformation of myosin using a combination of distance constraints between adjacent path residues and evolutionary data. While allosteric communication through a set of physically proximate residues is one possible mechanism, other mechanisms have been proposed. As the results presented here will show, it is likely that for the communication from the ATP binding to the lever arm, allostery may indeed occur through a set of physically proximate residues. The premise of our approach is consistent with prior work proposing that structural motifs within allosteric proteins can manifest themselves in an evolutionarily conserved sparse network of residue interactions. 8 Cope et al 9 aligned 82 myosin motor domain sequences and identified 131 highly conserved residues dispersed throughout the motor domain. Due to the identification of new myosin sequences since their work, we were able to compile a larger multiple sequence alignment and use this alignment to evaluate residue conservation. The multiple sequence alignment is available under downloads at Using physical proximity and conservation we found nearly identical pathways in all pre-stroke structures examined, which included structures for scallop, Dictyostelium, and chicken myosin II, as well as Dictyostelium myosin I. The beginning portions of the rigor and post-rigor paths are more heterogeneous, but the canonical pre-stroke path is nearly matched thereafter. Furthermore, we discuss our results in light of previously reported experimental mutation effects The proposed paths residues, which were identified using a combination of distance constraints between adjacent residues and evolutionary data, are consistent with previous studies that identify critical residues by genetic and mutagenesis approaches. Our method is computationally inexpensive and can be applied to other allosteric proteins after constructing a sufficiently informative multiple sequence alignment. A generalized and easy-to-use application of this method has been made available at Results Multiple Sequence Alignment and Conservation Weights We constructed a multiple sequence alignment of 158 myosin sequences from 33 different species. The MSA includes five reference sequences corresponding to the motor domains from Dictyostelium myosin II, scallop myosin II, chicken smooth muscle myosin II, Dictyostelium myosin I, and chicken myosin V. We obtained appropriate PDB structures for these proteins, some bound to various nucleotide analogs, such that multiple examples were included in each of the three major conformations: pre-stroke, rigor and post-rigor. These conformations are classified according to the positions of their lever arm and cleft: pre-stroke, rigor, and post-rigor. A conservation weight was computed for each column in the MSA that contained a residue from any of the reference structures. Graph Network To express potential residue interactions in a given structure, we constructed a graph representation. The graph contains a node for each residue in the structure and an edge between residues whose minimal distance does not exceed 3.3 Å, a distance chosen to reflect an acceptable distance for potential interactions, while minimizing spurious interactions. We compared the paths obtained at a cutoff of 3.3 Å with those obtained at 3.4 Å and 3.5 Å and observed that they are very similar. We set the conservation weight of each directed edge to the conservation of the destination residue. Allosteric Communication from the Catalytic Site We postulated the source of allosteric communication to be γ-phosphate of the ATP catalytic site. The destination was identified as a region corresponding to the beginning of the lever arm. The precise amino acid residue assigned to be the actual destination was chosen by first clustering the Dictyostelium pre-stroke conformation residues based on physical proximity, and subsequently applying a metric to select for paths with high conservation as described below. Although physically composed of a group of residues, the beginning of the lever arm needs to be concisely represented by a single surface residue for the purpose of our path calculation. To select the appropriate surface residue as our path endpoint, we first clustered the 389 surface residues in the Dictyostelium myosin II pre-stroke structure. We then ranked the conservation of paths ending at those residues using our path efficiency ratio, computed as the Cartesian distance between start and end points divided by the sum of path conservation weights. Surface residues were ranked in order of decreasing PE to identify paths with high conservation. We examined whether high-scoring surface residues, individually conferring paths with high conservation per angstrom, converged to a particular region within the structure. Strikingly, although the size of the cluster of interest varied significantly across various clustering runs, 12 of the 25 residues with the best PE were assigned to the same cluster in over 75% of the clustering runs. These residues, E492, K496, K498, N500, I504, P693, R695, R738, F739, I741, T742, and K743, are situated near or at the beginning of the lever arm. Residues E492, K496 and K498 are part of the relay helix close to the lever arm. Spatial distribution and clustering assignments of the best 25 residues in terms of PE are shown for one run at K = 15. We selected residue T742 for further analysis as our path endpoint because it had the highest PE of residues mapping to this region. Figure 1 Combined pathway and clustering analysis identifies surface residues with potentially strong allosteric coupling to the ATPase site. Shown are the top 25 high scoring end-point residues for the Dictyostelium pre-stroke... Shortest Path Calculation for pre-stroke Dictyostelium myosin II All matrices yielded two shortest paths with similar trends for the Dictyostelium myosin II pre-stroke structure, 10 with only minor differences at the residue level ). Residue substitutions as well as insertion/deletion of 1 or 2 residues can be detected when comparing the paths. Such differences resulted in the highest-residue path having 12 residues and the least-residue path having 10 residues. We chose the Miyata matrix for all further analysis due to its wide acceptance and application. Figure 2 Pathways of allosteric communication between ATP and the lever arm for the Dictyostelium myosin II pre-stroke conformation. Comparison of shortest paths derived from Identity, WAC, and Miyata matrices for the Dictyostelium pre-stroke structure 1VOM.... One of the two identified Myata paths traverses three conserved motifs shared in all myosins: P-loop, switch II, and the relay helix ). 11 The other path skips the P-loop and instead traverses an additional switch II residue but is otherwise identical. All paths comparisons that follow involve different reference sequences and structures. To facilitate path comparisons, residues computed for each structure were mapped back to residues in Dictyostelium myosin II via the MSA. Thus, the residue numbers on the paths presented hereafter have been converted to the residue numbering in Dictyostelium myosin II unless otherwise noted. Shortest Paths in other Pre-stroke Structures Figure 3 shows the predicted paths of allosteric communications for six pre-stroke structures, seven post-rigor structures, and two rigor structures. As is frequently the case, the PDB files corresponding to these structures have missing side chains, which could affect the validity of certain edges and alter the paths. To make sure our results are not affected, we completed all structures with Swiss-Pdb Viewer 12 to fill in all missing side chains. We verified that the paths for these reconstructed structures were in 100% agreement with the paths found using the unmodified PDB files, indicating that the inclusion or absence of the rebuilt residues does not alter our results. The paths of all pre-stroke and post-rigor structures were structurally aligned using MultiProt 13 and shown in Figure 4. Figure 3 Alignment of paths computed from pre-stroke, post-rigor, and rigor structures. As explained in the text, all residue numbers are based on the alignment with Dictyostelium myosin II, which is used to define a common residue numbering system. The alignment... Figure 4 Overlapped paths from pre-stroke and post-rigor structures. and Dictyostelium pre-stroke structure 1VOM, with the nucleotide and terminal residue 742 in space-filling representations, and path residues from 1VOM, 1YV3,... Comparison of paths in the pre-stroke structures of scallop myosin II and Dictyostelium myosin II show that they are nearly identical, and that the differences can be attributed to a minor structural deviation. Investigation of additional pre-stroke structures reiterate this trend, including Dictyostelium myosin I 15, chicken smooth muscle myosin II 16, as well as two Dictyostelium myosin II pre-stroke structures 1W9J and 1YV3 17, 4 ). Paths of all six pre-stroke structures pass through residue F482 in the relay helix. After residue F482, all paths follow the relay helix and closely mirror one another with minor divergences. As observed above for the Dictyostelium myosin II 1VOM structure, paths before residue F482 seem to have two options for each of the structures. One option is to jump directly to switch II. The other option is to traverse a single residue in the P-loop followed by a single residue in switch II ). Exceptions are the Dictyostelium myosin I structure, which has no optional jump from the binding site directly to switch II and for which all paths start with P-loop residue S181, and 1QVI which prefers the direct jump to the relay helix. Five of the six structures go through residue N475 in the relay helix, either coming directly from residue F458 in switch II or by going through residue I471 first. The Dictyostelium myosin I is again slightly different in one of its paths, where due to a large spatial gap between residue F458 and N475, the path traverses three additional residues in the relay helix before arriving at N475. In summary, all pre-stroke paths traverse 0–1 residue in the P-loop, 1–2 residues in switch II, and 8–10 residues in the relay helix. Paths Calculated for Post-Rigor Configurations We applied a similar shortest path calculation to the corresponding scallop myosin II apo post-rigor conformation: 1KK7, 18 chicken myosin V post-rigor with ADP-BeF3 bound, 19 as well as Dictyostelium myosin II post-rigor structures: 1MMD, 20 which is bound to ADP-BeF3; 1FMW, 21 ATP; 1FMV, 21 apo; 1W9I, S456Y mutation, ADP-BeF3; and 1MMA, 22 ADP, 4 ). Three of these structures have paths adhering closely to pre-stroke paths traversing K185 and sometimes 1–2 additional residues in the P-loop, followed by 1–4 residues in switch II, and then 7–10 residues in the relay helix.. In contrast, the ADP-bound 1MMA structure exhibits a very different path. The path in this post-rigor structure starts in the P-loop, weaves through numerous residues in switch I, goes through a few of the common residues in switch II, and then traverses several residues in the 670 – 700 region before arriving at residue T742. We note that this divergence is not an artifact of the path with lowest weight, but is due to structural differences,. Figure 5 Depiction of the Dictyostelium myosin II pre-stroke pathway residues 1) from structure 1VOM mapped onto the 1MMA post-rigor structure in light blue and 2) the actual pathway computed for 1MMA in yellow from the active site to the beginning of... We note that the pre-stroke structures tend to have a few alternate near-optimal paths, especially before reaching the relay helix, which is only the case for 1KK7 among the post-stroke structures. Paths in Additional Rigor and Post-Rigor Structures We further applied our method to the additional rigor structures Dictyostelium apo myosin II rigor 23, and chicken apo myosin V rigor. 24 When paths from all structures are aligned, we found that seven of thirteen matching residues in the pre-stroke paths are also present in most post-rigor and rigor paths. However the post-rigor and rigor paths appear to show somewhat more discrepancy at the beginning of their paths, ). Some paths traverse several P-loop and switch I residues before visiting the block of frequently observed residues. The Myosin V rigor structure has 10 paths, and the Dictyostelium apo myosin II rigor structure has 12 paths with nearly equivalent conservation scores, that differ significantly before residue N475 from the paths for other structures but converge thereon after. For 2AKA a few alternate paths continue to diverge from the general template up to residue F482. When increasing the cutoff distance to 3.4 Å, the paths remain similar but some shortcuts are observed. In particular, at distance 3.4 Å the paths for 1QVI show the shortcuts that the path for 1YV3 exhibit at cutoff 3.3 Å, preferring the route through G457 over the paths through S181. For almost all structures, paths take one shortcut at higher cutoff values towards the end of the paths, skipping 1 residue per path for 3.4 Å and 2 residues per path for a cutoff distance of 3.5 Å. Discussion We have demonstrated a very simple and computationally inexpensive method for determining a putative set of residues involved in protein allostery. Our method requires sequences from different species for proteins where similar allostery is suspected, the conformation in which the allosteric pathway is assumed to exist, and the starting and ending positions of the allosteric path. It is generally helpful to repeat the computation on several comparable structures represented by sequences in the MSA to establish the significance of paths obtained. Using residue conservation as inferred from the multiple sequence alignment as well as distance constraints described by the conformational structures, we predicted a set of intermediate residues that physically couple subtle changes from the nucleotide binding site to large lever arm motions. The identified paths are conserved among pre-stroke structures from different species and across two myosin classes. Furthermore, analysis of all post-rigor and rigor conformations produced paths aligning remarkably well in the relay helix, but showing significant variation at the beginning of the paths. The similarity of paths in all pre-stroke structures examined, 4 ) reflects the robustness of our method. In particular, remarkable conservation was observed between paths in the pre-stroke structure 1VOM and paths in the pre-stroke structure 1QVI of scallop myosin, with very minor differences attributed to subtle structural differences. These sequences exhibit ~ 45% identity within the motor domain. In contrast, path correspondence is sometimes markedly lower for different conformations of the same protein: the 1VOM path has no similarity to the 1MMA path, and while the paths from 1QVI and 1KK7 share similarity, the 1QVI paths are closer to the 1VOM paths than to the 1KK7 paths. Paths differences in the post-rigor, 4 ), and rigor structures may demonstrate the existence of alternate allosteric communication paths during other states in the catalytic cycle. The unusual paths in 1MMA may lack biological significance, since this ADP-bound structures represents a state that is not present in the physiologically relevant catalytic cycle. For completeness we also analyzed the paths for 1B7T another ADP-bound structures not present in the physiologically relevant catalytic cycle and observed a path that is both different from the 1MMA path as well as the “usual” path. A number of computational methods, including normal mode analysis, 11, 25, 26 energy minimization algorithms, 27 and molecular dynamics simulations, 28 have been used to identify putative coupling mechanisms between the ATP binding site and the lever arm. Stastical coupling analysis, 8, 29 a method based on sequence information, has also been used to identify coupling residues of several other proteins. Recently, Yu et al. implemented an approach that combines molecular dynamics, normal mode analysis, hinge analysis, and SCA to propose critical residues for coupling. 30, 31 Based on normal mode analysis, Zheng et al identified hinge residues which correspond to high correlation. 25 They found important residues in the ATP binding site, the actin binding site, the converter, the relay helix, and the SH1 helix. They further advanced the method by incorporating evolution information as perturbation strengths and obtained a list of hotspot residues for myosin. 26 The SCA method developed by Ranganathan and coworkers provides coevolution analysis and was used to identify allosteric coupling residues. 8, 29 Mechanochemical studies by Cui and co-workers integrated the SCA method with normal mode analysis to find hinge residues, and further incorporated the interaction analysis using molecular dynamics simulation to explore the key residues of the allosteric network for myosin. 31 Our approach, which aimed to identify physically interacting residues forming paths from the ATP binding site to the lever arm, provides a different venue for interpreting allosteric interactions. The method is remarkably simple and shows that in some cases the conserved mechanism driven by allostery can be explained by a sequence of conserved residues, and gives results consistent with experimental studies as well as other computational studies such as those discussed above. Signal Propagation from Catalytic Site to Lever Arm According to the swinging crossbridge mechanism, 32 allosteric communication initiates from the ATP binding site of the catalytic domain and travels to the lever arm on the catalytic domain surface during the lever arm cocking step in the myosin cycle. However, in order to avoid the bias inherent in searching for paths between only these two sites, we ranked all putative paths of allosteric communication between the ATP catalytic site and residues at the catalytic domain surface for 1VOM. We proceeded to examine whether high scoring paths disproportionately terminate at the lever arm. Reasoning that potentially interesting paths would travel through conserved residues, we defined a path efficiency metric, which reflects “conservation per angstrom traveled”. Path efficiency scores were computed for the best path generated between the ATP catalytic site and each surface residue. We grouped surface residues using K-means clustering and discovered that surface residues with the best PE values demonstrate scattered distribution except for a collection of residues corresponding to the beginning of the lever arm. This collection of residues group to the same cluster in a majority of clustering runs. This result substantiates our hypothesis that signals appear to propagate from the catalytic site preferentially to the lever arm. Using PE as a measure, we were then able to rationally select a residue from the beginning of the lever arm for subsequent calculations. While a disproportionate number of paths with highest PE score ended at the “lever arm cluster”, we note that the path with the highest PE score in 1VOM ends in A286, a residue distant from the beginning of the lever arm and not known to have any functional importance. When we applied a similar analysis to the scallop pre-stroke structure, we found that the residue corresponding to A286 is buried and therefore cannot serve as a path’s final residue. This indicates, not surprisingly, that not all end points of paths with high PE scores have functional significance, and that a path needs to be conserved across species or structures to be valid. Together, these results suggest that the combination of PE ratio calculation and cluster analysis may be useful in predicting end points for long-range allosteric pathways. The pre-stroke pathway we observe is consistent with previous descriptions of the recovery stroke. 10, 16, 27, 32 Myosin can be modeled as four subdomains that are linked by three joints. According to this model, rigid-body motion of the subdomains and concerted changes in the single-stranded joints are required to proceed from one conformation to another in the cycle. 33 Joints are crucial components because they facilitate information flow between distant, rigid regions of the protein. A major structural difference observed across different conformational states is the relative positioning of the converter domain with respect to the relay helix, which can be modeled as a joint. 6 A piston-like motion of the relay helix is thought to be responsible for directing converter and hence lever arm motion. 34 The repositioning of the relay helix is in turn thought to result from the movement of switch II. 19 Switch II plays a major role in sensing the state of the nucleotide γ-phosphate. 16, 35, 36 Crystal structures using ATP analogs indicate that the presence of ADP and phosphate in the catalytic site causes switch II to gravitate towards the hydrolyzed phosphate, which in turn triggers movement of the relay helix and converter and results in the lever arm transition to the cocked, “upstroke” position. The common pathways we observe in the pre-stroke structures based solely on evolutionary data and distance constraints agree with the above mechanistic studies. This agreement demonstrates the robustness of our method, and motivates the detailed examination of the path residues found for pre-stroke, post-rigor, and rigor conformations, as discussed below. Path conservation and divergence The fundamental similarity of the pre-stroke pathways across three species and two myosin classes is striking and its highly conserved nature may reflect a single, well-defined state within the catalytic cycle. A similar overall path is also observed in the majority of post-rigor structures. In particular, despite differences in the P-loop and/or switch I, these paths use a nearly identical sequence of residues in the relay helix to reach the beginning of the lever arm. This similarity suggests that a common mechanism of allosteric communication may operate in both the post-rigor and pre-stroke states, and is consistent with the interpretation that the transition state analogs trap myosin in a state that is poised at the beginning of the recovery stroke. The greater diversity in post-rigor paths likely stem from the variety of nucleotide states and switch I and II positions that are compatible with the overall post-rigor conformation. The nucleotide-free structures 1FMV and 1KK7 generate paths that are similar to the pre-stroke paths and that are also similar to the ATP-analog bound post-rigor structures. Although we classify the scallop nucleotide-free structure 1KK7 as “post-rigor” based on its mostly open 50 kDa cleft, it has been described as “near-rigor” in the literature. 18 Similarly, nucleotide-free Dictyostelium myosin II has been crystallized in both a rigor-like and post-rigor conformations. These observations suggest that in the absence of actin and nucleotide, the rigor and post-rigor conformations are energetically comparable for Dictyostelium myosin II. The P-loop, switch I, and switch II In the pre-stroke paths, the γ-phosphate analog is coupled to switch II directly through a hydrogen bond to residue G457, or indirectly through the P-loop residue S181. The direct phosphate-switch II interaction has been noted previously, and has been hypothesized to play a key role in establishing the structural transformations that lead to the recovery stroke. 10 The initial portions of the post-rigor paths show greater diversity, 4 ). All paths begin in the P-loop at residue K185, before connecting to switch II via the P-loop residues G179, E180, S181 or G182. In the pre-stroke conformation, S181 offers a connection from the γ-phosphate to switch II through a main-chain hydrogen bond, but only because switch II has moved close to the ATP binding site. A gap between the P-loop and switch II opens in the post-rigor structures, necessitating a more circuitous route through K185 and G179/E180 before continuing on to switch II and the relay helix. The P-loop forms a key part of the ATP binding site, and is very highly conserved among myosins and is structurally conserved among diverse NTPases, including G proteins, kinesin, and ATP synthase. 37, 38, 39 Despite its obviously central role in catalysis, the P-loop has been subject to relatively little scrutiny in myosin, probably because its conformation is static in nucleotide-bound structures. Our pathway calculations highlight how the P-loop mediates indirect contacts between the nucleotide and switch II, and may thus play a more active role in myosin allostery than is generally appreciated. Paths computed for the nucleotide-free, rigor-like structures include long digressions through either the P-loop or switch I, before converging to the common pathway through the relay helix. Examination of both of these structures shows a large gap between residues 181–185 and the closest residue in switch II, explaining the insertion of switch I residues or the addition of several P-loop residues. This structural rearrangement is related to the rearrangements in the nucleotide binding pocket. 24 In the rigor-like myosin V structure, residue S181 hydrogen bonds to residue N233 in switch I. Nucleotide binding necessitates a structural rearrangement wherein this interaction is exchanged for hydrogen bonds to the γ-phosphate. One possible interpretation of our result is that ATP binding restores direct communication between the P loop and switch II, which could be functionally related to the opening of the 50 kDa cleft and the eventual detachment from actin. Although the beginning residues of the rigor-like paths are divergent, strong path conservation is again observed in the relay helix. This observation supports the centrality of the relay helix in mediating communication between the lever arm and ATPase site. Known Pre-stroke Pathway Mutants Four pathway residues are known to result in functional defects when mutated. The mutant F458A, present in all pre stroke structure with the exception of 1QVI, shows a nearly complete loss of actin-activated ATPase activity. 40 F482 is present in every one of our pre-stroke paths. The mutation F482A dramatically slows ATP hydrolysis even though the residue is distant from the active site. 41 F487 is present in all but one of the pre-stroke paths and the mutation F487A increases actin affinity in the presence of ATP, thus disrupting the normal release from the actin filament in the post-rigor state. 42 While I499 is present on very few of our paths, all of our paths go through either E497 or G498. The distance between these paths residues and I499 in our twelve structures that do not go through I499 ranges from 1.3Å to 3.4Å. The F499A mutant hydrolyzes ATP with close to normal kinetic parameters, but does not produce a functional lever arm swing. 43 These experimental results underscore the importance of at least some of the pre-stroke path residues in mediating allosteric communication. Based on the agreement between our work and previous experimental results, we speculate that other highly represented path residues, for instance S181, K185, N475 and Q479, are excellent candidates for further mechanistic studies. Other relevant known mutuations Several known mutations to residues in the SH1 helix alter myosin catalytic activity, and in particular the coupling between the lever arm, ATP binding site, and actin binding interface. These residues often contact pathway residues. For instance, the Dictyostelium myosin II mutation F692A uncouples ATPase activity from the lever arm swing. 43 F692 hydrogen-bonds to the side chain of pathway residue Y494, and is in close proximity to the pathway residue I499. The mutations G680V, G680A and G680F result in an abolishment of function due to slowed phosphate release and a structural alterations in the actomyosin interface. 44, 45 G680 contacts F482, a highly conserved pathway residue, which is itself sensitive to mutation. Remarkably, the combined mutations G680F, F482A almost completely restores function, suggesting that contacts between the relay and SH1 helices are essential for mediating long-range allostery. 41 Similarly, a disulfide bond introduced using the double mutant I499C and R738C has no effect on catalytic parameters, again indicating that this interface is conserved during the pre- to post-stroke structural transition. 46 Taken together, mutational studies suggest that contacts between pathway residues and the SH1 helix are functionally critical, thus further underscoring the functional validity of the pathway identification. The existence of these SH1 helix mutations, which lie near but not on our identified pathway, also demonstrates that the algorithm used here does not capture the full complexity of myosin structural dynamics, but rather focuses on identifying residues critical for the allosteric communication. Conclusion Allosteric communication pathways are often invoked when discussing the biological significance of protein structures. These pathways are usually determined using personal structural intuition, with reference to the available biochemical and functional data. Our method provides a simple, computationally efficient means of predicting a set of residues using evolutionary constraints and only one three-dimensional structure. We provide a refined, downloadable application at and source code to share the tool with a wider community. Methods Multiple Sequence Alignment Two sources were used for the accumulation of a comprehensive set of protein sequences for myosin II motor domain. We used a large set of myosin sequences previously reported in a multiple sequence alignment format. This set of sequences was enriched with additional published and aligned myosin sequences. 47 We extracted corresponding myosin sequences from other databases including NCBI, GenDB, TIGR, and DOE-JGR. The multiple sequence alignment of the 158 identified sequences was constructed using ClustalW, using the PAM250 substitution matrix. We made sure to include all reference sequences that correspond to myosin conformations that participate in our subsequent analysis in the MSA. Conservation Weights Our goal was to assign a conservation weight to each column of the multiple sequence alignment with the following properties: all weights are positive and small weights reflect high conservation. We used the sum of pairs method, where substitution scores for each residue pair in the column are aggregated to assign a raw conservation weight using three different conservation matrices as described below. To avoid zero weights we initialized all weights to 0.001 and computed weights using 10 −2 precision to produce optimal paths. For near-optimal paths we relaxed the precision to 10 −1 while using an initialization of 0.01. We chose three matrices for the analysis. The simplest matrix is the identity matrix with a substitution score of one for a pair of matching amino acids and zero otherwise. The Miyata matrix reflects the idea that the frequency of amino acid substitutions decreases linearly with increase of physical-chemical differences between the amino acid pair. 48 The pairwise scores between amino acids using the Miyata matrix reflect differences in both physical attribute and chemical attribute between the pair. The Wei-Altman-Chang matrix examines physical-chemical and structural differences between environments of amino acid pairs to assign a score to the substitution. 49 Graph Network To find the most probable set of residues for allosteric communication, the residues in a protein structure were represented by a directed, weighted graph. Each vertex in the graph represents a residue, and each weighted edge represents potential interaction between a residue pair. We draw an edge between residues u and v if the distance between these residues in the structure falls below a threshold value chosen to reflect the maximum acceptable distance for a potential interaction. In our graph, a bi-directional edge was added between any two residues whose minimal contact distance was below 3.3 Å. Since we expect myosin allosteric communication to propagate through a network of hydrogen bonds and Van der Waals interactions, a distance constraint slightly more generous than the hydrogen bond length was selected. We also increased the distance to 3.4 Å and 3.5 Å and observed no significant differences. Directed edge weights are derived from conservation of the destination residue. The weight of edge is defined to be the conservation weight of residue v, given that the likelihood of traveling from u to v should be highly correlated to the conservation of v under our model. The weight associated with traversing an edge from u to v is hence different from the weight associated with traversing the same edge from v to u. Using such a framework, the problem of finding the most conserved set of residues is simplified to finding the least weight path in the graph network between a source and sink node. Dijkstra’s Algorithm The weight associated with a path from v i to v f is computed by summing the weights of edges connecting the path from v i to v f. To find the least weight path from v i to v f, we used Dijkstra’s algorithm. Dijkstra’s algorithm is an efficient algorithm that has been shown to find the path of least weight from a specified initial vertex to all other vertices in a graph provided that each edge is associated with a positive weight. 50 When given an initial vertex v i, Dijkstra’s algorithm will produce a shortest path from v i to all other reachable vertices in the graph. The set of shortest paths can be extracted from the graph in order of increasing path weight. Since the algorithm requires all weights to be positive, paths whose traversed nodes are characterized by high conservation will be preferentially extracted. Allosteric Communication from the Catalytic Site To apply Dijkstra’s algorithm to our problem, we need to define an initial and final position for the communication pathway within a protein structure. The initial position marks the source of allosteric communication, and is unequivocally represented by γ-phosphate in the catalytic site. It is understood that ATP hydrolysis energy is stored in β-γ-phosphoanhydride bond and therefore structural change must propagate from there. Depending on the nucleotide presence at the catalytic site, the initiation of the path was selected as either γ-phosphate analog, β-phosphate of ADP, or the equivalent of S181 in Dictyostelium myosin II. Although the basic mechanism and ATPase cycle of myosin strongly suggests that structural changes must propagate from the ATP binding site to the lever arm, we also searched for the most probable direction of allosteric communication without using our prior knowledge of function and mechanism. Residues in 1VOM were first classified as either “buried” or “surface” using NACCESS. 51 The relative surface accessibility for each amino acid is calculated by dividing the solvent accessible surface area by the maximal accessible surface area of the amino acid. A residue was labeled as surface and hence a candidate for a path end residue, if its RSA > 25 % and buried otherwise. We grouped residues using K-means clustering of spatial coordinates to make regional inferences from individual surface residues. K-means clustering was performed on all 730 defined PDB residues of 1VOM, using 3D coordinates of the Cα atom to represent each residue and Euclidian distance from a cluster center to group the residues. Residues in spatial proximity are grouped together in such as way that K or fewer nonempty residue clusters are produced. Our implementation of K-means clustering terminates when data assignments to clusters converge, and each residue is closest to the mean point of its current cluster than to the centroid of any other cluster. Three different values of K were explored. Since random initial cluster assignments can impact the final solution, we ran the algorithm three times for each value of K to acknowledge variability in results. We defined an efficiency metric as PE = PD/PW, where PD represents the Cartesian distance between the initial and final positions and PW represents the net path weight. In the context of a path, PE measures the conservation per angstrom traveled, thus enabling paths of different lengths to compete fairly in terms of path conservation. Two factors contribute to the path weight: number of residues used and conservation of those residues. We ordered the surface residues in decreasing efficiency, limiting our analysis to residues whose paths encompass a distance of > 20 Å. This distance minima criterion eliminates paths that never leave the ATP binding site. Using earlier clustering assignments, we analyzed endpoints of the best scoring paths and looked for well-represented clusters among them. T742 of Dictyostelium myosin II was identified to have the highest PE among residues in the largest cluster, the cluster containing lever arm residues. The final position for all paths the path was selected to be the residue that corresponds to T742 in Dictyostelium myosin II, in our multiple sequence alignment. We reconstructed missing side chains for all structures with Swiss-Pdb Viewer 12. Shortest Path Calculations Each path calculation was contingent upon the definition of an initial and final position for the structure being analyzed. For each conformation that we examined, we were able to locate solved structures from two myosin classes and at least two different species. For the pre-stroke conformation, structures were selected from Myosin I and II. For the post-rigor and rigor conformation, structures were selected from Myosin II and V. For all three conformations, we examined structures from at least two of the following: Dictyostelium, scallop, and chicken. In particular, we focused on pre-stroke and post-rigor structures from Dictyostelium and scallop myosin II for cross-species comparison. 