Role of Phosphatidylinositolbisphosphate Organization in Membrane Transport by the Unc104 Kinesin Motor You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Role of Phosphatidylinositolbisphosphate Organization in Membrane Transport by the Unc104 Kinesin Motor Cell. 2002 May 3; 109: 347–358. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Cell Author Manuscript HHS Public Access Role of Phosphatidylinositolbisphosphate Organization in Membrane Transport by the Unc104 Kinesin Motor Dieter R. Klopfenstein, Michio Tomishige,, and Ronald D. Vale Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials Fig S1 Legend. NIHMS184989-supplement-Fig_S1_Legend.pdf GUID: 88C05C4F-5297-4ED9-9280-2AE169567FC1 s1. NIHMS184989-supplement-s1.jpg GUID: 5CDDD24A-AF46-435A-AA07-A3C842D0E229 Summary Unc104 kinesin transports membrane vesicles along microtubules in lower and higher eukaryotes. Using an in vitro motility assay, we show that Unc104 uses a lipid binding pleckstrin homology domain to dock onto membrane cargo. Through its PH domain, Unc104 can transport phosphatidylinositolbisphosphate P 2 )-containing liposomes with similar properties to native vesicles. Interestingly, liposome movement by monomeric Unc104 motors shows a very steep dependence on PtdInsP 2 concentration, even though liposome binding is noncooperative. This switch-like transition for movement can be shifted to lower PtdInsP 2 concentrations by the addition of cholesterol/sphingomyelin or GM1 ganglioside/cholera toxin, conditions that produce raft-like behavior of Unc104 bound to lipid bilayers. These studies suggest that clustering of Unc104 in PtdInsP 2 -containing rafts provides a trigger for membrane transport. Introduction Long-range transport of membranes in higher eukaryotic cells occur along a microtubule network that is usually organized as a radial array emanating from the centrosome. A large multisubunit motor, cytoplasmic dynein, is primarily responsible for transport toward the microtubule minus end anchored at the centrosome, whereas plus-end-directed transport is driven by many motors belonging to the kinesin superfamily. Mammals contain ~45 kinesin genes, 38 of which are expressed in brain tissue, and many of these motors are likely to be involved in transporting distinct cargoes in axons and dendrites. Understanding how specific kinesins become linked to particular cargoes and deciphering the regulatory mechanisms for membrane transport remain as major unsolved research questions. Kinesin motor proteins contain two major functional domains: a “motor domain,” which powers motion along the microtubule and is conserved throughout the kinesin superfamily, and a “tail domain,” which recognizes a specific cargo and has a sequence that is unique to a particular kinesin class. Recently, several studies have identified vesicle-associated “receptor” proteins that bind to kinesin tail domains or tail-associated subunits. However, the role of membrane lipids in motor-driven transport has received less attention. A potential role for lipids in minus-end-directed membrane transport was proposed based upon findings showing that cytoplasmic dynein binds membranes via nonerythroid spectrin, which in turn binds phosphatidylinositolbisphosphate P 2 ) lipids through a pleckstrin homology domain. Candidate lipid binding PH domains also have been identified by sequence in the tail regions of the myosin-X and the kinesin Unc104/KIF1A, although the functions of these domains have not been explored. Moreover, PtdInsP 2, the lipid target of many PH domains, has been implicated in membrane-trafficking events. These findings raise the possibility that cargo packaging into vesicles/membrane tubules and the subsequent recruitment of motor proteins could potentially involve phosphoinositides. To explore the roles of lipids in motor-driven transport, we investigated the mechanism of membrane movement driven by Unc104/KIF1A kinesin. Unc104/KIF1A kinesin was originally discovered as the gene underlying a paralyzed mutant in worms and later cloned from mouse. In worms and mice, this kinesin plays a similar role in transporting synaptic vesicle precursors from the cell body to the nerve terminal. The direct visualization of Unc104-GFP in living worms reveals fast transport of fluorescent punctae from the cell body into the axon. Biochemical analysis further reveals that KIF1A binds to a synaptic vesicle precursor compartment and not to other axonally transported vesicles. Unc104/KIF1A relatives also are found in fungi and Dictyostelium, and a disruption of the Dictyostelium gene causes defects in vesicle transport. These results indicate that the involvement of Unc104/KIF1A motors in vesicle trafficking is ancient and precedes metazoan evolution. Unc104/KIF1A kinesins have structural and motility properties that set them apart from other kinesins. Adjacent to the N-terminal motor domain lies a 100 amino acid fork head homology-associated domain that has been shown in other proteins to bind phosphothreonine residues. Following the FHA domain lies a long region of low sequence conservation and then a canonical PH domain. Despite containing regions of predicted coiled-coil sequence near the motor domain, mouse KIF1A and Caenorhabditis elegans Unc104 purify as monomeric species, in contrast to most other kinesin motors which are dimers. However, Dictyostelium Unc104 has a ~600 aa coiled-coil extension beyond the PH domain that causes this motor to dimerize. Unc104 is one of the fastest known kinesin motors, eliciting velocities of 1.2–2.5 μm/s, depending upon the organism source. While the biophysical and structural properties of mouse KIF1A and C. elegans Unc104 motor domains have been studied extensively, the mechanism of vesicle transport by these kinesins has not been investigated. In this study, we have used an in vitro motility assay to investigate how Unc104 transports membrane cargo. We report that the PH domain of this motor is necessary and sufficient for binding to and transporting native vesicles and PtdInsP 2 -containing liposomes. We also demonstrate that liposome motility is highly cooperative with respect to the PtdInsP 2 content and is enhanced by agents that promote organization of lipids into raft-like domains. We propose that lipid raft formation may act as a regulatory mechanism for activating vesicle transport by monomeric Unc104 motors. Results DdUnc104 Transports PtdInsP 2 -Containing Liposomes along Microtubules In Vitro We have shown previously that the Dictyostelium ortholog of Unc104 transports Dictyostelium vesicles in vivo and in vitro. A candidate membrane binding domain of DdUnc104 is the pleckstrin homology domain located in the C-terminal half of the protein. PH domains bind to acidic phospholipids, especially to phosphatidylinositolphosphates. We therefore tested whether DdUnc104 is capable of transporting artificial liposomes containing PtdInsP n. When combined with a microtubule-purified motor fraction from Dictyostelium, liposomes containing 10 mol% PtdInsP 2 moved predominantly to the microtubule plus end at a similar frequency to that observed for isolated Dictyostelium vesicles. This plus-end-directed motion is largely generated by the DdUnc104 motor, since the frequencies of vesicle and liposome movement were reduced by >80% when the motor fraction was prepared from a DdUnc104 null cell line. The properties of DdUnc104-mediated PtdInsP 2 liposome transport were similar to those of native Dictyostelium vesicles. The two cargoes exhibited similar processivity as well as movement velocity. Figure 1 The PH DdUnc104 Domain Binds to Membranes and Enables DdUnc104 to Transport Native Vesicles and Artificial Liposomes In Vitro We also tested the lipid specificity of DdUnc104 using the in vitro liposome transport assay. PtdInsP 2 -containing liposomes were transported most efficiently. PtdInsP-containing liposomes moved less frequently with shorter run lengths compared to PtdInsP 2 and PtdInsP liposomes. These results also indicate that the position of a single phosphate moiety affects motor-driven transport. A crude brain lipid extract, a mixture of 10% PtdInsP n acidic phospholipids and 40%–50% phosphatidylserine, also showed a robust activity similar to PtdInsP 2 liposomes but with somewhat reduced processivity. With liposome compositions that supported motility, virtually all obvious microtubule binding events resulted in transport and static binding was rarely observed. In contrast to DdUnc104, dynein-based movement of PtdInsP 2 liposomes toward the microtubule minus end was only slightly enhanced over PC liposomes and was much less pronounced compared to DdUnc104-generated motion.. Dictyostelium also has a second plus-end-directed motor that moves vesicles in extracts from DdUnc104-KO cells. This other plus-end-directed vesicle transport motor exhibited low levels of liposome transport and displayed only a slight preference for PtdInsP 2 over PC liposomes. Thus, among the microtubule-based vesicle motors in Dictyostelium extracts, DdUnc104 is the most active in transporting liposomes and displays the strongest preference for PtdInsP 2. We also examined whether DdUnc104 utilizes phosphoinositides in its mechanism for transporting native vesicles. Figure 1B shows that transport of native vesicles and PtdInsP 2 liposomes were both reduced by ~85% by the addition of soluble inositol trisphosphate. Neomycin, an agent that binds to negatively charged lipid head groups, also inhibited the movement of native vesicles and PtdInsP 2 liposomes. These effects are specific for the DdUnc104 motor, since dynein-mediated transport of native vesicles was not inhibited by either IP 3 or neomycin, which contrasts finding with squid dynein. These agents, however, inhibited dynein-mediated liposome transport. In summary, these results suggest that DdUnc104 mediates transport of native vesicles, at least in part, by binding to phosphoinositide-containing lipids. Purified PH DdUnc104 Binds Native Vesicles and PtdInsP 2 -Containing Liposomes Given the lipid specificity for liposome transport, DdUnc104’s PH domain was a likely candidate region for mediating membrane attachment. To test this directly, we bacterially expressed and purified a PH DdUnc104 -GFP-His 6 fusion protein and assayed binding by sucrose gradient floatation. PH DdUnc104 bound to native Dictyostelium vesicles in the top membrane fraction, but GFP, as a control protein, did not. In the absence of vesicles, both PH DdUnc104 and GFP were recovered from the bottom fraction only. These results indicate that PH DdUnc104 binds in a specific manner to native vesicles. PH DdUnc104 also bound to 10 mol% PtdInsP 2, protein-free liposomes but not to liposomes composed entirely of PC. In a panel of different lipids tested, PH DdUnc104 bound with greatest affinity to PtdInsP 2, followed by PtdInsP, PtdInsP 3, phosphatidic acid, and PtdIns. PH DdUnc104 exhibited little binding to other phosphatidyl derivatives, such as phosphatidyl serine, phosphatidyl ethanolamine, and phosphatidyl glycerol. Therefore, PH DdUnc104 recognizes distinct inositol phosphate conformations, and this binding specificity mirrors that observed for the native DdUnc104 motor in the liposome transport assay. We also tested whether a bacterially expressed GST-PH DdUnc104 could compete with DdUnc104 for binding and transport of native vesicles and liposomes. GST-PH DdUnc104 reduced DdUnc104-mediated transport of both native vesicle and PtdInsP 2 liposomes by 60%. GST alone at the same concentration had little inhibitory effect on plus-end-directed movement, and neither GST nor GST-PH DdUnc104 affected dynein-based minus-end-directed movements. The finding that GST-PH DdUnc104 specifically competes with the native motor suggests that DdUnc104 utilizes its PH domain to transport membrane cargo. The PH Domain Is Necessary and Sufficient for Vesicle and Liposome Movement In order to further test the role of the PH domain through mutational analysis, we sought to reconstitute membrane transport using a recombinant DdUnc104. However, expression of the full-length DdUnc104 in Dictyostelium resulted in very poor yields. Instead, we attempted to reconstitute transport using a bacterially expressable “minimotor” that contains a motor domain and the minimal region necessary for cargo attachment. However, the Dictyostelium Unc104 motor domain could not be expressed in Escherichia coli due to insolubility. We therefore created a minimotor consisting of the motor and FHA domains from C. elegans Unc104, which expresses well in bacteria, and the PH domain from DdUnc104. This construct, termed CeU653-PH DdUnc104, lacks the long stalk region that exhibits low amino acid sequence similarity among the Unc104 motors from Dictyostelium to mouse. This monomeric CeU653-PH DdUnc104 minimotor stimulated robust movement of both native Dictyostelium vesicles and PtdInsP 2 liposomes at similar frequencies to those produced by the native DdUnc104 motor from the microtubule-purified fraction. When membrane movements generated by CeU653-PH DdUnc104 were analyzed using kymographs, long run lengths with only occasional pauses were observed. The velocities of transport for CeU653-PH DdUnc104 -mediated vesicles and liposomes were 1.6 μm/s and 1.5 μm/s, respectively, which is similar to the rates of microtubule gliding activity and in vivo vesicle transport produced by the C. elegans Unc104 motor. Importantly, membrane transport by the minimotor required the PH domain, since CeU653 protein lacking the PH domain only rarely moved membranous cargo. CeU653-PH DdUnc104 exhibited the same selectivity for PtdInsP 2 liposomes as described for the native motor. Figure 2 The PH DdUnc104, Joined onto a Kinesin Motor Domain, Elicits Vesicle and Liposome Transport In Vitro Table 1 Properties of Native Vesicle and Liposome Transport by Native DdUnc104 and Bacterially Expressed Minimotors While the above experiments suggest that PH is important for cargo interaction, the CeU653-PH DdUnc104 protein also contained a fork head homology domain next to the motor domain. To ascertain if the FHA domain played a role in membrane attachment, we created a minimotor construct that lacked the FHA domain but contained the minimal motor domain necessary for eliciting maximal movement velocity followed by the PH DdUnc104 domain. CeU446-PH DdUnc104 transported Dictyostelium vesicles and liposomes at the same rate and frequency as CeU653-PH DdUnc104 ; movements were extremely processive and very rarely did the membranes release before reaching the microtubule plus end. The above experiments, while strongly arguing that the PH domain is involved in membrane transport, do not exclude the possibility that a region in the Unc104 motor domain also is needed for cargo attachment. Therefore, we fused the PH domain to the motor-stalk domains of the minus-end-directed kinesin motor Ncd, which is involved in mitotic spindle function but not in vesicle transport. The PH DdUnc104 -Ncd protein moved native vesicles and liposomes along microtubules toward their minus end at speeds of 0.15 μm/s, which is consistent with the previously observed direction and rates of Ncd motor activity. In the absence of a PH domain, Ncd did not move membranes. These results indicate that the PH domain is sufficient for mediating membrane transport in an in vitro assay. A Role for Membrane Proteins in DdUnc104-Mediated Vesicle Transport While PtdInsP 2 lipids suffice in supporting binding of the PH DdUnc104 domain and membrane transport by the intact motor, membrane proteins in native vesicles also may be involved in the transport mechanism, and several PH domains have been shown to bind to specific protein partners. In order to dissect the roles of lipids and membrane proteins, we created several PH DdUnc104 mutants and identified one that is defective in PtdInsP 2 binding. When this mutant PH domain was fused onto CeU653, liposome transport was decreased by ~90%. When tested on native vesicles, on the other hand, the KKK1531-3EEE mutant was still capable of eliciting transport, albeit at ~50% of the level of the wild-type PH domain. This residual activity, which also argues that the triple lysine mutant is not misfolded, suggested that the mutant PH domain might elicit vesicle motility by binding to either membrane proteins or lipids other than PtdInsP 2. To examine this question, we proteolyzed surface-exposed membrane proteins with trypsin. Consistent with previous results for native DdUnc104, trypsinized vesicles showed a ~40% reduction in motility with wild-type PH DdUnc104, although transport velocity was not significantly changed. In contrast, the motility of trypsinized vesicles was reduced close to background levels with the KKK1531-3EEE mutant, presumably because of the lack of protein docking sites and its inability to bind lipids. Taken together, these results suggest DdUnc104-mediated transport of native vesicles involves not only lipid binding but also proteins on the vesicle membrane. Table 2 Properties of Native Vesicle, Trypsinized Native Vesicles, and Liposome Transport by Bacterially Expressed Minimotors Containing Various PH Domains As a second means of investigating the roles of lipids and proteins in the microtubule-based transport of native vesicles, we created Unc104 minimotors bearing PH domains from other proteins. We chose the PH domain of phospholipase C-δ1, which, like PH DdUnc104, binds PtdInsP 2 but presumably has distinct protein binding partners, and the PH domain of the dual adaptor for phosphotyrosine and 3-phosphoinositides-1, which has a distinct lipid specificity for PtdInsP 3. As expected from their lipid specificities, CeU653-PH PLCδ1 transported PtdInsP 2 liposomes efficiently, whereas CeU653-PH DAPPI elicited very few movements that were of low velocity. In contrast, PtdInsP 3 liposomes were efficiently transported at maximal velocity by CeU653-PH DAPPI. Neither of these minimotors moved PC liposomes efficiently. Interestingly, native vesicles were transported at similar frequencies and processivity by CeU653-PH PLCδ1 and CeU653-PH DAPPI compared with CeU653-PH DdUnc104. However, the velocities of movement were significantly lower for these foreign PH domains, suggesting that protein interactions were somehow important for reconstituting normal cargo transport. Importantly, trypsinization did not affect transport by either CeU653-PH PLCδ1 or PH DAPPI. This result indicates that these foreign PH domains mediate transport of native vesicle solely through lipid interactions and that trypsin diminishes PH DdUnc104 -mediated transport by eliminating proteins that bind specifically to this PH domain. Cooperativity of PtdInsP 2 Lipids in Transport In order to better understand the requirements of PtdInsP 2 for Unc104-mediated membrane transport, we measured how the concentration of PtdInsP 2 influences the liposome binding and transport by CeU446-PH DdUnc104. With the motor concentration held constant and the PtdInsP 2 concentration varied between 0–10 mol%, the amount of liposome bound CeU446-PH DdUnc104 increased in a hyperbolic manner that is typical for a simple binding interaction with no apparent cooperativity. In contrast, liposome transport was infrequently or not observed between 0 and 6 mol% PtdInsP 2, and then increased dramatically between 7 and 9 mol%. This sharp transition with increasing PtdInsP 2 concentration indicates that liposome transport, but not motor binding, is a highly cooperative phenomenon. Once transport was observed, the velocity was not substantially affected by increasing PtdInsP 2 concentration. Figure 3 Effects of PtdInsP 2 Concentration and Lipid Clustering Agents on Unc104-Mediated Liposome Transport One potential explanation for the cooperativity is that a cluster of PtdInsP 2 with bound Unc104 motors is needed to elicit liposome transport. To investigate this idea, we tested whether agents that might facilitate the clustering of PtdInsP 2 affect liposome transport. Previous studies have shown that cholesterol and sphingomyelin enhance the formation of membrane subdomains called “rafts”. Cellular cholesterol levels can be relatively high and vary among membranes. When cholesterol and sphingomyelin were incorporated into liposomes with varying PtdInsP 2 concentrations, the binding of CeU446-PH DdUnc104 to membranes was not altered ; however, a dramatic change in the PtdInsP 2 dependency of liposome movement was observed. In the presence of cholesterol/sphingomyelin, transport frequencies increased sharply with increasing PtdInsP 2 concentrations, but this transition occurred at a 3 mol% lower PtdInsP 2 concentrations compared to cholesterol/sphingomyelin-free liposomes. Reducing the cholesterol concentration to 20 mol% also enhanced motility substantially at a fixed PtdInsP 2 concentration of 5 mol%, although the effect was reduced by 65%. Unc104 motor fused to the PH domain of PLCδ1 also displayed a sharp transition for movement that was shifted to lower PtdInsP 2 concentration by cholesterol/sphingomyelin. If clustering of PtdInsP 2 by cholesterol/sphingomyelin-induced raft formation was responsible for facilitating transport, then lipid clustering achieved by other means might also produce similar effects. To test this notion, we prepared liposomes containing GM1, a lipid ganglioside that is recognized and clustered by binding of the pentameric B subunit of cholera toxin. Although GM1 is usually found only in the outer leaflet of biological membranes, we exploited the accessibility of GM1 in reconstituted liposomes in the in vitro motility assay. When CeU446-PH DdUnc104 was combined with liposomes consisting of 5 mol% PtdInsP 2 and 10 mol% GM1, the frequency of movement was unaltered compared with liposomes lacking GM1. However, addition of 2 μg/ml CTX increased movement frequencies 40-fold when GM1 was present but had no measurable effect in its absence. We also tested the effects of spermine, a small polyamine compound that clusters acidic phospholipids in model liposome membranes. Again, 2 mM spermine increased transport frequencies by 3-fold but had no effect when added to liposomes composed exclusively of PC alone. Neither spermine nor GM1/CTX affected the binding of CeU446-PH DdUnc104 to 5 mol% PtdInsP 2 -liposomes. Therefore, several diverse agents that have been reported to cluster lipids all increase transport frequencies without increasing the amount of motor bound to the membrane. Raft-like Behavior of Unc104 Motors Bound to Liposomes and Supported Lipid Bilayers Previous studies have demonstrated that cholesterol and sphingomyelin promote the formation of lipid sub-domains enriched in PtdInsP 2. Therefore, the enhanced Unc104-mediated liposome motility by cholesterol/sphingomyelin could be due to the partitioning of PtdInsP 2 bound motors into a lipid raft domain. Raft formation is most commonly tested by the partitioning of lipids/proteins into a cold 1% Triton X100-insoluble membrane fraction. In the presence of 5 mol% PtdInsP 2 without cholesterol/sphingomyelin, little CeU446-PH DdUnc104 was recovered from the 1% cold-Triton X100-resistant membrane fraction. Similarly, little motor was recovered from this fraction with 40 mol% cholesterol/20 mol% sphingomyelin without 5 mol% PtdInsP 2, as the motor fails to bind to such liposomes. However, for liposomes composed of 5 mol% PtdInsP 2 and 40 mol% cholesterol/20 mol% sphingomyelin, the minimotor was recovered in the detergent-resistant fraction. The recovery in this fraction was ~50% of that observed with intact, nondetergent-treated liposomes, indicating that a substantial fraction of Unc104 is bound to PtdInsP 2 -associated lipid rafts under these conditions. Figure 4 Raft-like Behavior of Unc104 Motor Bound to Liposomes or Supported Lipid Bilayers Although lipid raft subdomains have been reported to be small in size and highly dynamic, studies have demonstrated that proteins and lipids that partition into lipid rafts have lower two-dimensional diffusion coefficients compared to nonraft components. We therefore examined whether the lateral diffusion of Unc104 motors bound to PtdInsP 2 is affected by cholesterol/sphingomyelin or GM1/CTX. To investigate this question, we labeled CeUnc446-PH DdUnc104 with Cy3 dye, visualized single fluorescently labeled motors bound to planar lipid bilayers supported on the surface of a quartz slide using total internal reflection microscopy, and tracked their movements using an automated centroid-tracking program. Diffusion coefficients were determined from the initial slope of mean square displacement plots. CeUnc446-PH DdUnc104 molecules bound to 5 mol% PtdInsP 2 bilayers exhibited an average diffusion coefficient of 0.99 ± 0.04 μm 2 /s. However, the histogram revealed several populations—a minor, less mobile population centered around 0.1 μm 2 /s, a major population centered around 0.9 μm 2 /s, and a minor, highly mobile population with diffusion coefficients of 1.5–3.5 μm 2 /s. In the presence of cholesterol/sphingomyelin, the average diffusion coefficient decreased ~7-fold to 0.14 ± 0.01 μm 2 /s, and the values were contained within a narrow range that corresponded to the minor, poorly mobile fraction observed with 5 mol% PtdInsP 2 alone. Representative trajectories demonstrate the difference in the area roamed by a single motor in the absence or presence of cholesterol/sphingomyelin. The addition of CTX to bilayers consisting of 5 mol% PtdInsP 2 and 10 mol% GM1 also resulted in a substantial reduction in D from 0.85 ± 0.05 μm 2 /s to 0.22 ± 0.01 μm 2 /s. Multiple populations of diffusion coefficients were apparent again in 5 mol% PtdInsP 2 /10 mol% GM1 P 2 alone), but values were confined to a narrow range after CTX addition. A shift in D to lower values was also observed when the PtdInsP 2 content was increased from 5 to 10 mol%. Therefore, several conditions that enhanced the frequencies of Unc104-mediated liposome transport also restricted the lateral mobility of Unc104 bound to membrane surfaces. The Molecular Basis of the Cooperative Switch for Transport How could organized PtdInsP 2 lipid subdomains facilitate motor-driven transport? If Unc104 minimotors are nonprocessive, then a single molecule could not transport a liposome. However, a cluster of several Unc104 monomers could enable vesicle transport, as at least one motor would be contacting and producing movement along the microtubule during times when other motors are detached. An alternative possibility is that high local concentrations of Unc104 in a lipid raft facilitates motor dimerization, producing a processive Unc104 dimer that moves in a hand-over-hand manner as described for conventional kinesin. The latter idea is suggested by the finding of a predicted coiled-coil adjacent to the motor domain in the same location as the neck coiled-coil of conventional kinesin. We therefore created two hydrophobic to charge mutations in the “a” and “d” positions of the first complete heptad of the predicted coiled-coil following the motor domain to inhibit or partially inhibit with motor dimerization and/or the mechanism of the motor dimer. Unlike wild-type CeU653-PH DdUnc104, the mutant was unable to transport liposomes even at very high PtdInsP 2 concentrations, although it bound to the same extent as the wild-type motor. Addition of cholesterol/sphingolipid allowed movement with a steep dependence on PtdInsP 2 but at much higher concentrations than observed with the nonmutated motor. The transport velocity for the mutant was somewhat lower than wild-type. We also investigated the behavior of native DdUnc104, which, unlike mouse KIF1A and C. elegans Unc104, is a constitutive dimer due to a coiled-coil extension at its C terminus. Liposome movement by dimeric native DdUnc104 did not display a cooperative transition, and cholesterol/sphingomyelin addition had little effect on movement. Collectively, these results suggest that motor dimerization via coiled-coil formation may be facilitated when motor proteins become clustered in lipid raft domains. Figure 5 Models for the Regulation of Unc104-Mediated Membrane Transport by PtdInsP 2 Lipid Clustering Discussion In this study, we have dissected the mechanism of membrane transport by Unc104 kinesin, an important vesicle transport motor that is conserved from unicellular organisms to man. In contrast to other reported in vitro vesicle transport systems, Unc104-mediated transport can be reconstituted with purified vesicles and motor protein and no additional soluble components. In this study, we have shown that the native motor can be substituted by bacterially-expressed minimotors containing a functional motor domain and a minimal membrane cargo binding region, which has enabled a structure-function dissection of membrane attachment through mutational analysis. We have also demonstrated that highly efficient transport can be achieved by liposomes in place of native vesicles, which has allowed a mechanistic dissection of how lipids influence transport. The combination of these methodologies have allowed us to identify the PH domain as the cargo binding region of Unc104, to analyze the roles for lipids and vesicle proteins in transport, and to uncover a regulatory mechanism for activating transport based upon lipid organization. The PH Domain Is a Cargo Binding Region of Unc104 Unc104 motors are unusually large motors within the kinesin superfamily. The motor domain is contained within the first ~40 kDa, but the functions of the remainder of the polypeptide chain have not been elucidated. Here, we demonstrate that the fusion of PH DdUnc104 to the motor domain of either C. elegans Unc104 or Ncd is sufficient to reconstitute transport of native vesicles. These results indicate that neither the FHA domain nor the long region between the FHA and PH domains is necessary for membrane transport in this reconstituted assay, although these regions could play important regulatory roles in vivo. Our attempts to address these questions by rescuing DdUnc104 null cells with plasmids expressing this motor, however, have been unsuccessful to date. Through binding and motility assays, we also show that the PH DdUnc104 domain is capable of binding directly to phoshoinositide lipids with selectivity for PtdInsP 2. The importance of lipid binding in the transport mechanism is suggested by the findings that neomycin 2 ) and soluble IP 3 both inhibit native vesicle movement by DdUnc104. In further support of this idea, a mutant PH DdUnc104 domain with diminished PtdInsP 2 binding capability cannot fully reconstitute native vesicle transport, and conversely, minimotors containing a PtdInsP 2 binding PH domain from an-other protein can reconstitute vesicle transport. While lipid binding by the PH domain is important, vesicle-associated proteins also play a role in Unc104-mediated transport, since trypsinization of native vesicles decreases transport efficiency by half. Furthermore, a minimotor with a PH domain defective in PtdInsP 2 binding can still move native vesicles, albeit at 50% efficiency. The identities and functions of these proteins are unknown and will require further investigation. Lipid Clustering Enhances Transport Efficiency Using our defined liposome transport assay with monomeric motors, we unexpectedly discovered that liposome movement shows an “on-off” switch-like transition for transport as the concentration of PtdInsP 2 in the membrane is increased. Once transport occurs above the critical PtdInsP 2 threshold, movement takes place at near maximal velocity and processivity. The switch-like behavior in transport is not due to cooperative binding of motors, but rather appears to involve the creation of clustered microdomains of PtdInsP 2. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that three distinct methods of clustering lipids all enhance motility at low concentrations of PtdInsP 2. The steep transition point observed for motility could potentially reflect a “critical concentration” of PtdInsP 2 that allows the formation of raft microdomains. The notion that lipid organization underlies the switch-like behavior in transport is supported by our biochemical and microscopic studies of Unc104 motors bound to membranes. Raft formation, as defined by detergent resistance, was observed for Unc104 motors bound to membranes containing PtdInsP 2 and cholesterol/sphingolipid. Furthermore, single Unc104 motors bound to supported lipid bilayers show lower diffusion coefficients in the presence of cholesterol/sphingolipid, GM1/CTX, or high concentrations of PtdInsP 2, conditions that all enhance motility at lower PtdInsP 2 concentrations. Although less pronounced than the results described here, other studies have measured a 2-fold decrease in the diffusion coefficients of lipids in raft domains in supported bilayers and for raft-associated proteins in vivo. Vesicle Transport and the Biophysical Properties of Unc104 Motors Monomeric mouse KIF1A motors have been reported to be processive using single-molecule fluorescence assays. In such a case, a single motor should suffice for vesicle transport, and the type of cooperative transport that we observed would not be expected. We therefore believe that a single monomeric Unc104 from metazoan organisms is incapable of efficient, long-range transport. The processivity observed for mouse KIF1A resembles a biased diffusional motion, which results in a much lower velocity of motion than observed for native Unc104/KIF1A or longer motor constructs. Such biased diffusional motion has not been observed for vesicles either in our reconstituted assays or in axons of living worms and consequently may reflect an unusual behavior of the particular truncated KIF1A protein used in these studies. Two possible models could allow Unc104 motors to transport a vesicle processively: Unc104 monomer clustering and facilitated dimerization. While the detachment of a single motor from the microtubule would interrupt vesicle transport, clustering of several monomeric motors could enable continuous motion. Such a mechanism has been suggested for a closely related monomeric kinesin motor called KIF1D. The alternative possibility of motor dimerization is suggested by a predicted coiled-coil adjacent to the catalytic core in position corresponding to the neck coiled-coil of conventional kinesin. This putative Unc104 coiled-coil must be weak, since the motor behaves as a monomer under the concentrations in which hydrodynamic experiments are performed. However, when a high local concentration of motors is achieved in a lipid raft, the motor could dimerize and move by the hand-over-hand mechanism proposed for conventional kinesin. In favor of this latter idea, introducing two point mutations destabilizing the first heptad of the predicted coiled-coil dramatically decreases the ability of motor to transport PtdInsP 2 liposomes. Moreover, the dimeric DdUnc104 motor does not show the switch-like behavior for transporting liposomes with increasing PtdInsP 2 concentration. However, additional experiments will be required to convincingly distinguish between these two proposed models. Regulation of vesicle movement in cells has been generally thought to involve either turning the motor activity on or off or regulating motor interaction with a receptor. Our findings raise the possibility of yet another regulatory mechanism that involves the generation of a high local concentration of motors on a membrane surface through clustering into lipid subdomains or rafts. The steady-state cellular concentration of PtdInsP 2 is generally below 1 mol%, and these levels would not be expected to allow transport by Unc104 motors based upon our in vitro transport results. However, high local concentrations of PtdInsP 2 could be achieved by recruiting PtdIns-kinases and -phosphatases to membranes or proteins that can cluster PtdInsP 2. Activating transport by generating high local motor concentrations represents a possible model for regulating the various kinesin motors belonging to the largely monomeric KIF1 class. However, the slime mold Dictyostelium has added an extended coiled-coil domain to the C terminus of its Unc104, which suggests that it has evolved an alternative regulatory mechanism. Relevance to Other Systems Many other proteins involved in membrane motility have the potential to bind PtdInsP 2 lipids directly, including the actin-based motor myosin X, the proposed dynein receptor axonal spectrin, and N-WASP, which causes actin-based endosome rocketing. In addition, a much larger group of proteins involved in signaling, trafficking, and motility have been shown to partition in lipid rafts. In many of these instances, aggregation of proteins into lipid subdomains has been proposed to facilitate biochemical reactions by increasing local protein concentrations. Our results illustrate how raft formation can control a process if the process involves cooperative protein-protein interactions. Switch-like behavior, similar to the one described here, may occur for other proteins with cooperative activation mechanisms that tend to accumulate within lipid raft domains. Experimental Procedures Materials The following lipids were purchased from Avanti Polar lipids : egg PC, PtdInsP, PtdInsP 2, PS, PE, PG, and PA ; PtdInsP and PtdInsP 3 were from Matreya Inc. ; and brain lipid extract, sphingomyelin, and cholesterol were obtained from Sigma. Cholera toxin B subunit and spermine also were obtained from Sigma. Cell Culture and Affinity Purification of DdUnc104 Dictyostelium strain Ax-2 and Ax-2 DdUnc104 null cells were grown, and a microtubule affinity-purified motor fraction was prepared as previously described. The motor fraction was collected and either assayed for motility directly or frozen in liquid nitrogen. This fraction contains two predominant plus-end-directed vesicle transport kinesins, one of which is DdUnc104 and the second is a 160 kDa conventional kinesin. To determine the contribution of DdUnc104 in our assays, we prepared a microtubule affinity-purified motor fraction from DdUnc104 null cells by the same procedure. Vesicle and Liposome Preparation Dictyostelium vesicles were prepared as previously described. Liposomes were prepared by dissolving 10 μmol lipids in chloroform followed by evaporation in 13 × 100 mm borosilicate screw cap vials under a constant Argon stream. The lipid film was dried under high vacuum overnight and lipids were rehydrated by addition of LBN. Ten freeze/thawing cycles were performed, and the liposomes were extruded through a 100 nm pore polycarbonate filter using a miniextruder from Avanti Polar Lipids. Liposome diameter size was verified by light scattering using a Zetasizer 1000. Liposomes were stored in the dark at 4°C under an atmosphere of argon and used within a week. Bacterial Protein Expression and Purification The PH domain of DdUnc104 was cloned using standard PCR into a modified pET17b vector with a 3′ flanking GFP followed by a His 6 tag. Lysines and arginines in the PH DdUnc104 domain were mutated using QuickChange mutagenesis. Minimotors were cloned from a C. elegans Unc104 construct with the indicated PH domain-His 6 extension following the C-terminal Unc104 residue. PH DdUnc104 -Ncd was prepared by cloning the PH DdUnc104 domain into the KpnI site adjacent to the His 6 -GFP-start methionine of the Ncd construct. All constructs were verified by DNA sequencing. Proteins were expressed and purified by Ni-NTA chromatography followed by HiTrap-Q or HiTrap-S ion exchange chromatography as described. Immediately after a microtubule bind and release affinity-purification step, motors were either assayed or were frozen with 10% sucrose added and stored in liquid nitrogen. For single-molecule microscopy, CeU446-PH DdUnc104 was labeled to a stochiometry of ~1.5 dye per protein using a Cy3 dye coupled to a monofunctional NHS-ester which reacts with primary amine groups. Labeled protein was separated from free dye by Sephadex G25 gel filtration. Membrane Binding and Lipid Raft Assays Vesicles or liposomes were incubated on ice for 30 min with 1.5 μg minimotor or 1 μg PH DdUnc104 -GFP. LB buffer was added to the incubation reaction to bring the final sucrose concentration to 1.6 M, and this mixture was overlaid with cushions containing 1.4 M, 0.4 M, and 0.25 M sucrose in the same buffer in a TLS-55 tube. After centrifugation at 201,000 × g for 30 min in a TLS-55 rotor, the 0.25/0.4 M interphase, 0.4 M/1.4 M interphase, and the loading fractions were collected and analyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by either Coomassie-stained or immunoblot analysis. Binding efficiency was calculated by comparing the specific binding values to PtdInsP 2 versus PC liposomes, subtracting the corresponding nonspecific binding value from the PtdInsP2 binding, and was expressed as the ratio between wild-type and mutant PH domain. Association of CeUnc446 with lipid rafts were analyzed by sucrose gradients as described above except that the liposomes were lysed with 1% Triton X-100 for 40 min on ice and 1% Triton X-100 was included in the gradient that was centrifuged at 201,000 × g for 3 hr at 4°C. In Vitro Membrane Transport Assay and DIC Microscopy The details of this assay have been described elsewhere. In brief, sea urchin sperm axoneme-nucleated microtubule structures were prepared in flow cells as described previously. KI-washed vesicles, a mixed population isolated from the crude extract, were isolated as described. For the membrane transport assay, the flow cell was first washed with 10 μl of LB /15% sucrose, followed by the introduction of a 10 μl assay mix consisting of 5 μl purified motors from native source or recombinant expression, 3.0 μl LB/15% sucrose, 1 μl KI-washed vesicles or 1 μl of liposomes, 0.5 μl casein, and 0.5 μl ATP-regenerating mix. The movement of membranes was observed using a microscope equipped with differential interference contrast optics, a Newvicon camera, and an image processor. Recordings were made with a S-VHS video tape recorder. Directionality of membrane movement was determined on axonemes with clearly identified long and short microtubules emerging from their ends. Transport frequency and velocity was analyzed using special projections of the image stack : in an image stack, a line was drawn over a microtubule of interest and the image of that line as a function of time was obtained using ImageJ 1.26 software. Velocities were calculated from these kymograph records by measuring the slope of the line for periods of persistent movement. Single-Molecule Microscopy on Lipid Bilayers Individual Unc104 minimotors were visualized using a custom-built total internal reflection fluorescence microscope as described previously. A liposome suspension was added to acid-washed quartz slides and incubated for 20 min. The spontaneous formation of supported bilayers was ended by removing excess liposomes with four buffer washes. Labeled Cy3-motors at 0.2 nM was added to the bilayer, incubated for 20 min at room temperature, and washed once with 200 μl of buffer. Cy3-molecules were illuminated with an argon laser at 5 mW. The fluorescent images were recorded onto S-VHS tape, and images were digitized and analyzed on a computer using the following custom macros. Fluorescent particles were first tracked in digitized video sequences using crosscorrelation with an experimentally obtained, diffraction-limited spot image and centroid analysis as described. The algorithm was implemented in a set of Matlab scripts. In all cases, the accuracy of the tracking algorithm was checked visually, and, when needed, input parameters were adjusted to provide optimal tracking. Particle trajectories over 0.5 s long overlapping time windows were used to calculate diffusion coefficients by linear least square fitting of the mean square displacement of the particle using the first four data points of the mean square displacement. Only those diffusion coefficients with a maximum error between the fitted and observed data less than 7.5% of the observed data were recorded. Between 30 and 50 individual particles were tracked for each bilayer composition, resulting in more than 400 diffusion coefficients for all conditions. Supplementary Material Fig S1 Legend Click here to view. s1 Click here to view. 