 The rapid reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in response to external stimuli is an essential property of many motile eukaryotic cells. Here, we report evidence that the actin machinery of chemotactic Dictyostelium cells operates close to an oscillatory instability. When averaging the actin response of many cells to a short pulse of the chemoattractant cAMP, we observed a transient accumulation of cortical actin reminiscent of a damped oscillation. At the single-cell level, however, the response dynamics ranged from short, strongly damped responses to slowly decaying, weakly damped oscillations. Furthermore, in a small subpopulation, we observed self-sustained oscillations in the cortical F-actin concentration. To substantiate that an oscillatory mechanism governs the actin dynamics in these cells, we systematically exposed a large number of cells to periodic pulse trains of different frequencies. Our results indicate a resonance peak at a stimulation period of around 20 s. We propose a delayed feedback model that explains our experimental findings based on a time-delay in the regulatory network of the actin system. To test the model, we performed stimulation experiments with cells that express GFP-tagged fusion proteins of Coronin and actin-interacting protein 1, as well as knockout mutants that lack Coronin and actin-interacting protein 1. These actin-binding proteins enhance the disassembly of actin filaments and thus allow us to estimate the delay time in the regulatory feedback loop. Based on this independent estimate, our model predicts an intrinsic period of 20 s, which agrees with the resonance observed in our periodic stimulation experiments. Keywords: Dictyostelium discoideum, microfluidics, caged cAMP, delay-differential equation The actin cytoskeleton provides the basis for shape dynamics and motility of eukaryotic cells. Essential biological processes like wound healing, embryonic morphogenesis, or cancer metastasis rely on the rapid rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton in response to external chemical cues. Many of the underlying actin-driven processes have been investigated in cells of the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. Under starvation, the single-celled amoeba expresses a chemotactic signaling system to aggregate into a multicellular structure, mediated by the chemoattractant cAMP. The corresponding receptor signaling pathway and the downstream cytoskeletal machinery show remarkable similarities to motile cells of higher organisms, in particular neutrophils, making Dictyostelium one of the most popular models for eukaryotic cell motility and chemotaxis. In earlier studies, it was observed that the actin system of chemotactic Dictyostelium cells shows a complex, nonmonotonic response when exposed to a sudden increase in the extracellular chemoattractant concentration. Between 5 and 10 s after the stimulus, a first maximum in the filamentous actin content is observed, followed by a second, less intense but prolonged maximum that starts about 30 s after the stimulus and can last for several minutes. The first rapid response of this biphasic time profile is generally associated with decreasing motility and rounding up of the cell, while the prolonged second phase is attributed to the generation of new localized pseudopods. Numerous later studies, including live-cell fluorescence imaging, have confirmed this behavior for Dictyostelium. A similar time course was also found for the activation of the GTP binding protein RacB, and for the accumulation of phosphatidylinositol -trisphosphate in the membrane. Similar biphasic and oscillatory actin responses have also been observed in neutrophils. How can we explain the temporal profile of the actin response to a rapid uniform receptor stimulus? Given the fundamental role of receptor-induced actin activity for cell motility and chemotaxis, this question is central to our understanding of many biological processes. In the present article, it is our aim to provide a mechanistic explanation for the response dynamics, based on extensive single-cell stimulation experiments. We performed live-cell recordings of the actin dynamics in chemotactic Dictyostelium cells with laser scanning confocal microscopy. As a marker for filamentous actin, we used DdLimEΔcoil–GFP, the fluorescently tagged version of a Dictyostelium Lim-domain protein with truncated coiled-coil domain. It is known to colocalize with F-actin. Due to its excellent fluorescence properties and low cytosolic background levels, LimE–GFP became a popular in vivo marker for F-actin structures. It was successfully used in high-speed recordings of cortical actin reorganization as well as in studies of actin waves and phagocytosis. We generated cAMP stimuli by using microfluidic flow photolysis, an approach to address individual cells with well-controlled chemical signals. This method is based on the laser-induced release of cAMP from a biologically inert, caged precursor. It enabled us to apply chemical stimuli to single cells with subsecond temporal resolution. Results Actin System Shows Damped Oscillations in Response to a Pulse Perturbation. We exposed chemotactic LimE–GFP–expressing Dictyostelium cells to a single short pulse of extracellular cAMP using microfluidic flow photolysis. All experiments were performed with starvation-developed cells that had been synchronized with 6 min periodic cAMP pulsing over several hours. The uncaging geometry for our experiments is shown in Fig. 1 A. The temporal profile of a concentration pulse generated in this setup was characterized with the help of caged fluorescein and can be seen in Fig. 1 B. The build-up time of the cAMP signal at a distance of 30 μm from the cAMP source is about 0.6 s. For details of the experimental setup, see Materials and Methods. Fig. 1. Geometry of the uncaging region and the imaging region. The small blue square indicates the positions at which the time profile of the fluorescence signal, displayed in B, was evaluated. Time profile of the fluorescence... In Fig. 2 A, the temporal evolution of the fluorescence intensity at the cell cortex and in the cytosol is displayed following a short pulse of extracellular cAMP. In the cortical region, an initial increase in the fluorescence intensity was observed due to a receptor-mediated boost in actin polymerization. At the same time, the cytosolic signal was diminished, reflecting the recruitment of the marker to the freshly polymerized actin structures in the cortex. The onset of the response was detected at 3.4 ± 1.5 s after the stimulus similar to previous reports on the dynamics of the LimE–GFP label. The maximal response was reached after 8.4 ± 2.5 s. The first strongly pronounced response was followed by a second weaker peak. This behavior resembles a damped oscillation consisting of two oscillatory excursions before relaxing back to its initial steady state. The period of the first full oscillation was 19 s, not including the first 3 s between the stimulus and the onset of the response. Fig. 2. Average cortical and cytosolic LimE–GFP fluorescence signal in response to a short pulse of cAMP. The response time scales were defined by the crossings of the cytosolic signal with the averaged lower confidence interval... When analyzing the individual time traces, we found that the single-cell behavior was more diverse. Whereas some cells displayed a single oscillation in response to the stimulus, others clearly showed several alternating maxima and minima. Even weakly damped oscillations that persisted over many oscillation cycles were observed. Two single-cell examples, representative of a strongly damped and a weakly damped response, can be seen in Fig. 2 B and C. Note that the majority of cells display a strongly damped response, whereas the weakly damped case is observed less frequently. Also, in the case of a step-like increase in the extracellular cAMP concentration, a nonmonotonic response was observed for the averaged signal. However, compared with the pulse response, the initial cytosolic depletion was prolonged by several seconds and was succeeded by a more strongly delayed second cycle, in agreement with previous observations. Small Subpopulation of Chemotactic Cells Shows Self-Sustained Oscillations in the Cortical F-Actin Concentration. In absence of stimuli, the majority of cells exhibit moderate fluctuations around a constant base level in their cortical and cytosolic fluorescence signals. However, in a small subpopulation, we observed self-sustained oscillations in the cortical F-actin concentration, without any external stimulation. The detected oscillation periods range from 12 to 20 s. These datasets were excluded from the analysis of our stimulation experiments. An example from this self-oscillating subpopulation can be seen in Fig. 2 D. Periodic Stimulation Reveals a Resonance of the Actin System at a Period of 20 s. To confirm the presence of an intrinsic oscillatory process in the actin system, we exposed cells to periodic sequences of cAMP pulses. Periods ranging from T = 4 s to T = 60 s were systematically explored. We chose 4 s as the smallest period to ensure that the cAMP signal, delivered to the cell during a single pulse, had decayed completely before the next pulse was applied. The upper limit of 60 s was selected because, on average, the response to a single pulse fully decays back to the base level within this time. We thus covered the entire time span of the single pulse response with our periodic stimulation experiments. For periods smaller than 8 s, Dictyostelium is not able to temporally resolve the individual cAMP pulses. The cells react as if exposed to a continuous level of cAMP and exhibit an adaptation response similar to the response to a step-like increase in the cAMP concentration. The onset of a clear periodic response in the actin system was found for periods larger than T = 8 s. In Fig. 3 A and D, data from a stimulation experiment with a 10 s pulse interval are displayed as an example. Fig. 3. Time series of the average cytosolic fluorescence intensity of LimE–GFP cells responding to pulse trains with a period of 10 s, 20 s, and 30 s. The laser stimulus is shown in red. The corresponding frequency spectra are displayed... Up to stimulation periods of 20 s, we observed a fluorescence response that exhibited one oscillation during each stimulation period. In the frequency spectra, it can be seen that the dominant response frequency was identical to the frequency of the stimulus. The response amplitude is increasing for growing stimulation period and reaches its maximum for a period of 20 s. For periods longer than 20 s, the response decreased again. The amplitude as a function of the stimulation frequency is displayed in Fig. 4 A. A clear resonance at a period of T = 20 s can be seen, confirming the presence of an intrinsic oscillatory process in the actin system. In this case, the actin system is periodically stimulated in such a way that each pulse arrives, when the first oscillation induced by the previous pulse was completed. Fig. 4. For each stimulus frequency the amplitude of the largest peak in the frequency spectrum of the corresponding data set is displayed. Furthermore, the amplitude at the stimulus frequency is shown. By comparing to the single pulse response, it becomes obvious that the longer stimulation period now allows the next cycle of the damped oscillatory response to develop. A corresponding second peak emerges in the frequency spectrum. For increasing periods, this results in a 1:2 response, where one external pulse is received during every second oscillation cycle. The second smaller peak around T = 40 s in Fig. 4 A is indicating the resonant 1:2 response. The periods of the two largest modes in the frequency spectrum of the response signal are shown in Fig. 4 B as a function of the stimulation period. In Fig. 4 C, the time lag between the stimulus and the maximal response of the cytosolic fluorescence intensity is displayed. Here we see that for increasing periods, the time lag of the response converges to a constant value, reflecting the intrinsic time scale of the signal transduction pathway that links the cAMP receptor to the actin machinery. Finally, for large stimulation periods, the resulting temporal pattern resembles a sequence of isolated single pulse responses. In between the pulses, the fluorescence signal decayed back to its prestimulus level. As an example, results from 60 s stimulation experiments are presented in Supporting Information. Inhibitory Regulators of Actin Polymerization Affect the Characteristic Response Time of the Actin Cytoskeleton. To estimate the time scales of regulatory processes in the actin system, we have performed similar periodic stimulation experiments with cells that express GFP-tagged variants of Coronin and actin-interacting protein 1, two proteins that control the disassembly of filamentous actin. Translocation of these proteins to the cortex indicates up-regulation of F-actin–degrading processes. By comparing the time shift between a cAMP-induced peak in the F-actin concentration and the associated peak in cortical Coronin/Aip1 localization, we can estimate the time it takes until the cell up-regulates the actin depolymerization machinery in response to an increase in the F-actin concentration. Furthermore, as Coronin and Aip1 are among the key regulators of actin dynamics, a knockout of these proteins is expected to lead to altered response times. To test this hypothesis, we have exposed LimE–GPF–expressing Coronin-null and Aip1-null cells to cAMP stimuli with a period of 20 s. In Fig. 5, the results from periodic stimulation of the GFP-tagged variants and knockout mutants of Coronin and Aip1 are summarized. All cells were stimulated with a period of T = 20 s. The results are displayed together with the actin response in wild-type cells for comparison. It can be clearly seen that both Coronin–GFP and Aip1-GFP exhibited a response that is delayed compared with the actin response. A closer analysis revealed that in both cases the response was shifted by about 5 s with respect to the actin response. Nevertheless, both proteins responded in a 1:1 fashion to the external stimulus. For the knockout mutants, a difference was observed between Coronin-null and Aip1-null. Although the LimE–GFP response in Aip1-null cells is almost in phase with the LimE–GFP signal in the wild type, the LimE–GFP response in Coronin-null is delayed by 4.1 s. Besides, both knockout mutants show a reduced amplitude of the LimE–GFP response. Fig. 5. Stimulation of labeled cell lines and the corresponding knockouts with a period of 20 s. All markers were recorded in independent experiments, and the average cytosolic fluorescence intensities are displayed. Comparison of the responses of LimE–GFP... Discussion We acquired a large number of fluorescence recordings that show the actin dynamics at the level of individual cells. During our recordings, we exposed the cells to single short pulses or time periodic pulse trains of cAMP that were generated by microfluidic flow photolysis. When averaged over many cells, we observed a damped oscillatory response in the cortical F-actin content following exposure to a single short pulse of extracellular cAMP. This substantiates earlier results that indicated damped oscillatory kinetics in the actin system. However, an analysis of the time traces from individual cells revealed a variety of different behaviors ranging from rapidly decaying responses to weakly damped, slowly decaying oscillations. Surprisingly, in a small subpopulation, we even observed ongoing, self-sustained oscillations in the cortical F-actin concentration. Together, these observations suggest the presence of an oscillatory instability in the regulatory system of the actin cytoskeleton. To test our hypothesis, we stimulated cells with periodic sequences of cAMP pulses. We systematically changed the frequency of the stimulus and found a clear resonance at a stimulation period of 20 s. We furthermore observed that cells were able to temporarily resolve pulse trains with periods as short as 10 s. This is much shorter than previously observed for the cAMP-induced formation of PIP 3, where periods down to ∼ 20 s could be resolved. How can we explain our experimental observations? Previously, it was suggested that the biphasic response to a step-like increase in the extracellular cAMP concentration can be related to a positive feedback in the upstream receptor signaling pathway. Here, we propose a model that is based on the properties of the actin cytoskeleton. The regulatory mechanisms of the actin system involve a large number of components. Many such players have been identified, like actin nucleators and nucleation-promoting factors, branching complexes, capping and severing proteins, as well as various regulators that connect these proteins to different signaling pathways in the cell. However, our overall picture of this regulatory network is still far from being complete, and a quantitative model of the actin system that explicitly takes all molecular constituents into account is currently beyond reach. We will therefore present a simplified heuristic model, in which the detailed processes are summarized into a small number of effective kinetic terms. The ongoing buildup and degradation of filamentous actin allow for a quick rearrangement of the cortical structures, essential for the rapid responses of motile cells to extracellular cues. We will describe this process on the basis of a simple effective kinetic rate equation: The variable A denotes the concentration of F-actin in the cell cortex. The temporal evolution of A depends on growth and decay terms. All processes that enhance actin polymerization, like the action of actin nucleators and polymerization-promoting factors, are lumped into the parameter k +. Because polymerization usually occurs at the ends of existing actin filaments, the rate also depends on the present amount of F-actin, A. Similarly, the effect of depolymerizing agents is represented by the effective parameter k −. Here, depolymerization also depends on the present concentration of F-actin, A, as in the absense of F-actin, no depolymerization can occur. In addition, we incorporate the effect of regulatory feedback loops into the decay term. In particular, to balance the amount of cortical F-actin, the depolymerization machinery is up-regulated when the concentration of F-actin increases. However, it is reasonable to assume that some of the depolymerizing factors do not respond instantaneously to an increase in A, but with some finite response time τ. This introduces a time delay into the second term of Eq. 1. Depolymerization depends not only on the current F-actin concentration A, but also on the F-actin concentration some time τ ago, A. Our model thus turns into a delay differential equation. It exhibits a fixed point solution at A 0 = k + / k −. For k + τ > π/2, the fixed point becomes unstable and gives birth to time-periodic limit cycle oscillations. Thus, depending on the choice of k +, the attractor of our model is either a stable steady state or a stable limit cycle. Furthermore, it can be shown that the period T of these limit cycle oscillations depends on the delay time τ such that T ≈ 4τ. From the resonance curve in Fig. 4 A, we know that T = 20 s in our case. For the delay time in the regulatory feedback loop that initiates the depolymerization machinery, the model Eq. 1 thus predicts τ = 5 s. For most cells, the cortical F-actin concentration is constant over time and shows only moderate fluctuations about a stationary base level. In terms of our model, this corresponds to a combination of parameters, such that k + τ < π/2. In response to a pertubation—i.e., a sudden transient shift in the F-actin concentration A, induced by a receptor stimulus—the F-actin level will relax back to the fixed point value A 0. Depending on the proximity of k + to the bifurcation point at π/2, the relaxation will exhibit a damped oscillatory time profile. In particular, the closer k + τ to π/2, the weaker the damping. If we assume that the value of k + is not exactly identical in all cells but shows a certain degree of variability from one cell to another, we can explain the differences in the oscillatory time profiles that were observed for individual cells. Even self-sustained oscillations can be explained within this framework. They occur for the rare cases of stronger deviations in the parameter k + from the population average, such that k + τ > π/2 lies within the oscillatory regime. The phase diagram in Fig. 6 A summarizes where the different dynamical regimes can be found as a function of. We have also exposed model Eq. 1 to time-periodic stimuli, similar to our periodic stimulation experiments. In Fig. 6 E and F, examples for stimulation periods of 20 and 35 s are displayed. In agreement with the experimental results displayed in Fig. 3 B and C, the model shows a 1:1 response for periods up to 20 s and the characteristic 1:2 profile for larger periods. Examples from model simulations with other stimulation periods can be found in Supporting Information. In Fig. 6 G, the results of all simulations with periodic stimuli are summarized in a resonance plot. The amplitude of the dominant peak in the frequency spectrum is plotted as a function of the stimulus frequency for periodic stimuli with periods ranging from 4 to 60 s. The shape of the resonance curve closely reproduces the experimental result displayed in Fig. 4 A. Fig. 6. Numerical simulations of model Eq. 1. Phase diagram indicating the different dynamical regimes. The oscillatory instability occurs at and is marked by the dashed vertical line. The different response patterns displayed in Fig. 2 correspond to different... Thus, the modeling results show an excellent overall agreement with the experimental data. How can we test the validity of this model? We have performed experiments with Dictyostelium cells that carry fluorescent markers fused to Coronin and Aip1. These are regulatory proteins that inhibit the polymerization of actin filaments and promote their degradation. When actin levels have risen above the equilibrium value, Coronin and Aip1 will be recruited to the cell cortex to down-regulate the amount of F-actin. By measuring their translocation times from the cytosol to the cortex, we can gain an independent estimate of the delay time τ in the regulatory feedback loop of Eq. 1. From the data displayed in Fig. 5, we obtained τ = 5 s on average, determined from the cross-correlation of the two signals. Based on the model prediction of T ≈ 4τ for the period T of oscillations, we find T ≈ 20 s. This is in agreement with the resonance detected in our periodic stimulation experiments and thus supports the validity of our model. We have furthermore investigated the LimE–GFP response to periodic stimulation in Coronin-null and Aip1-null cells. In the Coronin knockout, we find a clearly delayed actin response. This is in agreement with a simulation of model Eq. 1, where the delay time has been increased to τ = 10 s. Note that the initial transient and the reduced amplitude of the LimE–GFP signal are also recovered by the model simulation. We thus conclude that a lack of Coronin results in an increased delay time in the regulatory feedback loop of Eq. 1. Even though Aip1 is enhancing the disassembly of actin filaments similarly to Coronin, no such delay effect was observed for the Aip1 knockout, suggesting that Aip1 is not critical for the timing in the regulatory feedback loop of the actin system. In summary, our experimental observations led us to conjecture that, in chemotactic Dictyostelium cells, the actin cytoskeleton and its regulatory pathways can be described as a dynamical system operating close to an oscillatory instability. Many biological systems have been demonstrated to operate at the border of an instability. For example, there is evidence that the exceptional auditory sensitivity of the cochlea relies on a force-generating dynamical system, which is maintained at the threshold of a Hopf bifurcation. Under such conditions, the system can act as a precisely tuned nonlinear amplifier for stimuli close to its intrinsic frequency. The resonance curve in Fig. 4 A strongly supports this view. The question remains: What is the role of this selective amplifier in a motile cell? External stimuli with a period of 20 s do not belong to the native environment of Dictyostelium cells, in which commonly cAMP pulses with a period of 5–10 min occur. In the absence of stimuli, however, the typical time interval between successive pseudopods is between 10 and 20 s on average. Together with our findings, this may indicate that the cytoskeletal machinery selectively amplifies internal signals that lead to the formation of pseudopods with a characteristic period of 10–20 s. Note that in the description presented above, the cell was treated as a uniform system. No spatial degrees of freedom were included. Although the first peak of actin polymerization in response to a receptor stimulus occurs almost uniformly around the cell, later peaks display a more irregular cortical structure with patches of increased F-actin concentration, in particular at locations of newly extending pseudopods. Even though these heterogeneities were neglected in the purely temporal description of Eq. 1, we believe that our model provides a useful first approximation for the temporal dynamics of the system. It will be the subject of future work to extend this description to a spatially extended system. Materials and Methods Cell Culture. The D. discoideum strain LimE–GFP was cultivated in HL5 medium at 22 °C on polystyrene Petri dishes or shaken in suspension at 150 rpm. For preparation of an experiment, cells were starved in shaking phosphate buffer for 6 h, at a density of ∼ 2 × 10 6 cells/mL. To synchronize the developemental process, the shaking culture was pulsed with 50 nM cAMP every 6 min over the course of 5 h. Approximately 90 min before the experiment, the cells were harvested and washed three times in PB. The D. discoideum :GFP strain expressing cytosolic GFP was used as a control and cultured with 10 μM G418. Coronin–GFP LimE–mRFP and Aip1–GFP LimE–mRFP strains were cultured in the presence of 5 μM Geneticin and 10 μM Blasticidin. Aip1-null Lim–GFP was cultured in the presence of 20 μL/10 mL G418 and 7.5 μL/10 mL Blasticidin, whereas Coronin-null LimE–GFP required the addition of 5 μL/10 mL G418 and 20 μL/10 mL Blasticidin. Both the Aip1-null Lim–GFP and Coronin-null LimE–GFP cells were starved for 10 h, instead of 6 h, before starting the experiment. All cell lines were derived from the axenically growing strain AX2 and were kindly provided by G. Gerisch. Microfluidics. Standard soft lithography was used to produce microfluidic channels that were 500 μm wide, 26 μm high, and 3 cm long. The fabrication process was based on photolithographic patterning of a photoresist layer to produce a reusable patterned master wafer. To obtain the microfluidic device, poly-dimethylsiloxane was poured onto the wafer and cured for 1–2 h at 75 °C. A PDMS block containing the microchannels was cut out, and inlets were punched through the PDMS using a syringe tip. A glass coverslip was sealed to the PDMS block after a 3–5 min treatment in air plasma to close the microchannels. cAMP Stimulus and Its Characterization. Pulses of cAMP were created by light-induced release of cAMP from a caged precursor. Uncaging was initiated at 405 nm with a 50 mW FV5-LD405 laser diode. As uncaging region, we chose a line oriented perpendicular to the flow direction. The line was scanned by the laser for 1 s with a pixel residence time of 4 μs/pixel. To limit the action of Taylor dispersion on the concentration profile, the uncaging region was located about 30 μm upstream of the cell. We used DMNB-caged fluorescein to visualize the dynamics of the uncaging event with a frame rate of 0.1 Hz. Twenty independent uncaging events of DMNB-caged fluorescein were recorded and averaged. Note that there is a slight mismatch in the diffusion coefficients. The uncaged dextran-conjugated fluorescein has a diffusion coefficient of D = 267 μm 2 /s ± 8 μm 2 /s, whereas the diffusion coefficient of cAMP was estimated to be 440 μm 2 /s. In Fig. 1 B, the results for the temporal profile of the stimulus were compared with a numerical simulation of the corresponding advection–diffusion–reaction equation obtained with the finite element package COMSOL Multiphysics 3.5. For the simulation, the channel was chosen 300 μm wide, 200 μm long, and 26 μm high. According to our experimental estimate, the average flow velocity was set to 120 μm/s ± 6.5 μm/s, and a parabolic flow profile was assumed in z -direction. The simulation result was height scaled to fit the acquired data. To estimate the time profile of cAMP pulses, we performed analogous numerical simulations using the diffusion coefficient of cAMP instead. Background levels of cAMP due to hydrolysis of the DMNB-caged precursor were analyzed by reverse phase HPLC and estimated to ∼ 1%. In summary, a laser pulse of 1 s created a cAMP pulse with a rise time of ∼ 0.6 s and a total duration of 1.5 s over a typical cell length of 10 μm. Image Acquisition and Analysis. The cells were infused into the microfluidic channel and allowed to settle before replacing the PB with 10 μM DMNB-caged cAMP. Confocal laser scanning microscopy was conducted on the Olympus Fluoview 1000 setup, using a 60× UPlanSApo objective. For excitation of the LimE–GFP, the 488 nm line of a 150 mW argon laser was used. The frame size was 120 × 120 pixels, with 1 pixel = 0.4 μm. We recorded confocal sections through the center of the cell body with a rate of one frame per second using a laser residence time of 2 μs/pixel. A motile single cell was centered within the imaging region and recorded for 30 s, before applying the first uncaging event. Uncaging events were then applied with a chosen period for a total duration of maximal 320 s per experiment. Cells that clearly showed a cytoskeletal response—i.e., a visible translocation of LimE–GFP to the cell cortex—were used for further analysis. The images were subjected to binary thresholding, using the Chan-Vese algorithm. The corresponding MATLAB code was downloaded from ref. 45. The thresholded images were subdivided into a cortical and a cytosolic region using the image erosion function of the MATLAB image processing toolbox. The diameter of the cortical region was estimated to ∼ 1.6 μm. All pixel values of one region were averaged to obtain the averaged fluorescence intensity,, for each time step and within both regions. In this way, separate time traces for the cortex and the cytosol were obtained. Intensity values exceeding, where σ is the SD of, were excluded from the cytosolic region and added to the cortical region. Each signal was linearely detrended. Model Simulations. To compare the dynamics of model Eq. 1 with the experimental data, we have numerically integrated Eq. 1 using an explicit Euler scheme with a fixed time step of Δ t = 0.001. For simplicity, we chose k + 0 = k −, so that the fixed point of Eq. 1 was A 0 = 1 in all cases. We also took A = 1 as initial conditions for all simulations. The delay time was set to τ = π/2. The time axes in the numerical plots were converted to seconds based on the value of τ = 5 s. A receptor stimulus typically induces a boost in actin polymerization. We therefore incorporated external receptor stimuli into our model via a time-dependent actin polymerization rate constant k +. To also recover the response to a step increase in extracellular cAMP, we included adaptation to the extracellular cAMP level by choosing, where r is the receptor input and the adaptation variable b is governed by. Here, τ ad is the characteristic time scale of adaptation and can be estimated from the step response experiments to τ ad = 12.5 s. To mimic the pulse stimulation experiments, narrow perturbations of Gaussian shape with a maximum value of 0.5 and σ = 0.3 were added to the receptor input r. Supplementary Material Supporting Information: Click here to view. 