 Dictyostelium discoideum is an amoebozoa that exists in both a free-living unicellular and a multicellular form. It is situated in a deep branch in the evolutionary tree and is particularly noteworthy in having a very A/T-rich genome. Dictyostelium provides an ideal system to examine the extreme to which nucleotide bias may be employed in organizing promoters, genes, and nucleosomes across a genome. We find that Dictyostelium genes are demarcated precisely at their 5′ ends by poly-T tracts and precisely at their 3′ ends by poly-A tracts. These tracts are also associated with nucleosome-free regions and are embedded with precisely positioned TATA boxes. Homo- and heteropolymeric tracts of A and T demarcate nucleosome border regions. Together, these findings reveal the presence of a variety of functionally distinct polymeric A/T elements. Strikingly, Dictyostelium chromatin may be organized in di-nucleosome units but is otherwise organized as in animals. This includes a +1 nucleosome in a position that predicts the presence of a paused RNA polymerase II. Indeed, we find a strong phylogenetic relationship between the presence of the NELF pausing factor and positioning of the +1 nucleosome. Pausing and +1 nucleosome positioning may have coevolved in animals. Among the social amoebae, Dictyostelium discoideum is the most studied species. All of these organisms live in the forest soil as solitary cells, feed on bacteria, and proliferate by binary fission. Upon starvation, free-living cells aggregate to form multicellular structures that undergo morphogenesis and cell type differentiation. The major transition of gene expression during development occurs 4–6 h after onset of starvation. This transition not only comprises the turning on of developmental genes but also a shutdown of basic cellular functions. At this stage, the cells are committed to development and are no longer able to revert to the growth phase. Development ends with the formation of a basal disc and stalk, which supports a fruiting body. Fruiting bodies contain spores that can survive starvation conditions. Dictyostelium is located deep in the phylogenetic tree of life, diverging just after plants but before the divergence of fungi and animals. Since fungi and animals organize their chromatin differently, Dictyostelium should provide some insight into this major evolutionary shift. The 34-Mb and ∼12,500-gene genome of Dictyostelium is unusual in that it is highly A/T-rich, surpassed only by the 81% A/T-richness of Plasmodium falciparum. The evolutionary forces that drove these organisms to such an A/T-rich extreme are unclear. Analysis of the Dictyostelium genome structure may, therefore, provide insight into how highly preferred usage of adenosine and thymine bases leads to the organization of chromatin, genes, and regulatory elements. Like most eukaryotes, Dictyostelium utilizes nucleosomes to package its nuclear genome into chromatin. A nucleosome is composed of a histone protein core with ∼147 bp of DNA wrapped around its exterior. Typically, nucleosomes are spaced by linker DNA that ranges from 10 to ∼50 bp in length. Nucleosomes may regulate gene expression by allowing or blocking access of transcription factors to regulatory DNA elements such as TATA boxes. Across eukaryotic species, promoter regions and other transcriptional regulatory sites are generally nucleosome-free, whereas most genic regions are occupied with arrays of well-phased nucleosomes, especially just downstream of the transcription start site. As demonstrated in yeast, nucleosome occupancy levels are controlled in large part by the underlying DNA sequence. AA/TT dinucleotide periodicities and GC-richness have been proposed to contribute to nucleosome occupancy. An intriguing question, then, is whether nucleosome occupancy in the highly A/T-rich Dictyostelium genome utilizes similar principles or, instead, has evolved different mechanisms. Given the depth of the Dictyostelium branch on the tree of life and that it spends part of its life cycle in an independent unicellular state and part in a multicellular state, it is unclear as to whether Dictyostelium organizes its chromatin as a unicellular or a multicellular organism. The unicellular pattern has been defined by Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe, which are evolutionarily divergent by nearly a billion years. These fungi place the upstream border of the first genic nucleosome over the TSS, where it would be positioned to block access of the transcription machinery. This placement of nucleosomes over the TSS would suggest that loss of histone-DNA contacts around the TSS might precede transcription initiation. In contrast, multicellular eukaryotes, defined largely by Drosophila and vertebrates, place their first nucleosome further downstream and away from the TSS. As a result, the TSS resides in the NFR, which would appear to give unobstructed access of RNA polymerase II to the TSS. Possibly as a consequence of this, Pol II initiates transcription, elongates, then pauses just upstream of the +1 nucleosome, which is also ∼20–50 bp downstream from the TSS. Recent genome-wide studies showed that this promoter-proximal pausing is widespread in animals and that it may contribute to cell-to-cell coordination/timing of developmental programs in animals. Coordinated timing is critical for multicellular development and is also a key element in the Dictyostelium life cycle. Here, we present the first high-resolution genome-wide nucleosome maps of an amoeba, whose genome is highly A/T-rich and representative of a deep branch in the phylogenic tree. First, we examined the nucleotide composition of Dictyostelium genes, promoter regions, and nucleosome positions. Second, we determined nucleosome organization around genes during its unicellular and multicellular life stages. Third, we addressed the evolutionary relationship between nucleosome organization and potential pausing of the transcription elongation complex. Results Dictyostelium start their genes with poly-T and end with poly-A As a prelude to nucleosome mapping, we first sought to characterize the extreme A/T-richness of the Dictyostelium genome. In particular, we found tracts of poly-T or poly-A to be more prevalent across the Dictyostelium genome than expected by chance. The same was seen for the highly A/T-rich genome of Plasmodium falciparum and much less so in other genomes. We, therefore, suspect that A/T-rich genomes impart function to long poly-T/poly-A tracts. Next, we examined the distribution of poly-T or poly-A tracts around transcription start and end sites. This necessitated the production of a high-resolution transcriptome map of Dictyostelium, which was accomplished by RNA-seq. Four observations regarding the distribution of T and A nucleotides surprised us. First, poly-T tracts were highly enriched on the sense strand near the start of genes, immediately upstream of the TSS, as seen previously on a small number of Dictyostelium genes. Second, the 3′ ends of these poly-T tracts were tightly distributed ∼2 bp upstream of the TSS. Third and fourth, poly-A tracts were highly enriched on the sense strand at the end of genes and started ∼1 bp downstream from the TES. Remarkably, poly-T and poly-A on the sense strand precisely demarcated the start and end of transcribed regions, respectively. The precision of poly-T and poly-A tracts with respect to the TSS and TES highlights the accuracy of the transcriptome map. Figure 1. Dictyostelium gene organization with poly-T/poly-A enrichment. Distribution of poly-T/poly-A tracts in 5468 genes with the annotated TSS. Each track represents the DNA sequence of a gene, fetched from −500 to 2500 relative... The lengths of these poly-T and poly-A tracts did not correlate with transcript abundance or with each other, the latter indicating that these complementary nucleotides were not quantitatively linked between the 5′ and 3′ ends of genes. Other organisms lacked an equivalent organization, although other patterns were evident, in accord with the literature. Plasmodium lacked a strand-specific enrichment of poly-T/poly-A, and thus A/T-richness alone cannot explain the striking poly-T/poly-A demarcation of genes in D. discoideum. The A/T-rich genome of Dictyostelium might be the product of a distinct evolutionary path toward A/T-richness, which Plasmodium did not encounter. Poly-T tracts in promoters are interrupted by TATA boxes The TATA box promoter element consists of an 8-bp consensus in Saccharomyces : TATAA. In Dictyostelium, the A/T-richness of the genome raises the question as to whether TATA boxes are sufficiently unique to specify the location of the transcription initiation complex. If so, we would expect bona fide TATA boxes to be precisely positioned upstream of the TSS, as they are in other organisms. As in metazoans, we found a tight distribution of TATAAA elements centered ∼29 bp upstream of Dictyostelium TSSs. The sequence directionality of these elements was strongly biased toward the sense strand. A highly focused enrichment at the canonical metazoan location, with a strong strand bias, provides three lines of evidence that they are functional. As a fourth line of evidence, no strand-specific enrichment was found downstream from the TES at the 3′ ends of genes. In contrast, fortuitous TATA elements may be present on the genic side of the TSS-proximal poly-T and TES-proximal poly-A tracts. Figure 2. Frequency distribution of TATA elements as TATAAA midpoint locations around the 5′ and 3′ ends of Dictyostelium genes. TATA elements were counted on the sense and template strand. Their frequency was... Dictyostelium nucleosomes have polymeric-A/T borders Nucleosomes were mapped across the Dictyostelium genome using MNase-seq, before and after the major transition in gene expression during the two distinct phases of its life cycle: as a free-living unicellular amoeba and as a multicellular aggregate. Dyad-enriched G/C and the presence of 10-bp repeats of WW-type dinucleotides are important determinants of nucleosome formation. Indeed, Dictyostelium nucleosomes were relatively enriched with G/C near their midpoints. However, 10-bp periodic WW dinucleotides were not evident, despite these dinucleotides being among the most abundant in the genome. Similar observations were made for human nucleosomes, and auto correlation analysis of dinucleotides within nucleosomal sequences also indicated a general lack of such periodicities. Figure 3. Nucleosomal DNA properties of Dictyostelium nucleosomes. 73,396 nucleosome dyad locations were grouped as −1, +1, and all other genic nucleosomes. For the three assigned nucleosome groups, the... Toward the nucleosome borders and linker region, we observed a high incidence of homo- and heteropolymeric-A/T. Such nucleosome placement was observed in all classes of nucleosomes including the −1 and +1 nucleosomes that flank promoter regions. Thus, Dictyostelium may utilize a combination of both homo- and heteropolymeric-A/T near nucleosome peripheries and relative G/C-richness toward the dyad to promote nucleosome formation. This trend is similar to but perhaps a more extreme version of what is evident in fungi and metazoans. Dictyostelium organizes its nucleosomes on genes similar to animals We next examined the organization of Dictyostelium nucleosomes around their transcription start and end sites and addressed the following questions: Does Dictyostelium package the 5′ ends of its genes basically in the same way, by having canonical nucleosome positions relative to the TSS? Are NFRs present at the 5′ and 3′ end of genes, as seen in other organisms? Is the +1 nucleosome placed over the TSS, as in single-celled fungi, or downstream, as in multicellular animals and plants? Is nucleosome spacing uniform within genic nucleosomal arrays, as seen in other organisms? Does nucleosome organization change between the unicellular and multicellular state? Figure 4A displays a composite distribution of nucleosomes in vegetative amoebae and multicellular aggregates aligned by the transcriptional start site of 5468 protein-coding genes. No canonical organization was seen upstream of the TSS, where the −1 nucleosome typically resides, although the region appeared rather depleted of nucleosomes compared to genic regions. A 5′ NFR, centered 54 bp upstream of the TSS, was evident. This region is where the TATA box and poly-T/poly-A tracts reside and is the likely site of transcription complex assembly. At the ends of genes, a 3′ NFR was found as seen in other organisms. This region might be important for transcription termination. The depletion of nucleosomes upstream of the TSS is unlikely to be due to an inability to extract those portions of the genome, because whole genome 454 Life Sciences sequencing of Dictyostelium does not reveal such bias. Within genic regions, nucleosomes were, indeed, organized into a canonical arrangement relative to the TSS. The first genic nucleosome was centered at approximately +115 relative to the TSS. Figure 4. Nucleosome organization around the 5′ and 3′ end of the Dictyostelium genes. Composite distribution of in vivo nucleosome positions relative to the TSS and TES. The midpoints of all nucleosomal sequence reads were distributed around... Vegetative and aggregating cells showed a similar nucleosome organization in the genome, which indicates that the same overall chromatin structure predominates at Dictyostelium genes and is maintained regardless of its uni- vs. multicellular status. However, cells that developed for 6 h appeared to have a higher nucleosome occupancy at the beginning and end of genes compared to the unicellular state. The +1 nucleosome position is among the most highly dynamic, at least in yeast. During cellular differentiation imposed by starvation, most genes become quiescent. Nucleosome acquisition at this position might therefore play a role in this process. We further examined genes whose expression is up-regulated during the aggregation phase and found that they displayed the same basic nucleosome organization as the average gene in the aggregation state. Thus, changes in gene expression are not generally associated with major or global changes in chromatin organization, although transient changes are not excluded. The main conclusion is that, like other organisms, Dictyostelium has a canonical nucleosome organization that is largely invariant, regardless of the activity of relevant genes and through at least two distinct life cycle states. An evolutionarily conserved change in genic nucleosome spacing upon starvation Despite similarities in overall organization during the unicellular and aggregated states, we observed a modal shift in the spacing between genic nucleosomes in the two states. Canonical spacing increased on average from 162 bp in the unicellular state to 169 in the multicellular state. This increase in spacing is reminiscent of a similar increase in spacing seen in yeast during a starvation response and the increase seen in human at cells quiescent/repressed regions of the genome. In Dictyostelium, a starvation response is essentially the basis for development into a multicellular organism and a shutdown in gene expression. Thus, an increase in genic inter-nucleosome spacing may be an evolutionarily conserved response to starvation, which may be associated with transcriptional quiescence and the production of refractory chromatin. Figure 5. Comparison of inter-nucleosomal distances between five species in their nucleosome arrangement within the genic region. The canonical inter-nucleosomal distance between two neighboring nucleosomes was calculated as the peak-to-peak... Dictyostelium organizes genic nucleosomes into pairs We examined nucleosome spacing more quantitatively in Figure 5, by plotting the canonical inter-nucleosomal distance between the +1 and +2 positions, between +2 and +3, and so on. We also did the same in other organisms whose nucleosomes had been mapped at high resolution. Strikingly, Dictyostelium nucleosomes appeared to be arranged into dinucleosome units where +1 and +2 are closely spaced, whereas +2 and +3 were more separated. Similarly, +3 and +4 were closely spaced compared to their flanking nucleosomes. These differences were not due to a position-specific alteration in the size or sequence composition of the nucleosomal DNA. Such dinucleosome patterns were not evident in yeast and other organisms, suggesting that Dictyostelium undergoes an unusual organizational pattern involving pairs of closely spaced nucleosomes, which are separated from adjacent pairs by a somewhat greater distance. Evolutionary linkage between RNA polymerase II pausing and a downstream placement of the +1 nucleosome One of our driving questions concerning D. discoideum, was whether the placement of the first genic nucleosome resembled that of multicellular eukaryotes or that defined in unicellular fungi. The placement of the first nucleosome has implications with respect to unicellular versus multicellular gene regulatory strategies. A downstream placement has been linked to the existence of an adjacent upstream paused RNA polymerase. In Figure 6, we compare the canonical genic nucleosome organization across the tree of life, with particular emphasis on the +1 nucleosome position. Seven species were chosen in this study, which come from four major phylogenetic branches of eukaryotes and which range widely across the evolutionary spectrum— S. cerevisiae, S. pombe, human, Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, Arabidopsis thaliana, and also D. discoideum. For D. discoideum, genic nucleosomal arrays started at approximately the same distance from the TSS as seen in other multicellular organisms, with the apparent exception of C. elegans. The canonical pattern in C. elegans was rather weak. Most of the TSSs used for analyses in C. elegans are actually ORF starts, since C. elegans undergoes trans -splicing, which obfuscates the location of the TSS. Our results suggest that chromatin organization in Dictyostelium is more like that of multicellular organisms rather than unicellular fungi. Figure 6. Chromatin structure around the 5′ end of genes evolutionarily conserved across major eukaryotes. The data of genome-wide nucleosome positions in vivo were curated from the literature and the composite distributions of nucleosome locations were... We, therefore, wondered whether placement of a canonical +1 nucleosome in the “downstream” position is associated with the presence of a paused RNA polymerase II. To address this possibility, we searched for genes encoding the NELF pausing factor. NELF is a complex of proteins that is responsible for pausing RNA polymerase II at a fixed distance immediately downstream from the TSS. As reported, this type of pausing has been documented only in metazoans and not in fungi, although a retention of RNA polymerase II in the promoter region has been observed. As expected of a role of NELF in pausing, NELF homologs were found in metazoans. However, NELF homologs were not found in fungi, and also, surprisingly, not detected in C. elegans. Importantly, NELF homologs were found in Dictyostelium, which suggests that Dictyostelium is likely to undergo RNA polymerase II pausing, and is consistent with the downstream placement of the +1 nucleosome. Thus, there appears to be a strong linkage between having NELF and having a +1 nucleosome positioned downstream, next to where polymerase is expected to pause. Remarkably, this relationship did not appear to have a phylogenetic continuum, suggesting that the positioning of the +1 nucleosome and its linkage to RNA polymerase pausing may have shifted multiple times during evolution. NELF was also not found in plants, despite plants seemingly having a downstream placement of the +1 nucleosome. However, plants reside on a more distant branch of the evolutionary tree compared with all other multicellular eukaryotes tested, and thus a NELF homolog may be present but sufficiently diverged to be undetectable by our homology search algorithm. Taken together, these findings provide evidence for a deep evolutionary linkage between placement of the +1 nucleosome in a downstream position and the presence of an adjacent upstream paused polymerase that perhaps arose as part of a genomic gene regulatory mechanism that is imposed by the requirements of multicellularity. This is consistent with the notion that RNA polymerase pausing is a means of coordinating the developmental timing between adjacent cells in multicellular eukaryotes. Discussion Is Dictyostelium moving toward a binary genomic code? The unusual A/T-richness of the Dictyostelium genome makes it well-suited to evaluate the constraints placed on the utilization of G/C vs A/T nucleotides. Most organisms have a more-or-less balanced usage of the four nucleotides to encode not only genetic information but also for the regulation of the maintenance and expression of that information. For Dictyostelium, we see some very biased and unusual usages of A/T to the point where it raises the question as to whether this organism is evolving toward a binary code. Inasmuch as G or C is critical for certain codons, this seems unlikely to ultimately occur. Nonetheless, the extent to which different combinations of A and T can be used for different purposes is remarkable. The diverse usage of A/T nucleotides is illustrated in the following examples. First, we find that the 3′ ends of poly-T tracts, located on the sense strand upstream of ORF starts, demarcate transcriptional start sites. Second, the 5′ ends of poly-A tracts, when located on the sense strand downstream from ORF ends, demarcate transcript end sites. Third, embedded within these poly-T tracts resides the TATA box, which most typically has the sequence TATAAA. In general, the TATA box is located 25–30 bp upstream of the transcription start site and, together with the general transcription factors, helps determine TSS selection. Fourth, further upstream of the TATA box reside poly-T and poly-A tracts which disfavor nucleosome formation and may help maintain nucleosome-free promoter regions. Fifth, as in most other organisms, AATAAA near the 3′ ends of genes signifies the site of transcript cleavage, and sixth, to some extent in some organisms, periodic AA/TT dinucleotides may promote nucleosome formation. We do not know to what extent poly-T tracts define promoter regions and why poly-T rather than poly-A is preferred on the sense strand. Certainly, we would expect such tracts to exclude nucleosomes around the TATA box. This suggests that nucleosomes may not be as influential in controlling TATA box accessibility and pre-initiation complex formation in Dictyostelium as might occur in more GC-rich genomes. One model of transcription initiation is that RNA polymerase II moves away from the pre-initiation complex in search of a start site. Such movement might be accompanied by abortive transcription, where short RNA transcripts are released until a bona fide start site is found. After the start site, the nascent transcript may be more stable in an RNA/DNA hybrid to allow productive transcript elongation. Thus, it is conceivable that abortive transcripts consisting of poly-rU are particularly dissociable and thus preferred just upstream of the TSS. On the other end of the transcript, higher RNA/DNA stability imparted by a tract of poly-rA might slow down RNA polymerase, making it more susceptible to termination mechanisms. While these ideas are speculative, studies on RNA/DNA hybrid stability support these ideas. In particular, poly-rU/poly-dA hybrids are the least stable, and poly-rA/poly-dT hybrids are the most stable of all RNA/DNA hybrid tracts consisting of only A or T. While G/C-richness near the nucleosome dyad or AA/TT dinucleotide periodicities may be contributory toward nucleosome assembly, we only observed G/C-enrichment near the dyad of Dictyostelium nucleosomes, with little or no AA/TT periodicity. The latter is surprising given the extreme A/T-richness of the genome, but such periodicities also appear to be weak or nonexistent in other organisms. Dyad-enriched G/C was also weak on an absolute scale. However, homo- and heteropolymeric A/T tracts were enriched near nucleosome borders, which raises the question as to what extent these sequence preferences contribute to nucleosome formation. Dictyostelium organizes genic nucleosomes as in animals Nucleosome organization in the Dictyostelium genome is most similar to that of metazoans, where the first nucleosome downstream from the TSS places the TSS in the NFR. As such, the transcription machinery would be generally free to initiate transcription without direct influence of the +1 nucleosome. This contrasts with fungi where one edge of the +1 nucleosome resides over the TSS, and thus nucleosome displacement is expected to be a prerequisite to initiation. A downstream placement of the +1 nucleosome raises the question as to whether RNA polymerase II pauses as it approaches that nucleosome. More generally, the question arises as to whether RNA polymerase II pausing and downstream placement of the +1 nucleosomes have coevolved, perhaps originating from constraints imposed by multicellularity occurring at some stage of the life cycle. We examined this by comparing whether downstream placement of the +1 nucleosome is evolutionarily linked to the presence of NELF-encoding genes. NELF is a key determinant of pausing. Consistent with the link between pausing and nucleosome placement, fungi lacked both, whereas metazoans and Dictyostelium contained both. This linkage ties in and agrees well with the recent notion that RNA polymerase II pausing functions to coordinate the timing of multicellular development, and this would include Dictyostelium. One rationale is that many events are needed for assembly of the transcription machinery at promoters, and the combination of these events may have some stochastic elements. Thus, response to cell–cell signaling in development may be less coordinated among cells if left solely to the regulation of pre-initiation complex assembly. In contrast, a paused polymerase may only need a release factor to promote the expression of the gene, and in principle, this would be a more effective mechanism to ensure coordination among cells. Methods Nucleosome mapping Strain AX2-214 was grown axenically in liquid nutrient medium. Aggregated cells were grown in the same way, then harvested and incubated in Soerensen phosphate buffer at 22°C for 6 h. Cells were then subjected to formaldehyde crosslinking. Cells were harvested, washed, and lysed in 1% Triton-×-100. Mononucleosomes were prepared essentially as described. Briefly, washed chromatin pellets were treated with MNase to produce mainly mononucleosomes, which were then gel-purified and subjected to deep sequencing using the 454 Life Sciences GS20/FLX sequencer. This sequencer was utilized to take advantage of its long-read capability, which may improve mappability for potentially low complexity genomes. Sequencing reads essentially covered the entire nucleosome, thereby reporting on the location of both of its ends. We took the read midpoint to reflect the nucleosome dyad. Transcriptome sequencing and analysis RNA was isolated from wild-type strain NC4, which is the parent of AX4 and AX2 derivatives. Cells were grown on bacteria, then plated onto phosphate agar plates. RNA was extracted at 0, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24 h of development using the RNeasy Mini Kit from Qiagen, then converted to cDNA using the Evrogen Mint Kit. cDNA libraries were sequenced using the Roche GS20/FLX system. To obtain an unbiased location of transcripts, all seven RNA-seq data of 0, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24 h were compiled together, and the 5′- and 3′-most base of the matching region of a gene were defined as the TSS and TES, respectively, and were compared to TSS locations that pre-exist in the literature. Read counts for each gene at the indicated time point of development were taken as a measure of expression levels. Expression data were normalized to total read counts and to gene length. Differential expression was assumed if the read numbers between the start point of development and 4 and/or 8 h into the cycle were at least fivefold different. Among the 5468 genes with the annotated TSS, 325 genes were finally grouped as developmentally up-regulated genes, which were highly expressed during the first 8 h of starvation. Data analysis To identify overrepresented TATA sequence motifs in core promoters, we initially used the D. discoideum consensus TATA box TATAAAA, which was reported in 15 genes. We located TATA boxes with this consensus as a preliminary screen and aligned their locations by the TSS. We extracted the DNA sequences in the core promoter region from −37 to −21 bp upstream of the TSS, where bona fide TATA boxes are highly likely to be located. We considered the TATA sequences only in the sense strand. We looked for overrepresented motifs with those sequences using the MEME software. In accordance with the systematic nomenclature of nucleosome positions in the study of Jiang and Pugh, we demarcated the border of the −1, NFR, and +1 zones around transcription start sites. The TES of some genes was not available, and the ORF end site was used instead. In conducting the NPS analysis with nucleosomal core particle DNA sequences, the frequency of 10 dinucleotide sets was compiled as a function of the distance from the nucleosome dyad. Each dinucleotide was defined by reading their sequence in the 5′- to 3′-end direction. Data access The raw nucleosomal sequencing reads have been submitted to the NCBI Sequence Read Archive under accession number SRA044979. The raw RNA sequencing reads have been submitted to the NCBI Sequence Read Archive under accession number SRA045580. 