 P2X receptors are membrane ion channels gated by extracellular ATP 1, 2 that are found widely in vertebrates, but not previously in microbes. Here we identify a weakly related gene in the genome of the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, and show, with the use of heterologous expression in human embryonic kidney cells, that it encodes a membrane ion channel activated by ATP. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed essential conservation of structure–function relations with P2X receptors of higher organisms. The receptor was insensitive to the usual P2X antagonists 3 but was blocked by nanomolar concentrations of Cu 2+ ions. In D. discoideum, the receptor was found on intracellular membranes, with prominent localization to an osmoregulatory organelle, the contractile vacuole. Targeted disruption of the gene in D. discoideum resulted in cells that were unable to regulate cell volume in hypotonic conditions. Cell swelling in these mutant cells was accompanied by a marked inhibition of contractile vacuole emptying. These findings demonstrate a new functional role for P2X receptors on intracellular organelles, in this case in osmoregulation. The D. discoideum genome contains five sequences predicted to encode proteins homologous to vertebrate P2X receptors. The protein most closely related to the seven human receptors is DDB0168616. HEK cells expressing a humanized version of this complementary DNA responded to ATP with robust inward currents. ATP evoked unitary currents in outside-out patches, establishing that this gene encodes an ATP-gated ion channel. Whole-cell currents evoked by ATP were concentration-dependent with kinetic properties most similar to those observed for human P2X 2 or P2X 4 receptors 1. With sodium as the only cation, the current–voltage relation reversed at zero and showed moderate inward rectification. By measuring the current reversal potentials in different extracellular ions, we found that the channels were freely permeable to Ca 2+ ions but less so to larger cations, 0.54 ± 0.01, 0.48 ± 0.21, 0.38 ± 0.16 and 0.21 ± 0.05, where X represents Ca 2+, choline, Tris, tetraethylammonium and N -methyl- d -glucamine, respectively; Fig. 1c ). These values are in the range of vertebrate P2X receptors 1. Western blotting of the expressed receptor showed two bands at 48 and 55 kDa. The receptor formed a trimer under non-denaturing conditions, and immunocytochemistry indicated that the expressed receptor was clearly localized at the plasma membrane. These data are consistent with a body of evidence indicating that vertebrate P2X receptors are trimeric membrane proteins 1, 2, 4, 5. Figure 1 Dd P2X receptor is an ATP-gated ion channel The Dd P2X receptor was strongly activated by hydrolysis-resistant ATP analogues. βγ-Imido-ATP was about tenfold more potent than ATP, and αβ-methylene-ATP was equipotent with ATP. The receptor was only weakly activated by 2′,3′- O --ATP, and not at all by UTP, CTP, GTP, ADP, cyclic AMP, NAD +, FAD, ADP-ribose and cyclic ADP-ribose. Most P2X receptors are blocked by suramin and pyridoxal-phosphate-6-azophenyl-2′,4′-disulphonate, whereas P2X 1, P2X 3 and P2X 2/3 heteromeric receptors are blocked by nanomolar concentrations of 2′,3′- O --ATP 1, 3 : none of these antagonists inhibited the currents at Dd P2X receptors, even at 30–100 μM. However, Dd P2X was very sensitive to block by Cu 2+ 40 ± 5 nM, n = 5; Fig.2c ), whereas other divalent ions were much less effective. Inhibition by micromolar Cu 2+ has been described for some but not other mammalian P2X receptors 6, 7. Figure 2 Properties of Dd P2X receptors We tested the essential similarity in molecular physiology between the Dd P2X receptor and its vertebrate counterparts by mutating residues known to be critically involved in function 1, 8, 9. A body of work implicates two lysine residues in the receptor ectodomain as contributing to ATP binding. The first of these is in a position equivalent to Lys 71 of the rat P2X 2 receptor ; mutation to alanine caused a large decrease in ATP sensitivity. The second, Dd P2X Lys 289, aligns with rat P2X 2 receptor Lys 308; ATP elicited much smaller currents at Dd P2X. An aspartate residue in the second transmembrane domain is essential for function in vertebrate P2X receptors 1 ; the Dictyostelium receptor in which this was replaced by alanine was also non-functional. Finally, a YXXXK motif at the carboxy terminus of all vertebrate P2X receptors is involved in receptor stabilization at the plasma membrane 10 ; this motif was also required in Dd P2X for robust membrane currents. Conversely, some regions of the receptor that have been deduced to be critical for ATP binding and/or channel activation in mammalian P2X receptors were clearly not essential. These included the conserved NFTΦΦΦKNSΦ and GYNFRFAKY motifs in the ectodomain of mammalian receptors. The former motif is found in Dd P2X, but in contrast with the human P2X 1 receptor 9 the phenylalanine residue was not required for ATP action. The latter motif is not present in the Dd P2X sequence. A green fluorescent protein -tagged version of Dd P2X was localized to intracellular membranes of D. discoideum cells rather than the plasma membrane, contrary to what is observed either for P2X receptors in mammalian cells or for Dd P2X receptors expressed in HEK 293 cells. Strong co-localization with calmodulin demonstrated prominent expression on the membrane of the contractile vacuole, a specialized osmoregulatory organelle that allows protists to survive in hypotonic environments such as soil and fresh water 11 - 14. Identification of Dd P2X as a contractile vacuole protein thus indicated that Dd P2X receptors might be involved in osmoregulation. To test this, we generated mutant cells with a disrupted p2xA gene by homologous recombination and assayed for osmoregulatory defects. In hypotonic conditions, wild-type cells swelled by about 20%, followed by a regulatory decrease in cell volume over the next 40 min. In contrast, Dd P2X-null cells showed no regulatory decrease in cell volume but continued to swell over 60 min. Two lines of evidence indicate that this phenotype is due to a requirement for Dd P2X receptors in wild-type cells. First, expression of Dd P2X–GFP in the Dd P2X-null cells rescued the osmoregulatory defects of the mutant. Second, Cu 2+ at concentrations that blocked Dd P2X currents when expressed in HEK 293 cells recapitulated the swelling phenotype in wild-type cells. Furthermore, βγ-imido-ATP, which is polar and cell-impermeant, had no effect on the regulatory decrease in volume when applied to wild-type cells; this discounts a role for plasma membrane receptors and is consistent with the intracellular compartmentalization of Dd P2X. Taken together, these data indicate a direct role for Dd P2X receptors in osmoregulation. Figure 3 Dd P2X receptors are localized to the contractile vacuole and are required for cell volume regulation and contractile vacuole voiding In wild-type cells, the contractile vacuole periodically fills and voids, expelling water from the cell body and permitting the regulatory decrease in volume under hypotonic conditions. We therefore tested whether an impairment of contractile vacuole function could explain why Dd P2X-disrupted cells displayed no regulatory decrease in volume. In wild-type cells, regular voiding events occurred with a cycle of 80 ± 5s. In contrast, mutant cells had a decreased frequency of contractile vacuole voiding and a prolonged cycle. Wild-type cells treated with 10 μM Cu 2+ also had a prolonged voiding cycle. These results suggest that loss of the Dd P2X receptor leads to a compromised contractile vacuole, an inability to osmoregulate, and ultimately cell swelling. Contractile vacuole filling seemed to be normal in Dd P2X-null cells, implying that docking at the cell membrane or the contraction itself is deficient. It is possible that the Ca 2+ permeability of the P2X receptor in the membrane of the contractile vacuole has a key function. In concord with this idea, the pheno-type of Dd P2X-disrupted cells is similar to that of LvsA-null cells, which is thought to be partly due to a misregulation of calmodulin function 15, 16. One speculative possibility is that distension of the contractile vacuole leads to the entry of ATP from the cell cytoplasm: this then activates Dd P2X receptors, which allow vacuolar Ca 2+ ions to pass back into the cytoplasm and initiate contraction. These studies represent significant advances for the study of P2X receptor structure and function. The Dd P2X receptor reported here is relatively remote in sequence from those previously reported 1, 17. Despite this, essential properties of a P2X receptor are conserved between amoeba and man. Consequently, attention can now be drawn to those few parts of the molecule critical to these functions. P2X receptors have hitherto been considered in the context of the plasma membrane and the transmitter-like actions of extracellular ATP 1, 2. The present studies, however, define a receptor that is both found on internal membranes and has an intracellular role. This raises the possibility that P2X receptors might also function as intracellular ion channels in other cell types, including higher organisms. Such an idea is not without precedent. Another family of channel proteins has members with well-defined functional roles in both plasma and endosomal membranes 17. Furthermore, some members of the family of ‘ectoenzyme’ nucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolases are actually found predominantly on internal membranes 18. Given the ubiquitous presence of their ligand ATP, P2X receptors may be more general regulators of intracellular organelles in ways other than osmoregulation. METHODS Generation and expression of Dd P2X constructs A 1.1-kilobase cDNA corresponding to the predicted open reading frame of DDB0168616 was amplified by polymerase chain reaction from growth-phase AX4 strain D. discoideum. The insert was subcloned into pcDNA3.1-His at 5′ Bam HI and 3′ Xho I sites and into pDEX 27 GFP at Eco RI sites for expression in HEK 293 cells and D. discoideum, respectively. Expression of the pcDNA3.1 Dd P2X construct in HEK 293 cells produced messenger RNA transcript but no detectable protein or function. A humanized version of the Dd P2X receptor was synthesized in which each amino acid codon was replaced by that most commonly found in Homo sapiens. This was C-terminally tagged with hexahistidine and subcloned into pcDNA3.1. For electrophysiology, HEK 293 cells were transiently transfected with 1 μg or 0.1 μg plus 0.1 μg of enhanced GFP using Lipofectamine 2000. For expression in D. discoideum, cells were transformed by electroporation and subjected to G418 selection. Electrophysiology Whole-cell and outside-out patch recordings were made from HEK 293 cells at room temperature, 24–48 h after transient transfection. The extracellular solution contained : 145 NaCl, 2 KCl, 2 CaCl 2, 1 MgCl 2,13 d -glucose and 10 HEPES, pH 7.3. For whole-cell recordings, the intracellular patch pipette solution contained : 145 NaCl, 10 HEPES and 10 EGTA, pH 7.3. For outside-out recordings, NaF replaced NaCl in the patch pipette. Outside-out recordings were sampled at 10 kHz and filtered at 3 kHz. For monovalent ion substitution in whole-cell experiments P X / P Na was calculated from exp, and for Ca 2+ P Ca / P Na was from i /4 o, where i is the cytosolic Na i concentration, F is Faraday's constant, R is the universal gas constant, T is the absolute temperature and o is the extracellular Ca 2+ concentration. E rev values were corrected for calculated liquid junction potentials. Numerical data are presented as means ± s.e.m. Osmoregulation assay and contractile vacuole voiding Wild-type and mutant AX4 strain cells were maintained in HL5 growth medium at 22 °C. Cells adherent to glass coverslips were imaged with an inverted Olympus IX71 microscope ; images were captured at 2-min intervals with Simple PCI software. Geometric cell size was measured offline for ten cells per field over three independent experiments. Contractile vacuoles were observed at 1-s intervals for 15 min after exposure to water, and voiding time was measured directly. Immunoblotting and immunostaining We used 50 μg of total cell lysate per load for perfluoro-octanoic acid PAGE 19 and SDS–PAGE gels. For co-localization of Dd P2X–GFP and calmodulin, methanol-fixed D. discoideum cells were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 and blocked with 3% bovine serum albumin. Cells were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with mouse monoclonal anti-calmodulin primary antibody, washed and subsequently incubated with Cy3-conjugated donkey anti-mouse secondary antibody. For localization of Dd P2X-His in HEK 293 cells, the same protocol was performed but with anti-His tag as the primary antibody. Generation of Dd P2X receptor knockout A 3-kilobase genomic fragment encoding Dd P2X was amplified from wild-type AX4 genomic DNA and a tetracycline-blasticidin resistance cassette was inserted by in vitro transposition. This insertion is within exon 3 of the p2xA gene, about 650 base pairs downstream of the start codon. The linearized construct was transformed into D. discoideum followed by blasticidin selection. Homologous recombination was verified by polymerase chain reaction. Acknowledgements We thank H. Broomhead, L. Almond, K. Dossi and N. Aldren for their technical expertise during this study, and A. Mueller-Taubenberger for the gift of the pDEX 27 GFP vector. This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust, the Medical Research Council and the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine. Footnotes Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. Article information Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 Mar 5. Published in final edited form as: Nature. 2007 Jul 12; 448: 200–203. doi: 10.1038/nature05926 PMCID: PMC3942652 EMSID: EMS4043 PMID: 17625565 Samuel J. Fountain, 1 Katie Parkinson, 1 Mark T. Young, 1 Lishuang Cao, 1 Christopher R. L. Thompson, 1 and R. Alan North 1 Samuel J. Fountain 1 Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. Find articles by Samuel J. Fountain Katie Parkinson 1 Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. Find articles by Katie Parkinson Mark T. Young 1 Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. Find articles by Mark T. Young Lishuang Cao 1 Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. Find articles by Lishuang Cao Christopher R. L. Thompson 1 Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. Find articles by Christopher R. L. Thompson R. Alan North 1 Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. Find articles by R. Alan North 1 Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.R.L.T. or R.A.N.. PMC Copyright notice The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at Nature 