Keratocyte Fragments and Cells Utilize Competing Pathways to Move in Opposite Directions in an Electric Field You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Keratocyte Fragments and Cells Utilize Competing Pathways to Move in Opposite Directions in an Electric Field Curr Biol. 2013 Apr 8; 23: 569–574. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Current biology : CB Author Manuscript HHS Public Access Keratocyte Fragments and Cells Utilize Competing Pathways to Move in Opposite Directions in an Electric Field Yaohui Sun, Hao Do,, and Alex Mogilner Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials Supplementary Data. NIHMS483427-supplement-Supplementary_Data.pdf GUID: F10BCAEE-9EAC-4746-B60D-59550C7C3E09 Summary Sensing of an electric field by cells—galvanotaxis—is important in wound healing, development, cell division, nerve growth, and angiogenesis. Different cell types migrate in opposite directions in EFs, and the same cell can switch the directionality depending on conditions. A tug-of-war mechanism between multiple signaling pathways can direct Dictyostelium cells to either cathode or anode. Mechanics of motility is simplest in fish keratocytes, so we turned to keratocytes to investigate their migration in EFs. Keratocytes sense electric fields and migrate to the cathode. Keratocyte fragments are the simplest motile units. Cell fragments from leukocytes are able to respond to chemotactic signals, but whether cell fragments are galvanotactic was unknown. We found that keratocyte fragments are the smallest motile electric field-sensing unit: they migrate to the anode, in the opposite direction of whole cells. Myosin II was essential for the direction sensing of fragments but not for parental cells, while PI3 kinase was essential for the direction sensing of whole cells but not for fragments. Thus, two signal transduction pathways, one depending on PI3K, another on myosin, compete to orient motile cells in the electric field. Galvanotaxis is not due to EF force and does not depend on cell or fragment size. We propose a “compass” model according to which protrusive and contractile actomyosin networks self-polarize to the front and rear of the motile cell, respectively, and the electric signal orients both networks toward cathode with different strengths. Results and Discussion Cells and Their Fragments Migrate in Opposite Directions in an EF Keratocytes, as well as other motile cell types, can spontaneously detach cell fragments that move with shapes, speeds, and persistence similar to those of whole cells. Both fragments and parental cells cultured without application of an electric field showed migration in random directions, with a directedness value close to zero. When exposed to EFs, both cells and fragments, which are devoid of nuclei and major organelles, migrated directionally. Surprisingly, the cell fragments migrated to the anode, while the parental cells migrated to the cathode. Figure 1 EFs Direct Migration of Fragments to the Anode, in the Opposite Direction of that of the Parental Keratocytes This directional migration was further confirmed with multiple reversal of the EF polarity, which induced rapid reversal of the migration direction every time in both fragments and cells. Starting from an EF strength of 0.5 V/cm, increase of EFs increased directedness for both cells and fragments. The speed of cells, but not of fragments, increased moderately with the EF strength. The shapes of cells and fragments before EF application were not changed significantly by EFs. For keratocyte cells and fragments, it has been shown that quantitative changes in the principal modes of variations of cell shape are indicators of changes in the self-organization of the actin-myosin networks and consequent changes in biophysical motile machinery. Thus, the EF invariance of the shapes of fragments and cells indicates that an EF mainly orients fragments and cells without affecting organization of the actin-myosin networks. To assess the role of actin dynamics in EF sensing, we used the Arp2/3 inhibitor CK-666. Both perturbed cells and fragments slowed down significantly, yet remained strongly directional, to cathode and anode, respectively. Thus, actin machinery itself is unlikely to be a part of the signaling transduction pathway of galvanotaxis. Figure 2 Distinctive Roles for Myosin and PI3K Signaling in Cells and Fragments in Determination of EF-Guided Migration Direction PI3K Inhibition Does Not Affect Fragments, but Reverses Cells to the Anode What could be the mechanisms for fragments to migrate oppositely to their parental cells? In neutrophils, two antagonistic pathways—“frontness” and “backness”—were proposed to segregate the actin-protruding and actin-myosin contractile networks to the front and rear, respectively, and to orient the front up the chemotactic gradient. When Rac was inhibited and the frontness pathway weakened, the cell rear oriented up the chemotactic gradient, and cell migration shifted down the gradient. Though galvanotaxis has a different sensor, it shares known signal transduction pathways and molecules with chemotaxis. We hypothesized that, similarly, two pathways—frontness and backness—compete to orient cells in EFs in opposite directions, and that the frontness is stronger than the backness in cells, with the opposite being true in fragments. This hypothesis predicts that if the frontness is weakened, the cells in an EF would reorient from the cathode to the anode by the previously overwhelmed backness. On the other hand, the fragments’ directionality should not be affected because in them the backness dominates, and weakening of the frontness would not change this balance. PI3 kinase is a key part of direction-sensing frontness pathways relaying signals to actin ; therefore, we tested whether PI3K influences the migration direction of keratocytes and fragments. PI3K inhibition with LY294002, in agreement with our hypothesis, switched the directional migration of cells from the cathode to the anode. Although the overall number of motile cells and cell speed were decreased by this perturbation, a great fraction of keratocytes maintained persistent motility. As can be seen clearly in stronger EFs, the majority of cells migrate to the anode, but a few cells maintain the cathodal migration. As expected, LY294002 did not have significant effects on the anode-directed migration of fragments. Myosin Inhibition Disrupts Directional Sensing of Fragments but Not Cells According to our hypothesis, weakening of the backness should reorient the fragments from the anode to the cathode, but not the cells’ cathodal migration. We tested the effect of myosin inhibition, because myosin is associated with controlling the motile cell rear. Indeed, blebbistatin, a small-molecule inhibitor of myosin, did not affect the directional cell migration. However, rather than reorienting the fragments, blebbistatin treatment abolished the anode directed migration of fragments. Interestingly, fragments did not migrate in completely random direction: a statistically significant majority of the myosin-inhibited fragments in EFs migrated along the EF direction, to either the anode or the cathode. We used another compound, Y27632, to inhibit the Rho-associated kinase and myosin downstream. ROCK inhibition abolished directional migration of fragments to the anode but had little effects on cathode directed migration of cells. To investigate whether the signal transduction was limited to the PI3K- and myosin-mediated pathways, we applied LY294002 and blebbistatin simultaneously. When both pathways were inhibited, directionality of both cells and fragments in EFs was lost completely. Moreover, there was no longer a bias to the quadrants represented by either the cathode or anode as opposed to the up or down quadrants. Therefore, a parallel independent pathway transducing the EF signal is unlikely. Depletion of Extracellular Calcium Disrupts Directional Sensing of Fragments but Not Cells We then asked what could be the basis for different relative strengths of the frontness and backness pathways in cells and fragments and investigated possible regulators upstream of myosin. The fragments are devoid of endoplasmic reticulum, the major store of intracellular Ca 2+, which could alter Ca 2+ dynamics in fragments. Ca 2+ channels are involved in keratinocytes’ galvanotaxis and are proposed to regulate keratocytes’ response to EFs. Varying extracellular Ca 2+ affects the direction of granulocyte migration in EFs. We used EGTA, a chelating agent, to deplete extracellular Ca 2+. In addition to lowering the average speeds of cells and fragments, this perturbation rendered fragments nondirectional in EFs. Because myosin and adhesion turnover are regulated through Ca 2+, one possibility is that due to different Ca 2+ regulation in cells and fragments, myosin and adhesion strengths and distributions are affected differently, leading to different transduction of the galvanotactic signals along two pathways in cells and fragments. Figure 3 Calcium Signaling Is Required for Galvanotaxis of Fragments but Not Cells, Whereas Microtubules Are Dispensable for Both Perturbation of Microtubules Has No Effect on Cell and Fragment Galvanotaxis Another difference between the cells and fragments is the presence of microtubules in the former and absence in the latter. Microtubules do not affect keratocyte cell motility, and disruption of microtubules does not affect keratocytes’ galvanotaxis. Disruption of microtubules with nocodazole did not affect the directedness of either cells or fragments in EFs. Thus, different microtubule-mediated signaling is not the cause of the different balance of the anode- and cathode-directing pathways of galvanotaxis. Directional Sensing Does Not Depend on Cell or Fragment Sizes Yet another difference between the cells and fragments is their size, with cells having four times greater surface area than fragments. This could potentially lead to differences in both initial EF-sensing mechanisms and signal transduction. However, neither cell nor fragment directedness depends on their sizes, while the directedness of both depends on the EF strength. In fact, the smaller fragments are more sensitive to weaker EFs than the larger cells. The Galvanotactic Effect Is Not the Result of Direct Electric Force Sensing In principle, if the cell and fragment bear opposite surface charges, the electrostatic and osmotic forces on their surfaces in EF would be opposite. However, in suspension, both cells and fragments are dragged to the cathode with similar speeds in EFs, so their surfaces have charges of the same sign and similar density, and the electric forces would drag them in the same direction. Another serendipitous observation argues against the direct force-sensing: often, fragments stay connected to mother cells by membrane tethers. In this state, cell or fragment pairs often moved in opposite directions for minutes, until the tether was stretched up to tens of microns, at which point both cell and fragment were stalled. When PI3K was inhibited, both cell and fragment connected by the tether migrated to anode, but the cell was usually faster and would outrun the fragment, after which the cell and fragment in its wake traveled together without stretching the tether further. When myosin was inhibited, the cathode-directed cell rapidly left the fragment behind, stretching the tether sometime by more than 100 μm. This indicates that cells and fragments are unlikely to respond to mechanical force exerted by EFs on charged cells, because such force of at most 10 pN would be overwhelmed by the opposite tether force of tens of piconewtons. The EF signal orients the tethered cell and fragment effectively enough for the cell and fragment to persist despite the opposing mechanical forces. Figure 4 Galvanotaxis of Fragments Tethered to Mother Cells Finally, we tested how the cell and fragment directedness depended on external pH and found that, in agreement with, the cells maintained the cathodal-oriented motility in the wide range of pH only losing the directedness at pH < 6. Interestingly, the fragments sensed EFs in the range of pH similar to that of the EF-sensing cells, pointing indirectly to the same physical EF sensor in the cells and fragments. “Compass” Model of Galvanotaxis We conclude that the cell fragment—the simplest and smallest cell migration unit—is also the smallest EF-sensing unit, containing both the EF sensor and the relevant signal transduction pathways. These PI3K- and myosin-dependent pathways perform differently in cells and fragments. We propose that two competing pathways direct cells in an EF : a PI3K-dependent pathway signaling to the protruding actin network at the cell front, orienting the front toward cathode, and a myosin-dependent pathway signaling to the contractile actin-myosin network at the cell rear, orienting the rear also toward the cathode. The PI3K-dependent pathway dominates in cells, while the myosin-dependent pathway dominates in fragments. In the whole cell, the signal orienting the protruding actin network toward the cathode is stronger, so the cell front is facing the cathode. In the fragment, the signal orienting the contractile actin-myosin network at the rear toward the cathode is stronger, so the fragment rear is facing the cathode and the front is facing the anode. The identity of the factors that govern these two pathways differently in cells and fragments remains unknown. One possibility could stem from different PIP3/PTEN or other activator/inhibitor ratios in cells and fragments. Another is that fragments’ ability to regulate intracellular Ca 2+ levels is diminished, so EF could create a Ca 2+ gradient in a fragment but not in a whole cell, rendering myosin-related signaling at the fragment rear relatively stronger. No long-lasting Ca 2+ gradient within the keratocyte cell lamellipodium has been observed, so it is likely that in whole cells Ca 2+ is buffered and does not develop spatial gradients. Yet another possibility is that, mechanically, myosin could have a weaker steering effect on the whole cells than on fragments. Related to that, fragments are unlikely to inherit much myosin from mother cells; the myosin that they inherit is weakened and does not affect the motility mechanics, so the fact that myosin-mediated steering in EFs is crucial is puzzling. Perhaps a signaling, not mechanical, function of myosin is essential for the EF sensing. Our data argue against involvement of the actin assembly dynamics in the galvanotaxis, but whether all actin networks are only downstream readouts of signaling pathways, unlike in neutrophils, requires further investigation. Many studies have gradually converged on a number of hypotheses about how cells can sense EFs. First, an EF induces a gradient in the membrane electric potential, which can affect asymmetrically ion fluxes that could signal to the motile machinery. Second, cells are oriented by fluid flow, and the EF creates an electro-osmotic flow near the charged plasma membrane. Third, charged signaling proteins in the plasma membrane can be dragged by an electric force aggregating at one cell edge and spatially biasing the signaling. Fourth, the cell can feel the force of an EF on the charged proteins in the plasma membrane. Following, our data suggest that electro-osmosis is unlikely to be the factor triggering galvanotaxis: since cells and fragments have similar surface charges and very different shapes, the electro-osmotic flow should pull both cell and fragment in the same direction, and the effect of fluid flow on the great mound of the cell body would be different from that on the flat and small fragment. The observation that a mechanical opposing force could not reorient cells and fragments suggests that direct electric force sensing is unlikely to be the galvanotactic mechanism. Our data agree with the hypothesis that electrophoresis of charged membrane proteins could be the initial signal of galvanotaxis in the keratocytes, as cells and fragments maintain their directedness in EF in similar ranges of pH. This also hints at the same upstream EF sensor in cells and fragments. Supplementary Material Supplementary Data Click here to view. 