α-Catenin and IQGAP Regulate Myosin Localization to Control Epithelial Tube Morphogenesis in Dictyostelium You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF α-Catenin and IQGAP Regulate Myosin Localization to Control Epithelial Tube Morphogenesis in Dictyostelium Dev Cell. 2012 Sep 11; 23: 533–546. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Developmental cell Author Manuscript HHS Public Access α-Catenin and IQGAP Regulate Myosin Localization to Control Epithelial Tube Morphogenesis in Dictyostelium Daniel J. Dickinson, Douglas N. Robinson,, and William I. Weis Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials 01. NIHMS388180-supplement-01.doc GUID: 0D98996B-84F0-4D7C-ADB9-24C756A28CD3 Summary Apical actomyosin activity in animal epithelial cells influences tissue morphology, and drives morphogenetic movements during development. The molecular mechanisms leading to myosin II accumulation at the apical membrane and its exclusion from other membranes are poorly understood. We show that in the non-metazoan Dictyostelium discoideum, myosin II localizes apically in tip epithelial cells that surround the stalk, and constriction of this epithelial tube is required for proper morphogenesis. IQGAP1 and its binding partner cortexillin I function downstream of α- and β-catenin to exclude myosin II from the basolateral cortex and promote apical accumulation of myosin II. Deletion of IQGAP1 or cortexillin compromises epithelial morphogenesis without affecting cell polarity. These results reveal that apical localization of myosin II is a conserved morphogenetic mechanism from non-metazoans to vertebrates, and identify a hierarchy of proteins that regulate the polarity and organization of an epithelial tube in a simple model organism. Introduction Morphogenesis is the process that produces functional tissue architectures during development of an organism. Cell migration, shape changes and differentiation must occur in concert for normal morphogenesis to occur. In animals, morphogenesis often occurs via the reorganization of cells within epithelial sheets, but it is unclear how individual cell behaviors are coordinated to produce robust tissue shape changes. Epithelial cells have molecularly distinct apical and basolateral plasma membrane domains and a polarized organization of the cytoskeleton that allow the cells to undergo directional and reproducible morphogenetic movements. The Adherens Junction, containing cadherin transmembrane adhesion molecules and their cytosolic binding partners including α- and β-catenin, is critical for this polarized cell organization and for the structural integrity of the epithelium. In many animal epithelial tissues, nonmuscle myosin II and actin are enriched at the apical membrane where actomyosin contractility generates forces that lead to changes in tissue shape. In planar epithelia, apical actomyosin activity can cause apical constriction, a morphogenetic process in which apical membranes shrink resulting in bending or invagination of the epithelial sheet. Apical constriction occurs during gastrulation in many animal embryos including Drosophila, C. elegans and sea urchin, and during vertebrate neural tube closure. The ability of actomyosin to power apical constriction in planar epithelia has been relatively well-described, but the function of actomyosin in tubular epithelia, in which the apical membrane faces the lumen, has been studied less. Epithelial tubes with apical actomyosin are found in the mammalian salivary gland, pancreas and the developing kidney, as well as in the zebrafish neural tube. In some cases, apical actomyosin may regulate the size of the lumen by exerting a force that opposes lumen expansion, but it is unclear whether this is a general phenomenon. In addition, how apical actomyosin contributes to the morphogenesis of epithelial tubes is not well understood. We examined this problem during multicellular development of the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. Social amoebae provide insights into the molecular and cellular factors that contributed to the early evolution of animal morphogenesis because of their phylogenetic position as an outgroup to metazoa. Dictyostelium amoebae initiate multicellular development by aggregating in response to starvation. In the last stage of development, called culmination, an epithelial tube is formed that surrounds the stalk at the tip of the fruiting body. Tip epithelial cells have molecularly distinct apical and basolateral plasma membranes, with the apical membrane adjacent to the stalk, and a polarized organization of the plasma membrane, cytoskeleton and cytoplasmic organelles. The polarity and morphology of the tip epithelium require an α-catenin ortholog and the β-catenin-related protein Aardvark that co-localize to the basolateral plasma membrane, and loss of either of these proteins disrupts epithelial organization and cell polarity. Figure 1 An apical actomyosin ring constricts the stalk tube One important developmental role of the tip epithelium is secretion of cellulose and extracellular matrix proteins to form the stalk tube, which is a rigid support that surrounds the stalk cells. The tip epithelium is located close to the substratum at the onset of culmination, but is lifted upward as the stalk forms, depositing cellulose and ECM as it goes. Because of the tubular morphology of the tip epithelium, this secreted material is also organized into a tube. Stalk cells increase in volume approximately 5-fold during culmination, and because these cells are encased in the rigid stalk tube, their expansion is directed upward, which contributes to the lifting force that raises the spore head. Thus, the patterning of the stalk tube by the tubular tip epithelium is essential for normal culmination in Dictyostelium because it allows stalk cell expansion to be converted into a lifting force. Mutations in α-catenin or aardvark compromise stalk formation by disrupting the organization and polarity of the tip epithelium. Here, we investigated molecular mechanisms downstream of α-catenin and aardvark that regulate morphogenesis of the tip epithelial tube. Significantly, as in higher animals, myosin is concentrated at the apical membrane in Dictyostelium epithelial cells, where it controls tissue morphology and regulates the size and shape of the lumen. We find that α-catenin regulates the localization of a Dictyostelium IQGAP homolog and the actin bundling protein cortexillin, which function together to exclude myosin from the basolateral membrane and promote its accumulation at the apical membrane. Loss of IQGAP1 or cortexillin compromises apical myosin enrichment and disrupts the organization of the epithelial monolayer, but does not affect cell polarity. Our results reveal a hierarchy of actomyosin regulatory proteins that link epithelial cell adhesion, cell polarity and morphogenesis in a simple developmental system. Results An apical actomyosin ring constricts the stalk in the Dictyostelium tip To understand the mechanism underlying the organization of tip epithelial cells into a tube during Dictyostelium morphogenesis, we began by examining the distribution of myosin in the tip epithelium, because tissue structure is often influenced by myosin activity in metazoans. We expressed GFP fused to the N-terminus of myosin heavy chain. GFP-myosin was expressed at near-endogenous levels, and at comparable levels in all cell lines used in this study. Cortical GFP-myosin was highly enriched at the plasma membrane domain adjacent to the stalk, which corresponds to the apical membrane of the cells, with lesser amounts localized basolaterally. Myosin co-localized with actin at the apical membrane and formed a continuous ring around the stalk. This structure probably corresponds to the “actin ring” observed in electron micrographs, which consists of bundled actin filaments connected between adjacent cells by electron-dense junctional structures. We refer to this structure as the actomyosin ring. To examine the role of myosin in the organization of the tip epithelium, we interfered with myosin activity. Dictyostelium cells that lack myosin heavy chain do not develop past the mound stage, precluding an analysis of culmination in these mutants. We therefore sought a milder genetic perturbation that would reduce myosin activity without preventing the cells from reaching culmination. Cells lacking myosin light chain kinase A have reduced myosin activity but are able to complete development. Culminants of this strain had defects in epithelial organization: the tip epithelium was multilayered, and the cells lacked the elongated, columnar morphology characteristic of wild-type epithelial cells. Cortical GFP-myosin was still present in these culminants, consistent with the fact that regulatory light chain phosphorylation stimulates myosin motor activity but does not affect its actin binding or bipolar thick filament assembly. With the assumption that RLC is the primary substrate of mlkA, these results indicate that wild-type levels of myosin activity are required for normal organization of the tip epithelium. The presence of an actomyosin ring surrounding the stalk in the tip epithelium coincides with a previous description of a narrowing of the stalk in this region, suggesting that the activity of the apical actomyosin ring in the tip epithelium compresses the stalk. To directly test this hypothesis, we measured the width of the stalk in mlkA- culminants. Indeed, loss of mlkA caused the stalk to be significantly wider than in wild-type culminants. These data strongly suggest that the contractile actomyosin ring in the tip epithelial cells compresses the stalk as it forms, although we cannot formally exclude the possibility that the multilayering of the tip epithelium in mlkA- also contributes to stalk expansion. Since tip epithelial cells secrete cellulose and extracellular matrix proteins to form a rigid tube that encases the entire stalk, constriction of the stalk in the tip probably restricts the stalk diameter along its entire length, resulting in a long, thin stalk. β-and α-catenin are required for apical myosin localization and stalk constriction The disruption of epithelial morphology in mlkA- culminants is reminiscent of the phenotype observed upon loss of α-catenin or the β-catenin-related protein Aardvark, which are required for epithelial cell polarity in Dictyostelium and higher metazoans. We therefore tested whether the catenins regulate myosin localization. We previously characterized two phenotypic classes resulting from α-catenin depletion by RNA interference ctnnA : a severe phenotype in culminants lacking detectable α-catenin, in which no trace of epithelial organization is visible; and a milder phenotype resulting from partial α-catenin depletion, in which the epithelial cells are recognizable but epithelial cell polarity and organization are disrupted. We focused on ctnnA culminants with the milder phenotype, since these culminants had a recognizable epithelium in which GFP-myosin localization could be analyzed. We also examined mutants lacking aardvark. In ctnnA and aarA- culminants, apical localization of GFP-myosin was not uniform and appeared reduced compared to wild-type. We also observed large accumulations of myosin that were not adjacent to the stalk tube. Quantitatively, there was a net redistribution of myosin away from the stalk tube: GFP-myosin levels were reduced apically, but increased along the lateral membrane. Closer examination revealed that the actomyosin ring was not continuous around the entire stalk. Consistent with this disruption of the actomyosin ring, the stalk was significantly wider in ctnnA and aarA- culminants and 140±12 μm 2 for aarA- compared with 70±10 μm 2 for wild-type; Figure 2D ). We conclude that both α-catenin and aardvark are required for the normal distribution of myosin in the tip epithelium and the formation of a functional actomyosin ring that constricts the stalk. Figure 2 β- and α-Catenin are required for normal myosin localization and stalk tube constriction Identification of IQGAP and Cortexillin as α-catenin-interacting proteins To investigate the molecular mechanism by which the catenins control myosin localization in the tip epithelium, we sought to identify known regulators of myosin activity that interact with α-catenin. We immunoprecipitated α-catenin from fruiting bodies and analyzed the immunoprecipitates by mass spectrometry. We chose two isoforms of IQGAP and two isoforms of the actin crosslinker Cortexillin for further study. IQGAPs form complexes with cortexillins, and together these proteins have been implicated in the regulation of myosin distribution in single cells undergoing cytokinesis. D. discoideum IQGAP proteins contain RasGAP-related domains homologous to those in animal and yeast IQGAPs, but lack the N-terminal actin binding domains and IQ repeats present in metazoan IQGAPs. Cortexillins consist of actin binding and coiled-coil domains, and thus likely serve as the actin-binding moiety in the IQGAP-cortexillin complex. Figure 3 Identification of IQGAP and cortexillins as α-catenin-interacting proteins Figure 5 IQGAP1 and cortexillins function in a complex We examined the localization of IQGAP1 and cortexillins I and II by immunofluorescence. Endogenous IQGAP1 and both cortexillins colocalized with α-catenin at the basolateral cortex of Dictyostelium tip epithelial cells. IQGAP1, cortexillins and α-catenin were notably absent from the apical membrane, where actin and myosin were enriched. The colocalization of IQGAP1, cortexillin I, cortexillin II and Dd α-catenin at the basolateral membrane is consistent with the possibility that these proteins function together in a complex. IQGAP1 and cortexillins control myosin localization in the tip epithelium Because IQGAP1 and cortexillins are known to regulate myosin organization in single Dictyostelium cells, we hypothesized that they regulate myosin in the tip epithelium during culmination. To test this hypothesis, we first examined mutants lacking IQGAP1. In iqgA- culminants, tip epithelial organization was severely disrupted. The epithelium was multilayered and, unlike in wild-type culminants, the epithelial cells were not elongated in the direction perpendicular to the stalk tube. GFP-myosin was not enriched at the plasma membrane adjacent to the stalk tube, and the actomyosin ring was not visible. As in ctnnA and aarA- culminants, disruption of the epithelium resulted in a significantly wider stalk tube. A mutant lacking IQGAP2 did not have any developmental phenotype, consistent with the very low expression levels of IQGAP2 in culminants ; therefore, IQGAP2 was not examined further. Figure 4 IQGAP1 and cortexillin I are required for normal myosin organization and tissue morphology We next examined culminants lacking cortexillin I. ctxA- tips appeared disorganized, with gaps in the actomyosin ring and abnormal accumulations of myosin distant from the stalk tube. Unlike iqgA- culminants, most ctxA- culminants contained small regions of normally organized epithelium, which varied in size. However, GFP-myosin was redistributed basolaterally to a similar extent overall as in igqA- culminants. Moreover, the stalk tube in ctxA- mutants was widened to a similar degree as in the iqgA - mutants, indicating that these small patches of epithelium were not sufficient to constrict the stalk. This result is consistent with our interpretation that a continuous actomyosin ring is essential for the compression of the stalk by the tip epithelial cells. We did not examine culminants lacking cortexillin II, but importantly, cortexillin II localization was strongly perturbed in ctxA- mutants. We therefore interpret the phenotype of ctxA- culminants as resulting from a loss of function of both cortexillins. IQGAP1 and cortexillins colocalized in the tip epithelium, and loss of either IQGAP1 or cortexillin I produced a similar phenotype. This was surprising because iqgA- and ctxA- have distinct phenotypes in single cells undergoing cytokinesis. IQGAP1 and cortexillins form a complex in single D. discoideum cells, and we confirmed that both cortexillins co-immunoprecipitated with GFP-IQGAP1 in wild-type culminants. To understand why iqgA- and ctxA- culminants had similar phenotypes, we asked how formation of an IQGAP1/cortexillin complex was related to the function of these proteins. First, we examined cortexillin localization in iqgA- culminants. Loss of IQGAP1 strongly reduced the total levels of both cortexillin I and II, their association with a Triton X-100-insoluble cytoskeletal fraction, and their cortical localization. Thus, IQGAP1 is required for normal expression and cortical localization of cortexillins I and II. This is in contrast to single cells in which cortexillin I localizes to the cortex in the absence of IQGAP1. Next, we examined IQGAP1 and myosin localization in ctxA- culminants. In wild-type cells, IQGAP1 and GFP-myosin had opposite cortical localizations: GFP-myosin was enriched apically, whereas IQGAP1 localized basolaterally. Indeed, a pixel-by-pixel analysis demonstrated that the distributions of IQGAP1 and GFP-myosin were anti-correlated in wild-type tip epithelia. Importantly, this anti-correlation was abolished in ctxA- culminants, and areas of colocalization between IQGAP1 and GFP-myosin were visible in the tip epithelium. Loss of cortexillin I also reduced the levels of IQGAP1, its recruitment to the cortex and its association with the cytoskeleton. Two interpretations are consistent with these results. Loss of cortexillin I could cause a redistribution of IQGAP1 from its normal localization opposite of myosin, to lower-affinity cortical sites unrelated to myosin. Alternatively, loss of cortexillin I could reveal a sub-population of IQGAP1 whose localization is unrelated to myosin. In either case, our data strongly suggest that in the tip epithelium, the majority of cortexillin I and a large fraction of IQGAP1 exist in a complex, and that cortical localization of myosin and of the IQGAP1/cortexillin I complex are mutually exclusive. We also observed that cortical localization of cortexillin II was not detectable by immunofluorescence in culminants in which the cortexillin I gene was disrupted. Cortexillin II was expressed at normal levels in ctxA- culminants but was not associated with the cytoskeleton. In previous studies, cortexillin II co-immunoprecipitated with IQGAP1 in wild-type cells ; see also Figure 5A ) but not in cells lacking cortexillin I, indicating that cortexillin I is required to recruit cortexillin II into a complex containing IQGAP1. These results are consistent with our finding that IQGAP1 is necessary for recruitment of both cortexillins to the basolateral cortex of tip epithelial cells. In summary, our results support the existence of a protein complex containing IQGAP1, cortexillin I and cortexillin II in tip epithelial cells; for simplicity, we refer to this complex as IQGAP1/cortexillin. The redistribution of GFP-myosin to the basolateral cortex in iqgA- and ctxA- culminants indicates that the mutually exclusive cortical localizations of GFP-myosin and IQGAP1/cortexillin in wild-type culminants is at least partially due to inhibition of myosin cortical localization by IQGAP1/cortexillin, although we do not exclude the possibility that myosin may also influence IQGAP1/cortexillin localization by a feedback mechanism. Aardvark and α-catenin control the localization of IQGAP1/cortexillin Since we found that IQGAP1 and cortexillins interact with α-catenin and produce similar epithelial organization defects, we examined the functional relationship between IQGAP1/cortexillin and the catenins. In ctnnA and aarA- culminants, IQGAP1 and cortexillin I were localized to the apical membrane adjacent to the stalk tube in some cells, a localization that was not observed in wild-type epithelial cells. The ratio of apical to basal intensity of both IQGAP1 and cortexillin I was increased about two-fold in catenin mutants. Importantly, however, the anti-correlation between IQGAP1 and GFP-myosin localization was maintained: apical membranes containing IQGAP1 and cortexillin I lacked bright GFP-myosin fluorescence. We conclude that the catenins are required for normal localization of IQGAP1/cortexillin to the basolateral membrane but not for its antagonistic relationship with myosin. Figure 6 IQGAP1/cortexillin localization is opposite myosin and is controlled by β- and α-catenin Until now, we have considered only the milder phenotypic class resulting from partial acatenin depletion by RNAi. We also examined severe ctnnA culminants that do not form a recognizable tip epithelium and in which α-catenin is not detectable by immunofluorescence. In the tips of these culminants, IQGAP1 and cortexillin I were cortically localized with a distribution that appeared uniform. GFP-myosin again was not colocalized with IQGAP1/cortexillin or, surprisingly, with cortical F-actin; instead, it was concentrated in unusual arc-shaped structures located in the cytoplasm. These data support our conclusion that IQGAP1/cortexillin antagonizes the cortical localization of myosin and confirm that α-catenin is not required for this function. IQGAP1 and cortexillin are not required for all aspects of catenin function To further define the relationship between IQGAP1/cortexillin and the catenins, we tested whether loss of IQGAP1 or cortexillin I affected α-catenin localization. Loss of aardvark strongly reduced α-catenin localization to lateral cell-cell contacts, as previously reported. In contrast, lateral membrane localization of α-catenin was clearly visible in iqgA- and ctxA- epithelial cells, despite the disruption in epithelial morphology. Quantitatively, the lateral cortical localization of α-catenin appeared slightly reduced in iqgA- and ctxA- culminants, but this reduction was much less than that in aarA- mutants and was not statistically significant. Total levels of α-catenin were similar in all four of these strains. We conclude that IQGAP1 and cortexillin I are not essential for normal localization of α-catenin to lateral cell-cell contacts in the tip epithelium. Figure 7 Loss of IQGAP1 or cortexillin I does not compromise all aspects of α-catenin function In addition to effects on tissue organization and myosin distribution, loss of α-catenin or aardvark disrupts epithelial cell polarity and compromises the ability of cells to secrete cellulose and extracellular matrix proteins into the stalk tube. We asked whether loss of IQGAP1 or cortexillin I caused a similar loss of cell polarity. Surprisingly, centrosomes were normally localized apically to the nuclei in iqgA- and ctxA- culminants, even in regions of the epithelium that were multilayered. Significantly, cellulose synthase ) was correctly localized on the plasma membrane closest to the stalk, even in cells that did not contact the stalk tube. This apical localization of cellulose synthase was associated with adjacent extracellular deposition of cellulose within the epithelium, indicating that cells throughout the multilayered epithelium in iqgA- and ctxA- culminants were able to secrete stalk tube components apically. Since α-catenin and aardvark are required for the polarized distribution of centrosomes and cellulose synthase in the tip epithelium, these data indicate that the catenins remain functional in iqgA- and ctxA- mutants, consistent with the normal localization of α-catenin described above. We conclude that although IQGAP1 and cortexillin I are required for normal apical enrichment of myosin in the tip epithelium, these proteins are not required for other aspects of epithelial cell polarity mediated by the catenins. Discussion In this study, we showed that myosin is enriched at the apical plasma membrane adjacent to the stalk tube in Dictyostelium tip epithelial cells, where it forms a contractile actomyosin ring that constricts the stalk tube. α-Catenin and the β-catenin-related protein aardvark are essential for proper localization of myosin, and we defined a pathway downstream of the catenins that specifies the apical localization of myosin by regulating the distribution of an antagonistic IQGAP1/cortexillin complex. The localization of myosin in the tip epithelial cells is strikingly similar to the apical enrichment of myosin that often occurs during epithelial morphogenesis in higher animals. Topologically, the stalk is equivalent to the lumen of tubular epithelia in animals, so compression of the stalk by the tip epithelium may be analogous to the regulation of luminal volume by apical contractility in epithelia of animals. Thus, our results indicate that apical enrichment of myosin may be a conserved morphogenetic mechanism from social amoebae to animals. In order to exert a force that can compress the stalk, actomyosin bundles must be interconnected between cells in the epithelial sheet to form a continuous ring. This connection is most likely provided by actin-associated cell-cell junctions that have been observed in electron micrographs of the apical region of the tip epithelium. By integrating cytoskeletal force-producing elements across cells in the epithelial sheet, Dictyostelium cell-cell junctions may fulfill a function similar to the Adherens Junction in Drosophila and other metazoa. However, it is noteworthy that these Dictyostelium cell-cell junctional structures require neither α-catenin nor aardvark, and are unlikely to be molecularly homologous to the Adherens Junction. It will be important in the future to determine the molecular composition of Dictyostelium cell-cell junctions in order to clarify the evolutionary relationship between apical actomyosin contractility in Dictyostelium and in metazoans. In all of the mutants we studied, disruption of the apical actomyosin ring was associated with loss of the monolayer organization of the tip epithelium, raising the question of how apical actomyosin contractility is related to the formation of an epithelial monolayer. One important consideration is cell shape: wild-type epithelial cells are wedge-shaped as a necessary consequence of the packing of a monolayer of cells into the cylindrical geometry of the tube. This shape could be the result of apical actomyosin contractility that narrows the apical membrane, analogous to apical constriction in animal epithelial cells. Apical myosin may also help to offset the mechanical stress that results from the local higher curvature along the apical surface relative to the basolateral surface. The mechanical stress itself might drive myosin to the apical cortex due to the propensity of myosin to accumulate in a mechanosensitive manner. At the basolateral surface, IQGAP1/cortexillin and the catenins might rigidify the cortex to help maintain shape. Because myosin, cortexillin I and IQGAP1 contribute to several aspects of cortical mechanics ), it is perhaps not surprising that these proteins have significant impact on epithelial cell and tissue morphology. A model for the regulation of myosin activity by the catenins and IQGAP1/cortexillin is presented in Figure 8. In the tip epithelium, the IQGAP1/cortexillin complex antagonizes myosin at the basolateral cortex, thereby restricting myosin accumulation to the apical plasma membrane where IQGAP1/cortexillin is absent. The catenins restrict the spatial distribution of IQGAP1/cortexillin to the basolateral plasma membrane, allowing enrichment of myosin apically. In the absence of α-catenin, IQGAP1 and cortexillin occupy the entire cortex, and myosin appears to be excluded from the cortex. This result indicates that α-catenin is not required simply to recruit IQGAP1 and cortexillins to the plasma membrane. Instead, we propose that α-catenin increases the affinity of IQGAP1/cortexillin for the basolateral cortex, perhaps by altering the organization or structure of actin filaments. Alternatively, by influencing membrane trafficking events, α-catenin may cause the asymmetric localization of another factor that affects IQGAP1/cortexillin localization. The small GTPases Rac1 and RacE, which bind IQGAP1, are candidates for such a factor. Figure 8 Model of myosin regulation during Dictyostelium culmination Our model is based in part on the epithelial phenotypes of ctnnA, aarA-, iqgA-, ctxA- and mlkA - culminants, so we considered whether defects occurring at earlier stages of development could contribute to these phenotypes. Several observations argue against this possibility. First, no gross defects in slug formation were seen in any of the mutants that we studied. Second, culmination can occur normally under environmental conditions that eliminate the slug stage entirely, indicating that culmination is not critically dependent on events that occur during the slug stage. Third, Dictyostelium development prior to culmination is driven mainly by chemotactic cell migration, and iqgA - and ctxA - single mutants do not have strong cell migration defects. Together, these observations support our interpretation of phenotypes observed in epithelial cells as arising during culmination. Our description of cortexillin I as part of a myosin-antagonizing complex in the tip epithelium might appear to contrast with its role in cytokinesis, where its actin cross-linking activity is essential for a mechanical feedback loop that enhances myosin recruitment both to the cleavage furrow and to sites of ectopic cortical deformation. However, the cortexillin I-binding protein IQGAP1 has been described as an inhibitor of cortical myosin recruitment in both systems ; this work). The apparent difference in cortexillin I function in the tip epithelium compared to single cells likely reflects differential protein abundance: our data suggest that nearly all of the cortical cortexillin I in tip epithelial cells is bound to IQGAP1, whereas an IQGAP1-free pool of cortexillin I is present in single cells and cooperates with myosin during cytokinesis. Another possible modulator of cortexillin I function is IQGAP2, which is essential for cytokinesis but not for culmination and is expressed at low levels in culminants. IQGAP2 antagonizes IQGAP1 and promotes cortexillin I-mediated mechanosensing and myosin accumulation at the cleavage furrow. Therefore, the low abundance of IQGAP2 during culmination might explain why most cortexillin I was found in a myosin-antagonizing complex with IQGAP1. These possibilities are not mutually exclusive, and future studies will seek to define the physical and functional interactions between α-catenin, myosin and IQGAP/cortexillin complexes. The disruption of apical myosin localization upon loss of α-catenin or aardvark is perhaps not surprising, since the catenins are essential for epithelial polarity in Dictyostelium. A more interesting finding is that loss of IQGAP1 or cortexillin I disrupts apical myosin localization without globally affecting cell polarity. This result implicates IQGAP1/cortexillin as a signal transducer that translates cellular polarity into an asymmetric organization of the actomyosin machinery. Disruption of this complex decouples cytoskeletal organization from cell polarity, resulting in a loss of tissue organization. To our knowledge, a similar role for IQGAP in coupling cell polarity to actomyosin organization has not been reported in other systems. However, such a role is plausible, as IQGAP localizes to cell-cell contacts and regulates cell-cell adhesion in both mammalian tissue culture cells and Xenopus embryos. Determining whether IQGAP controls myosin localization or activity in animal epithelia may reveal mechanisms of tissue organization that have been conserved since the last common ancestor of Dictyostelium and metazoans. Experimental Procedures Detailed descriptions of strains, plasmids, antibodies, cell culture techniques and quantitative image analysis methods may be found in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures. Cell culture, transformation and development Dictyostelium discoideum cells were cultured in HL5 medium using standard cell culture technique and were transformed as described. For development, cells were washed three times in ice-cold development buffer, counted and resuspended in DB. The cells were deposited on 25 mm Whatman Nuclepore filters resting on Whatman No. 3 filters soaked with DB. The cell density was 5×10 6 cells per filter. The plates were sealed and development was monitored using a dissecting microscope. Fluorescence microscopy Fluorescence imaging was performed as described. Briefly, cells were developed until culmination and fixed in ethanol containing 4% formalin for 1 hour at 4°C. The specimens were rehydrated in PBS, permeabilized with 1% saponin, and stained sequentially with primary and secondary antibodies. To visualize F-actin, fluorescent phalloidin was added to the secondary antibody solutions. To visualize cellulose, calcofluor was added to the mounting medium at a final concentration of 200 μg/mL. Specimens were examined with a Zeiss LSM510 confocal microscope equipped with a 63X, 1.4 NA objective. Confocal stacks were assembled and processed using custom-written scripts in ImageJ. When preparing figures for publication, some images were processed with a 3×3 median filter to reduce noise, and brightness and contrast were adjusted for easy visibility where appropriate. No other image manipulations were performed. Image data analysis and statistics All image measurements were made using ImageJ. Data analysis, graphing and statistical tests were performed using Prism and OpenOffice.org Calc. p values were generated using statistical tests as stated in the figure legends. All error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals unless otherwise specified. Stalk cross-sectional area was measured from the cellulose channel of an XZ image reconstructed from a 3D confocal series of the tip. The measurement was made at the center of the tip. GFP-myosin distribution was quantified using a procedure equivalent to an average of line scans perpendicular to the stalk tube, as illustrated in Supplemental Figure S2 and described in Supplemental Experimental Procedures. IQGAP1 and cortexillin I intensities were measured using line scans and are reported as a ratio of apical:basal intensity. To compare IQGAP1 and GFP-myosin distributions, individual pixel intensities were measured and Spearmann’s rank correlation coefficient was calculated. To quantify α-catenin cortical localization, colocalization with F-actin was measured using correlation analysis. The detailed procedures for each of the above measurements are described in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures. Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry To prepare samples for mass spectrometry, cells were developed until culmination was complete, and whole fruiting bodies were dissolved in lysis buffer containing the following protease inhibitors: 1 mM AEBSF, 0.5 μg/mL Antipain, 0.5 μg/mL Aprotinin, 0.5 μg/mL BAEE, 1 mM Benzamidine, 5 μg/mL Chymostatin, 10 μg/mL Leupeptin, 10 μg/mL Pepstatin, 10 μg/mL TLCK and 5 μg/mL TPCK. The crude lysate was clarified and then incubated with anti- Dd α-catenin beads, which were prepared by conjugating ammonium sulfate-fractionated antiserum to AminoLink Plus resin according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Negative control beads were prepared in parallel using the pre-immune serum from the same rabbit. The lysate was incubated with anti- Dd α-catenin beads for 1 hour at 4°C, washed with lysis buffer, and proteins were eluted in 0.2 M Glycine pH 2.5, 1 mM EDTA. For mass spectrometry, each sample was loaded in its entirety on a 4–12% Bis-Tris NuPage gel and run until the dye front was 3 cm from the bottom of the wells. The gel was cut into slices corresponding to different molecular weights, and the gel slices were sent to the Harvard Microchemistry and Proteomics Facility for in-gel tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis. Data were returned from the facility as a heat map showing the number of spectral counts detected for each protein in each gel slice. The data were analyzed using custom-written Perl scripts. Proteins identified by only a single unique peptide or by less than three spectral counts were excluded from the analysis, along with obvious contaminants and likely background hits. A partial list of identified proteins is shown in Figure 2B. Isolation of triton-insoluble cytoskeletons Cells were developed to culmination, and culminants were dissolved in lysis buffer as described above. The lysates were pre-cleared by centrifuging at 3,000 × g for 10 minutes. The clarified lysates were then centrifuged at 55,000 rpm for 45 minutes in a TLA100.1 rotor to pellet Triton-insoluble material. Pellets were resuspended in Laemmli buffer and analyzed by western blotting. ​ Highlights Apical actomyosin regulates morphology and luminal volume of a tubular epithelium Apical contractility is a conserved morphogenetic mechanism in amoebozoa and animals IQGAP1 promotes apical contractility by excluding myosin from the basolateral cortex IQGAP1 acts downstream of epithelial polarity and is regulated by β-and α-catenin Supplementary Material 01 Click here to view. 