 Living cells are constantly subjected to various mechanical stimulations, such as shear flow, osmotic pressure, and hardness of substratum. They must sense the mechanical aspects of their environment and respond appropriately for proper cell function. Cells adhering to substrata must receive and respond to mechanical stimuli from the substrata to decide their shape and/or migrating direction. In response to cyclic stretching of the elastic substratum, intracellular stress fibers in fibroblasts and endothelial, osteosarcoma, and smooth muscle cells are rearranged perpendicular to the stretching direction, and the shape of those cells becomes extended in this new direction. In the case of migrating Dictyostelium cells, cyclic stretching regulates the direction of migration, and not the shape, of the cell. The cells migrate in a direction perpendicular to that of the stretching. However, the molecular mechanisms that induce the directional migration remain unknown. Here, using a microstretching device, we recorded green fluorescent protein -myosin-II dynamics in Dictyostelium cells on an elastic substratum under cyclic stretching. Repeated stretching induced myosin II localization equally on both stretching sides in the cells. Although myosin-II-null cells migrated randomly, myosin-II-null cells expressing a variant of myosin II that cannot hydrolyze ATP migrated perpendicular to the stretching. These results indicate that Dictyostelium cells accumulate myosin II at the portion of the cell where a large strain is received and migrate in a direction other than that of the portion where myosin II accumulated. This polarity generation for migration does not require the contraction of actomyosin. Introduction Living cells are constantly subjected to a wide variety of mechanical stimulations, such as shear flow and substratum strain. They must sense the mechanical aspects of their environment and respond appropriately for proper cell function. For example, in vascular endothelial cells, blood shear flow activates various cell functions, such as gene expression, proliferation, and apoptosis. In the auditory hair cells of vertebrates, stereovillus deflections open mechanoelectrical transduction channels and cause changes in the membrane potential. In general, cells adhere to the substratum via focal adhesion sites. Thus, it seems that the cells receive mechanical stimuli mainly from substrata in physiological conditions. To mimic this situation, one of the most appropriate techniques for applying mechanical stimuli artificially is to stretch the elastic substratum to which cells adhere. In response to the cyclic stretching of the elastic substratum, intracellular stress fibers in fibroblasts and in endothelial, osteosarcoma, and smooth muscle cells are rearranged perpendicular to the stretching direction, and the shape of the cells becomes extended in that direction. On the other hand, in the case of fast-crawling cell migration, we found that Dictyostelium cells migrate perpendicular to the cyclic stretching. However, the molecular mechanisms by which cyclic stretching induces directional migration in Dictyostelium cells remain unknown. Under total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy, Dictyostelium cells show a dense meshwork of actin filaments instead of stress fibers. Thus, the reaction of Dictyostelium cells to cyclic stretching should be different from those of fibroblasts and endothelial, osteosarcoma, and smooth muscle cells. It is now generally believed that extension of the leading edge induced by actin polymerization and retraction of the rear by contraction through myosin-II-dependent processes are the driving forces of cell-crawling migration. If cells decide on their migrating direction in response to cyclic stretching of the substratum, the dynamics of actin and/or myosin II, and not the rearrangement of stress fibers, should be directly or indirectly regulated by the stimulation. In response to stretching of the cell surface by using a micropipette to suck it, myosin II localizes to the tip of the sucked cell lobe, indicating that the localization of myosin II is regulated by mechanical forces. Moreover, myosin-II-null cells cannot suppress lateral extrapseudopodia. Their path linearity and migration speed are significantly lower than those of wild-type cells under chemotactic conditions. Thus, myosin II is a possible candidate for mediator of directional migration induced by mechanical forces. In this study, cyclic stretching of the elastic substratum induced myosin II localization equally at both stretching sides in the cell. Wild-type cells migrated perpendicular to the stretching, whereas myosin-II-null cells migrated randomly. However, myosin-II-null cells expressing a myosin II variant that cannot hydrolyze ATP showed directional migration like that of wild-type cells. These results indicate that freely migrating Dictyostelium cells respond to the forces from the substratum, accumulating myosin II at the portion where a large strain is received and then migrating in a direction different from that in the portion where myosin II accumulated. This polarity generation for migration does not require the contraction of actomyosin. Materials and Methods Cell lines Dictyostelium discoideum cells were developed in Bonner’s standard saline until they became aggregation-competent, as described previously. The Dictyostelium cell lines used were AX2 cells ; AX2 cells expressing GFP-ABD120k; myosin II heavy-chain-null cells; mhcA − cells expressing GFP-myosin II, GFP-3xALA myosin II, GFP-3xASP myosin II, or GFP-E476K myosin II; and SibA-null cells. ABD120k is the actin-binding domain of the actin-crosslinking protein ABP120 and can only bind to filamentous actin. Fluorescence imaging of GFP-ABD120k reflects the distribution of filamentous actin. The gene encoding GFP-ABD120k was kindly provided by D. A. Knecht. This fusion gene was inserted into the pBIG expression vector by T. Q. Uyeda. In Dictyostelium, bipolar thick filament formation of myosin II is regulated by the phosphorylation of three threonine residues in the tail region. In the 3xALA cell line, the three threonine phosphorylation sites of myosin II heavy chain are replaced with alanine so that it mimics the constitutively unphosphorylated state and constitutively forms bipolar thick filaments. In 3xASP, the three threonine phosphorylation sites are replaced with aspartate residues, so that it mimics the constitutively phosphorylated state and cannot form thick filaments. E476K-mutant myosin II cannot hydrolyze ATP in mhcA - cells. SibA protein, similar to integrin beta, acts as an adhesion molecule in Dictyostelium. The sibA gene was disrupted using a knockout construct in which a 2-kb fragment and a 1.4-kb fragment of the coding region were inserted into pBlueScript II SK+ as a XbaI/BamHI and a KpnI fragment, respectively. Subsequently, a 1.9-kb hygromycin cassette was inserted between these fragments as a SalI fragment. Cyclic stretching of substratum to record migrating trajectory of cells Stretching of the substratum was performed according to the methods described previously. Briefly, elastic sheets, 22 mm × 40 mm, were made from polydimethylsiloxane. One 22-mm side of the sheet was fixed and the other connected to a coiled shape-memory alloy. Sequential square voltage pulses were applied to the coiled SMA, which induced cyclic stretching and relaxation of the sheet. In all experiments, the stretching ratio, time cycle, and duty ratio of stretching and relaxation were adjusted to 20%, 5 s, and 1:1, respectively, by modulating the frequency and the duty ratio of the square voltage pulses. Using elastic sheets, it is impossible to exclude the Poisson effect completely. When the sheet was stretched, perpendicular shrinkage of ∼5% took place simultaneously. Cells show random migration under the cyclic stretching stimulus of a 10% stretching ratio, indicating that cyclic stretching of <10% does not affect the directionality of cell migration. Thus, in all experiments in this study, the perpendicular shrinkage should not affect the directionality of cell migration for details). Statistical analysis of migrating trajectory of cells under cyclic stretching Migrating cells on a substratum under cyclic stretching were observed under phase-contrast microscopy using an inverted microscope with a 20× objective lens. Images taken by a CMOS camera were transferred to a PC at 30-s intervals for 30 min and analyzed using ImageJ Ver. 1.42 with two plug-ins, Manual Tracking and a Chemotaxis and Migration tool. In this analysis, the angle between the horizontal line and a straight line that connected the starting and ending points of a migrating cell was measured. As an index of the directional migration, |sin θ | was calculated. When all cells migrate parallel to the stretching direction under cyclic stretching, the average |sin θ | should be 0, whereas when cells migrate perpendicular to the stretching direction, the value should be 1. When cells migrate equally in all directions, the value should be 2/ π = 0.64. In preparing histograms, as shown in Figs. 3, ​,4, 4, and ​ and7, 7, the interior angle of each datum was 66.0°. This means that, for example, the value of the cells at 90° includes the number of cells that migrated in the direction from 57° to 123°. Directionality was also calculated. It is expressed as the linear distance between the start and end points of migration for 30 min divided by the pathlength of the trajectory between the same points. When a cell migrates on a straight path, the value should be 1. On the other hand, when it migrates windingly, the value should be smaller. Statistical analysis was performed by two-tailed Student’s t -test. Figure 3 Crawling migrations of wild-type Dictyostelium cells on elastic substratum with cyclic stretching. Stretching ratio and time cycle were 20% and 5 s, respectively. Trajectories of migrating cells under cyclic stretching in the horizontal... Figure 4 Crawling migrations of mutant cells on elastic substratum with cyclic stretching. Stretching ratio and time cycle were the same as in Fig. 3. Trajectories of migrating mhcA − cells under cyclic stretching in the horizontal... Figure 7 Crawling migrations of mhcA − cells expressing GFP-myosin II variants on elastic substratum with cyclic stretching. Stretching ratio and time cycle were the same as in Fig. 3. Frequencies of the migrating direction equipped with a laser confocal scanner unit with a 100× objective lens. The fluorescence images were detected with an EM CCD camera. Two images taken at a time interval of 40 s were arbitrarily picked up from the sequential images. In the first image, a dotted line was drawn from the centroid to a point on the boundary of a cell. On the dotted line, the distance from the centroid to the point was defined as l 1. The maximum value of GFP fluorescence in the intersection of the dotted line and the area 2 μ m from the cell boundary was defined as F. In the second image, a dotted line was drawn from the centroid at t = t 0, not t = t 0 + 40 s, in the same direction as in the first image. The distance between the centroid at t = t 0 and the cell boundary was defined as l 2. F and l 2 / l 1 were calculated along the 12 dotted lines in Fig. 1 C ) at intervals of 30°. When the pseudopod expands, l 2 / l 1 should be >1. Figure 1 Estimation of myosin II-localization and pseudopod dynamics that follow. From two sequential images at a time the interval of 40 s, l 1, l 2 and F were defined as shown in A and B. F and l 2 / l 1 were calculated... Cyclic stretching of substratum for observation of GFP-myosin II The stretching device described in the above section was optimized for observation of the migrating trajectory with a low-power objective lens. To observe the intracellular localization of GFP-myosin II in response to the stretching of the substratum, a fine microstretching device was used for a detailed description of the device). Briefly, an elastic microchamber was made from polydimethylsiloxane. A chamber stretching linkage mechanism was made from photoresist and fabricated with a photolithography technique. Cells were plated onto the elastic thin substratum, 100 μ m × 400 μ m, t = 10 μ m, in the microchamber. Strain distribution on the thin substratum was evaluated as previously described. In the test, the magnitude of stretch in the entire microchamber was 0.26. The results for strain distribution measurements are indicated in Fig. 2 B. There was a roughly homogeneous strain field. Strain in rectangular axis to stretch was well suppressed by the support flame of the microchamber. There was only 0.8% compressing strain in the rectangular axis to stretch. The migrating mhcA − cells expressing GFP-myosin II in the chamber of the device were observed with an inverted microscope equipped with a laser confocal scanner unit with a 100× objective lens. The fluorescence images were detected with an EM CCD camera. The chamber was stretched 20% in length in the linear direction by pushing the bottom part of the device with a glass microneedle connected to a piezo actuator. Figure 2 Microstretching device. Overview of a device. By pushing a part of the device with a glass microneedle, the chamber is stretched in the horizontal direction. Strain distribution of A when the magnitude of stretch in the entire microchamber is... Evaluation of symmetrical distribution of GFP-myosin II and -ABD120k in response to the stretching of substratum The cell area was divided into four portions by dotted lines. The lines were drawn from the centroid of the cell at angles of 45°, 135°, 225°, and 315° from the horizontal line. The areas 2 μ m from the cell boundary in the four portions were defined as a, b, c, and d, respectively. F a, F b, F c, and F d are the maximum values of the fluorescence of GFP-myosin II or GFP-ABD120k in areas a – d, respectively. F i | F j, which is an index of the symmetrical distribution, is expressed as the larger of F i and F j divided by the smaller. When the distribution of myosin II or actin filaments is symmetrical in the i and j areas, the value should be 1. When it is asymmetrical, the value should be larger. Figure 5 Myosin II localization caused by stretching of the substratum. Typical localizations of GFP-myosin II by 20% stretching of the substratum using the device featured in Fig. 2 A, shown before stretching, after two stretches, and... Evaluation of the relationship between pseudopod dynamics and GFP-myosin II localization in response to the stretching of substratum To estimate the localization of myosin II in response to the stretching and its role of following pseudopod dynamics, two images were taken before and after four repeats of 20% stretching. In the first of these images, a dotted line was drawn from the centroid to a point on the boundary of a cell. On the dotted line, the distance from the centroid to the point was defined as l 1. The maximum value of GFP fluorescence in the area defined by the intersection of the dotted line and the orbital area 2 μ m from the cell boundary was defined as F 1. In the second image, a dotted line was drawn from the centroid before, not after, stretching in the same direction as in the first image. The distance between the centroid before stretching and the cell boundary was defined as l 2. F 2 was defined in the same manner as F 1. Dotted lines were drawn from the centroid of the cell at angles of 0°, 45°, 135°, 180°, 225°, and 315° from the horizontal line. The values of l 2 / l 1 and F 2 / F 1 were calculated for the six areas on the dotted line. When pseudopod expansion takes place in the area, the l 2 / l 1 value should be >1. When myosin II localization takes place, the F 2 / F 1 value should be >1. Results Directional migration of wild-type cells in response to cyclic stretching of elastic substratum Cyclic stretching stimuli were applied to wild-type cells by repeated stretching and relaxation of the substratum, in which the stretching ratio and the time cycle were 20% and 5 s, respectively. Trajectories of cell migrations and frequencies of migrating directions are shown. The cells tended to migrate perpendicular to the stretching direction, whereas they migrated randomly in the absence of cyclic stretching. The average |sin θ | value calculated from Fig. 3 C was significantly higher than that from Fig. 3 D, as was the case in a previous experiment using the cAR1/cAR3 chemoattractant cAMP receptor double-mutant cell line RI9. These results indicate that Dictyostelium cells decide their migrating direction in response to forces from the substratum. Myosin II is indispensable for directional migration of wild-type cells in response to cyclic stretching of elastic substratum To clarify whether myosin II is a mediator of directional migration induced by the forces from the substratum, we observed the migration of mhcA − cells on the elastic substratum under cyclic stretching. The cells migrated randomly, although small fluctuations were seen. There was no statistical difference in migration, analyzed using the distribution of |sin θ |, between the case with cyclic stretching and that with no cyclic stretching. To test whether the cells sense a mechanical signal from the substratum through adhesion sites, we observed the migration of sibA − cells on the elastic substratum under cyclic stretching. SibA protein, similar to integrin beta protein, acts as an adhesion molecule in Dictyostelium. The cells tended to migrate perpendicular to the stretching direction, whereas they migrated randomly in the absence of cyclic stretching. The migration velocity was significantly decreased under cyclic stretching. These results indicate that SibA-related adhesion is not required for transduction of the mechanical signal for directional migration, although it is required for maintaining migration velocity. Table 1 Characteristics of migrations of all cell types on the substratum under cyclic stretching Next, localization of myosin II in response to the stretching of the elastic substratum was observed by dispersing mhcA − cells expressing GFP-myosin II on a fine microstretching device. After four repeats of 20% stretching, myosin II seemed to localize equally at the two edges of the stretched side in the cell. The localization of myosin II was estimated quantitatively. Fluorescence intensities of GFP-myosin II in the stretching sides significantly increased after stretching, whereas those in the other sides did not. The ratio of the greater to the smaller fluorescence intensity of GFP-myosin II in the stretching sides dramatically decreased after the stretching, although that in the nonstretching sides did not change, indicating that the left-right symmetrical forces induce the same symmetrical localization of myosin II. Dictyostelium cells have a dense actin meshwork instead of thick, straight filaments like stress fibers. To clarify whether not only myosin II but also actin meshwork responds to the forces from the substratum, we next observed the distribution of actin filaments in the meshwork before and after four repeats of 20% stretching by dispersing wild-type cells expressing GFP-ABD120k on the device shown in Fig. 2 A. In the middle of the cell, actin filaments did not show alignment in a particular direction, even after four repeats of stretching. Our next step was to estimate the localization of actin filaments on the boundary of the cell, which was done in the same way as for myosin II. There was no significant difference in the ratio of the greater to the smaller fluorescence intensity of GFP-ABD120k between the two stretching sides before and after four repeats of 20% stretching. In the nonstretching side, too, there was no significant difference before and after the stretching, indicating that localization of actin filaments has no relation to the stretching. Assembly of thick filaments rather than contraction of actomyosin is required for directional migration in response to cyclic stretching To determine what function of myosin II is essential for directional migration in response to cyclic stretching, three types of mhcA − cells were used in the following experiments. The first was mhcA − cells expressing GFP-3xALA myosin II, a myosin II that constitutively assembles into filaments; the second was mhcA − cells expressing GFP-3xASP myosin II, a myosin II that cannot form thick filaments; and the third was mhcA − cells expressing GFP-E476K myosin II, a myosin II that cannot hydrolyze ATP. These three types of mhcA − cell are referred to as 3xALA, 3xASP, and E476K cells, respectively. Localization of myosin II variants in response to stretching of the elastic substratum were observed by dispersing mhcA − cells on the device pictured in Fig. 2 A. After four repeats of 20% stretching, GFP-3xALA and GFP-E476K myosin II localized equally at the two edges of the stretched sides in the cell, and D, F, G, and I ). However, the distribution of GFP-3xASP myosin II was not affected. Figure 6 Localization of myosin II variants caused by stretching of the substratum using the device shown in Fig. 2 A. Typical localization of GFP-3xALA, GFP-3xASP, and GFP-E476K myosin II in mhcA − cells by 20% stretching of... In cell migrations, 3xALA and E476K cells migrated perpendicular to the stretching direction on the elastic substratum under cyclic stretching, whereas they migrated randomly in the absence of cyclic stretching. Average |sin θ | values calculated from Fig. 7, A and C, were significantly higher than those from Fig. 7, D and F, as was the case for wild-type cells. On the other hand, 3xASP cells migrated randomly on the elastic substratum under cyclic stretching. There was no statistical difference in migration between the case with cyclic stretching and that with no cyclic stretching, as was the case for mhcA − cells. Thus, it is tentatively summarized that 1), only the filamentous myosin II can respond to forces; 2), localization of myosin II takes place in response to external forces; 3), no contraction of actomyosin is necessary for the localization; and 4), directional migration requires not contraction of actomyosin but localization of myosin II filaments in response to cyclic stretching. Characteristics of migration of all cell types on the substratum under cyclic stretching are summarized in Table 1. Statistical tests were performed between Velocity and Velocity both under cyclic stretching and under no cyclic stretching. Under cyclic stretching, the velocities of cell types other than mhcA − in the direction perpendicular to the stretching were greater than those in the direction parallel to the stretching, although there was no significant difference in SibA − and E476K cells. Directionality was also compared statistically between cells under cyclic stretching and those under no cyclic stretching. In all cell types, directionality was <0.5 in both the presence and absence of cyclic stretching. P values for each cell type under cyclic stretching and in the absence of cyclic stretching are >0.01. Localization of myosin II prevents pseudopod expansion without contraction as actomyosin To test how localization of myosin II affects cell migration without contraction as actomyosin, we estimated the relationship between pseudopod movements and localization of E476K myosin II in cells both on a coverslip and on an elastic substratum with cyclic stretching. First, from the sequential images of free migration of mhcA − cells expressing GFP-myosin II or GFP-E476K myosin II on a coverslip, the values of F, l 1, and l 2 in Fig. 1, A and B, were measured along 12 directions at intervals of 30°. F reflects the spontaneous localization of myosin II in freely migrating cells. The value l 2 / l 1 reflects the contraction or expansion of pseudopodia. When l 2 / l 1 was >1, the pseudopod expanded, and when it was <1, the pseudopod contracted. In the case of mhcA − cells expressing GFP-myosin II, the l 2 / l 1 values at high F values were <1, indicating that spontaneous localization of myosin II induced contraction of the pseudopod. On the other hand, in the case of E476K cells, although the l 2 / l 1 values at low F values were >1, as is the case for mhcA − cells expressing GFP-myosin II, those at high F values were almost 1, indicating that the spontaneous localization of E476K myosin II did not induce retraction of the pseudopodia but prevented their expansion. Figure 8 Localization of myosin II and pseudopod dynamics that follow. Freely migrating mhcA - cells expressing GFP-myosin II and E476K cells on a coverslip. F refers to spontaneous localization of myosin II in freely migrating cells. The value... The next step was to estimate the role of E476K myosin II under cyclic stretching of the substratum from the data presented in Figs. 5 and ​ and6. 6. In these experiments, the values of F 1, F 2, l 1, and l 2 in Fig. 1, D and E, were measured in the stretching direction. F 2 / F 1 reflects localization of myosin II in response to the four repeats of stretching of the substratum. The value l 2 / l 1 reflects the contraction or expansion of pseudopodia. In all cases, the F 2 / F 1 values were >1, indicating the localization of myosin II and 3xALA and E476K myosin II at the stretching side in response to the stretching. On the other hand, although the l 2 / l 1 values in mhcA − cells expressing GFP-myosin II and 3xALA cells were <1, those in E476K cells ranged around 1. These results indicate that localization of myosin II and 3xALA myosin II at the stretching sides of the cell induce retraction of the pseudopodia there and make the cell shape short at the sides, whereas localization of E476K myosin II did not induce retraction of the pseudopodia but prevented their expansion, as was the case of freely migrating E476K cells. Discussion In response to the cyclic stretching of the elastic substratum, intracellular stress fibers in fibroblasts and in endothelial, osteosarcoma, and smooth muscle cells are rearranged perpendicular to the stretching direction. Dictyostelium cells have a dense actin meshwork instead of stress fibers. In the middle of the cell, actin filaments did not show alignment in a particular direction, whereas the distribution of actin filaments on the boundary of the cell continuously changed, even during cyclic stretching, and was independent of the stretching. Alternatively, myosin II localized equally at the two edges of the stretched side in the cell. The molecular dynamics in Dictyostelium cells in response to stretching differs from that in mammalian cells such as fibroblasts and endothelial cells. Dictyostelium cells are known to be a kind of fast-moving cell. The migrating speed of Dictyostelium cells is much faster than that of fibroblasts. Migration of other fast-moving cells, such as keratocytes and leukocytes, on elastic substratum with cyclic stretching may be one of the interesting issues for future investigation. In fibroblasts, it is widely thought that a mechanical signal from the substratum is transmitted through their adhesion sites as deformations of focal adhesion proteins, such as p130Cas. To test whether Dictyostelium cells sense a mechanical signal from the substratum through adhesion sites, as in the case of fibroblasts, we observed the migration of SibA − cells on the elastic substratum under cyclic stretching. The cells could attach to the surface of the substratum while the adhesiveness decreased and tended to migrate perpendicular to the stretching direction, indicating that SibA protein is not necessarily required for adhesion to the substratum, nor is itrequired for mechanosensing of Dictyostelium cells. However, it should contribute to stable migration, because the migration velocity of SibA − cells significantly decreased under cyclic stretching. Dictyostelium cells show straight migration to the chemoattractant, cAMP, or cathode under electric fields. The directionalities of those cells reach almost 1, whereas directionalities of all the cell types shown in Table 1 under cyclic stretching were between 0.31 and 0.41. These values are much smaller than those of chemotactic or galvanotactic cells. Moreover, there was no significant difference in directionality between the cyclic stretching condition and no stretching. Even under no cyclic stretching, cells can migrate, although the direction is random. Those cells may make their polarity for migration in response to the reaction forces from the substratum of their own tractions. The polarity generation for migration utilizing the force from the substratum may be one of the most fundamental mechanisms, and chemotaxis and galvanotaxis are highly sophisticated ones. How does myosin II localize in response to the stretching of the elastic substratum? There are several possibilities: 1), mechanical signal from the substratum is transmitted through their adhesion sites as deformations of focal adhesion proteins other than SibA; 2), mechanical signal induces activation of unidentified mechanosensitive channels; or 3), actin filaments are deformed. Deformation of actin filaments is a possible candidate to induce the myosin II localization, because actin meshwork is required for myosin II localization, just as the affinity of cofilin to the actin is modulated by the deformation of actin filaments. Recently, we showed that stretching actin filaments within Dictyostelium cells enhances their affinity for myosin II. This situation is just as valid for the localization of myosin II during cytokinesis. The mhcA − Dictyostelium cells perform cytokinesis on adhesive substratum, although they cannot do so under nonadhesive conditions. During cytokinesis, GFP-E476K myosin II localizes in the equatorial region, where the strain of the cell cortex should be maximal. Sucking of the cell using a micropipette also localizes myosin II at the tip of the sucked cell lobe. These observations suggest that myosin II localizes in response to stretching of the cell, although it is not possible in this study to distinguish whether stretching or relaxation of the substratum induces localization of myosin II. Localization of GFP-E476K myosin II and perpendicular migration of E476K cells on elastic substratum under cyclic stretching indicate that it is not contraction of actomyosin but assembly of thick filaments that is required for both localization and perpendicular migration in response to cyclic stretching. The directionality of E476K cells is larger than that of 3xALA, not only under cyclic stretching but also in the absence of cyclic stretching. These results also indicate that contraction of actomyosin is not necessarily required for directional migration. The defect in E476K myosin has to do with the hydrolysis of ATP. In the presence of ATP, therefore, most of the heads of the mutants bind ATP and form weak bindings with actin. The probability of binding of an E476K myosin II monomer to actin is low. That of binding of thick filaments should be high enough to keep binding to the actin filaments not only in migrating cells in this study but also in dividing cells. Localized E476K myosin II filaments prevent elongation of pseudopodia without contraction of actomyosin. Localized thick filaments of myosin II may induce cross-linking of actin filaments and stabilize the cortex of the cell. This hypothesis agrees well with earlier findings in Dictyostelium cells, in which cells lacking myosin II or components that regulate its assembly were unable to suppress lateral pseudopodia. The detailed mechanism is an interesting topic for future study. 