 Many types of cells migrate directionally in direct current electric fields, a phenomenon termed galvanotaxis or electrotaxis. The directional sensing mechanisms responsible for this response to EFs, however, remain unknown. Exposing cells to an EF causes changes in plasma membrane potentials. Exploiting the ability of Dictyostelium cells to tolerate drastic V m changes, we investigated the role of V m in electrotaxis and, in parallel, in chemotaxis. We used three independent factors to control V m : extracellular pH, extracellular, and electroporation. Changes in V m were monitored with microelectrode recording techniques. Depolarized V m was observed under acidic and alkaline conditions as well as under higher extracellular conditions. Electroporation permeabilized the cell membrane and significantly reduced the V m, which gradually recovered over 40 min. We then recorded the electrotactic behaviors of Dictyostelium cells with a defined V m using these three techniques. The directionality was quantified and compared to that of chemotaxis. We found that a reduced V m significantly impaired electrotaxis without significantly affecting random motility or chemotaxis. We conclude that extracellular pH,, and electroporation all significantly affected electrotaxis, which appeared to be mediated by the changes in V m. The initial directional sensing mechanisms for electrotaxis therefore differ from those of chemotaxis and may be mediated by changes in resting V m. INTRODUCTION Cells migrate directionally in response to many extracellular cues including chemical gradients, topography, mechanical forces, and electrical fields. Electric fields have long been suggested to be a candidate directional signal for cell migration in development, wound healing, and regeneration. The mechanisms used by cells to sense the weak direct current EFs, however, have remained very poorly understood. One of the immediate effects felt by a cell upon exposure to an EF is a change in the cell membrane potentials. In an EF, the plasma membrane facing the cathode depolarizes while the membrane facing the anode hyperpolarizes. It has been proposed that the changes in V m may underlie electrotaxis. In a cell with negligible voltage-gated conductance, the hyperpolarized membrane facing the anode attracts Ca 2+ by passive electrochemical diffusion. This side of the cell then contracts, thereby propelling the cell toward the cathode. In a cell with voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels, channels near the cathodal side open, thereby allowing Ca 2+ influx. Intracellular Ca 2+ levels will rise both on the anodal side and on the cathodal side in such a cell. The direction of cell movement in this situation will depend on the balance between the opposing contractile forces. The role of V m in electrotaxis has not yet been directly tested. In this report, we used Dictyostelium cells to test this directly. Dictyostelium cells show robust electrotaxis and tolerate significant changes in V m while maintaining good motility under conditions of different extracellular pH values and ion concentrations and even following electroporation. These features make Dictyostelium cells a unique testing model. We quantified electrotaxis and chemotaxis of cells with well-controlled V m s by varying three independent factors. We found that the V m indeed regulated electrotaxis while having no effect on chemotaxis. We thus identified a contrasting role of V m between electrotaxis and chemotaxis which may underlie the mechanisms used by cells to sense weak dc EFs. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture and development. Dictyostelium discoideum AX3 cells were grown axenically in HL5 medium. Vegetative cells were washed and starved in development buffer and then were pulsed with 50 nM cyclic AMP every 6 min for an additional 4 h. All procedures were carried out at room temperature. Micropipette chemotaxis assay. Chemotaxis experiments were performed as reported. Briefly, 20 μl of cells in DB were seeded onto a coverslip chamber. Bathing solutions with different pH values or different K + concentrations were then introduced. A Femtotip microinjection needle filled with 10 μM cAMP was placed into the field, and a positive pressure of 25 lb/in 2 was applied via a connected microinjector. Chemotaxis was recorded by time-lapse video using an inverted microscope with a 10× objective lens. Images were taken every 30 s for 30 min. Electrotaxis assay. Electrotaxis experiments were carried out as described previously. Developed cells were seeded into an electrotactic chamber. After 10 min of incubation, unattached cells were removed by gently washing with DB. Cells were then bathed in defined buffers, as indicated, with different pH values or different K + concentrations in parallel with the chemotaxis assay. For cells treated with electroporation, normal DB was used, and the EF was switched on 10 min after seeding. The applied EF was maintained at 12 V/cm for 30 min. Time-lapse images of cell migration were acquired using an inverted microscope equipped with a charge-coupled-device camera and a motorized XYZ stage, and controlled by Simple PCI, version 5.3, imaging software. Quantitative analysis of electrotaxis and chemotaxis. Chemotaxis and electrotaxis were analyzed as previously described. The chemotactic index and electrotactic index were used to quantify how, directionally, cells migrated toward cAMP or in response to an EF, respectively. To calculate the chemotactic index or electrotactic index, the cosine of the angle between the direction of movement and the direction of the chemoattractant gradient or electric vector was determined. For migration speed, we used trajectory and displacement speeds. Persistency was further calculated as the shortest linear distance between the start and endpoints of the migration path divided by the total distance traveled by a cell. All motile isolated cells were analyzed. At least 30 cells from three independent experiments were analyzed. Membrane potential measurements. Cells were seeded on a sterile glass coverslip and observed with a 60× objective. V m measurements were conducted using fine-tipped glass pipette microelectrodes. Two types of recording, transient and continuous, were used to verify each other. The pipettes were pulled from borosilicate glass using a PP-830 pipette puller, and the resistance was ∼20 MΩ when the pipettes were filled with 3 M KCl solution, as measured in the DB. Recordings were performed using a GeneClamp 500 amplifier. The signals were digitally filtered at 1 kHz and digitized at 2 kHz using a Digidata 1322A digitizer and pClamp, version 9.0, software. DB solution was used as the standard recording solution. The solutions with higher or lower pH values were obtained by adding HCl or NaOH. The solutions with different K + concentrations were made by using 3 M KCl and normal DB. All experiments were conducted at room temperature, and the recording was repeated in 16 or more cells. Both transient impolement recording and continuous recording yielded similar V m, which were consistent with previously published results. Modulation of membrane potential. The first method used to control V m was to maintain cells in four bathing solutions with pH values of 5.0, 6.5, 7.5, and 9.0. All solutions were autoclaved and stored at room temperature until use. Before measurement of V m or chemotaxis and electrotaxis experiments, cells were bathed in a defined solution for ∼10 min. The second method modulated V m by adjusting the recording buffer at three concentrations. The K + concentrations were verified with an ion-selective probe. All solutions were autoclaved. The third method was electroporation, which was carried out as previously described. Electroporation was performed in a Gene Pulser Xcell Electroporation System with two pulses of 0.85 kV/25 μF with a resistance-capacitance time of 1 ms, separated by a 5-s interval. For V m measurements, 20 μl of cell suspension was immediately taken out of the electroporation chamber and placed in a petri dish in DB and measured 10 min later. Statistics. Pearson's correlation coefficient and a chi-square test were performed when pertinent. All data points were presented as means ± standard errors of the means averaged from at least three measurements. RESULTS Extracellular pH and K + concentration regulated V m in Dictyostelium cells. A typical negative peak potential was transiently observed upon impalement of a Dictyostelium cell with a microelectrode. V m transiently reached a peak value within several milliseconds of impalement; the potential quickly decreased due to leakage. The initial peak value was used to reflect the V m, as in previous studies. The values were verified with the continuous measurement. We achieved continuous recording using microelectrodes with an extremely fine tip that penetrates a cell so the V m can be reliably monitored continuously for a much longer time, usually several minutes in contrast to milliseconds in the first method. Fig. 1. Extracellular pH and K + concentration regulate the membrane potential of Dictyostelium cells. Developed Dictyostelium cells were bathed in DB with different pH values and K + concentrations. V m was measured by microelectrode impalement. Typical... We first quantified the effect of extracellular pH and on V m. Being bathed in solutions of different pH values and K + concentrations resulted in significant and consistent changes in V m. An example of continuous recording of the dynamic change in V m, in which extracellular pH dropped from 7.5 to 5.0 and then went back up to 7.5, showed that the V m remained stable and was responsive to pH changes over several minutes. The membrane significantly depolarized when the pH either dropped to 5.5 or increased to 9.0. The maximal V m s were recorded at pH 7.5 and 5 mM K +. Chemotaxis and electrotaxis in bathing solutions with different pH values. To test the effects of depolarizing V m on chemotaxis, we used a needle chemotaxis assay and quantitatively analyzed the directional cell migration. Without cAMP gradient, cells bathed in different solutions showed similar patterns of migration in random directions. In buffer solutions of pH 5.0, pH 6.5, and pH 9.0, no significant differences in cell morphology, behavior, or trajectory speed were observed among cells in response to the cAMP gradient. This is consistent with a previous report. Fig. 2. Extracellular pH plays different roles in chemotaxis and electrotaxis in Dictyostelium cells. cAMP gradients were formed from the tip of a micropipette filled with 10 μM cAMP. Trajectories of cell migration toward cAMP in DB with different... Table 1. Effects of extracellular pH and K + on chemotaxis a The electrotaxis of Dictyostelium cells, however, is significantly altered by the pH of the bathing solution. The chemotactic indexes for cells bathed in DB of pH 5.0, pH 6.5, and pH 9.0 were 0.56 ± 0.01, 0.58 ± 0.01, and 0.52 ± 0.01, respectively. However, electrotaxis was significantly affected by bathing solution pH. Cells in solutions of pH 6.5 had more negative V m s and showed the best electrotaxis. Cells in pH 5.0 or pH 9.0 showed significantly reduced electrotaxis, with directedness values of 0.51 ± 0.01 or 0.30 ± 0.01, respectively. Chemotaxis and electrotaxis of K + -induced depolarized Dictyostelium cells. We then examined the effect of extracellular on chemotaxis and electrotaxis. Cells bathed in buffer of 5 mM K + moved toward cAMP with a typically polarized morphology. In buffer of 50 mM K +, cells near the micropipette tip moved toward the cAMP source. Cells further away from the tip appeared to move less directionally toward the pipette. Nonetheless, directional migration was evident. Cells in 50 mM K + migrated with a reduced chemotactic index of 0.30 ± 0.01, compared to that of 0.58 ± 0.01 for cells in 5 mM K +. Fig. 3. Extracellular K + significantly affects electrotaxis but does not affect chemotaxis of Dictyostelium cells. Chemotaxis of Dictyostelium cells in buffer with different extracellular K + concentrations. Cells in buffer with 5 mM or 50 mM K + were able... Extracellular significantly affected electrotaxis. Cells bathed in buffer with 5 mM K + showed robust electrotaxis with a directedness value of 0.93 ± 0.01. The directedness gradually decreased to 0.64 in 25 mM K + and 0.24 in 50 mM K +. Cells bathed in buffer with 50 mM K + had a significantly lower directedness value, representing a decrease of 73%. Although increasing extracellular appeared to inhibit both chemotaxis and electrotaxis, it seemed to have a more significant effect on electrotaxis. Table 2. Effects of pH and K + on electrotaxis a Electroporation depolarized V m and abolished electrotaxis. To further verify the role of V m in electrotaxis, we used electroporation to depolarize Dictyostelium cells. Electroporation with high-voltage pulses permeabilizes the cell plasma membrane, thus significantly depolarizing V m by causing a large increase in non-ion-selective membrane permeability. Measurements in electroporated cells showed that the membrane is significantly depolarized following electroporation. In the data shown in Fig. 4, the starting time was set as the time of electroporation. All cells measured at 10 min following electroporation showed a significantly reduced V m, which recovered gradually. The recovery took roughly 30 to 40 min following electroporation. Fig. 4. Electroporation depolarizes membrane potential and abolishes electrotaxis. Representative V m measured at pH 6.5 after electroporation. The moment of electroporation was set as time zero. Electroporated cells lost the electrotactic response,... Electrotaxis in electroporation-induced depolarized cells was lost. Batch-matched control cells had good directional migration with a directedness value of 0.96 ± 0.01 within 10 min in an EF, which was maintained through 20 to 30 min. Following electroporation, electrotaxis was completely inhibited. In the first 20 min following electroporation, the directedness of cells in an EF was almost zero. At 30 to 40 min, some directedness reappeared as V m recovered to a certain degree. We analyzed the relationship between these parameters and V m. We found that V m correlates significantly well with electrotaxis, with a correlation coefficient of −0.77, whereas chemotaxis did not appear to correlate with the changes in V m. Fig. 5. Significant correlation is between V m and electrotaxis but not chemotaxis. Scatter plot shows electrotactic directedness and resting membrane potential. The best-fit line is shown. Scatter plot shows chemotactic index and membrane... DISCUSSION We tested the effects of extracellular pH and on electrotaxis using Dictyostelium cells, which have the unique property of tolerating changes in extracellular pH,, and even electroporation, while maintaining good motility. We found that changes in extracellular pH and and electroporation significantly affected V m and that reduced V m in response to these three factors significantly inhibited electrotaxis. The inhibitory effect on electrotaxis correlated well with the reduced V m, but chemotactic effects did not. In developed Dictyostelium cells, cAMP binds G protein-coupled receptors, activates Gα2βγ, small GTPase, and class 1 phosphatidylinositol-3 kinases, thereby phosphorylating phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate into phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate, and finally induces F-actin polymerization, resulting in pseudopod development. Several other pathways may also contribute to chemotaxis. We demonstrated that Dictyostelium cells also show robust electrotaxis and are a good model for dissecting the molecular/genetic basis of electrotaxis. Extracellular pH,, and electroporation significantly affected V m and correspondingly reduced or abolished electrotaxis. When V m recovered, electrotaxis was restored. V m in Dictyostelium cells is mainly generated by electrogenic proton pumps. By varying extracellular pH, we controlled the V m with good reproducibility. The V m values were smaller than those reported previously. We used two different recording methods to confirm the measurements. The difference in V m values may be due to other modifications: the AX3 strain was used here whereas NC4 was used before; we used DB buffer while Van Duijn and coworkers used a Na + -saline ; we used different development protocols. The concentration of extracellular K + affects V m. Different extracellular K + concentrations regulated V m : the higher the K + concentration, the lower the V m. At 50 mM K +, electrotaxis was significantly inhibited. Depolarization of cells following electroporation abolished the electrotactic response while recovery of V m restored the electrotactic response. Chemotaxis of the cells with an altered V m, modulated by changes in extracellular pH or, was largely unaffected. This is consistent with a previous report. Collectively, these results support the theory that the inhibition of electrotaxis by changes in extracellular pH,, and electroporation appears to be a specific effect caused by changes to V m. The genome of Dictyostelium cells shows at least two possible transient receptor potential channel genes, a Ca 2+ channel gene, and several K + channel genes. Several signal transduction pathways related to electrotaxis could depend on V m caused by the interactions between ion channels and other signaling proteins such as integrins. It may involve different membrane proteins, such as ion channels, transporters, receptors, and the actin cytoskeleton, and may also involve Ca 2+ signaling. The reduced V m might inhibit Ca 2+ signaling and thereby affect electrotaxis. Another possibility is that V m may control the sensors that detect the EFs. We are currently using a high-throughput strategy to screen for such sensing molecules in electrotaxis. In conclusion, changes in extracellular pH,, and electroporation all had significant effects on electrotaxis. When the V m was depolarized, electrotaxis was significantly inhibited. Extracellular pH,, and electroporation all had significant effects on electrotaxis, which appeared to be mediated by the changes in V m. The initial directional sensing mechanisms for electrotaxis therefore differ from those in chemotaxis and may be mediated by changes in V m. 