 The oscillation of chemoattractant cyclic AMP in Dictyostelium discoideum is a collective phenomenon that occurs when the basal level of extracellular cAMP exceeds a threshold and invokes cooperative mutual excitation of cAMP synthesis and secretion. For pulses to be relayed from cell to cell repetitively, secreted cAMP must be cleared and brought down to the subthreshold level. One of the main determinants of the oscillatory behavior is thus how much extracellular cAMP is degraded by extracellular phosphodiesterase. To date, the exact nature of PDE gene regulation remains elusive. Here, we performed live imaging analysis of mRNA transcripts for pdsA —the gene encoding extracellular PDE. Our analysis revealed that pdsA is upregulated during the rising phase of cAMP oscillations. Furthermore, by analyzing isolated cells, we show that expression of pdsA is strictly dependent on the presence of extracellular cAMP. pdsA is induced only at ∼1 nM extracellular cAMP, which is almost identical to the threshold concentration for the cAMP relay response. The observed precise regulation of PDE expression together with degradation of extracellular cAMP by PDE form a dual positive and negative feedback circuit, and model analysis shows that this sets the cAMP level near the threshold concentration for the cAMP relay response for a wide range of adenylyl cyclase activity. The overlap of the thresholds could allow oscillations of chemoattractant cAMP to self-organize at various starving conditions, making its development robust to fluctuations in its environment. Introduction Aggregation of social amoebae Dictyostelium discoideum is directed by propagating waves of chemoattractant extracellular cAMP, where up to 10 5 cells stream together by chemotaxis to form a multicellular fruiting body. Upon elevation of extracellular cAMP, cells synthesize and secrete cAMP, which diffuses extracellularly to excite other cells in the vicinity—the process referred to as the cAMP-relay response. As a result, the excitatory events become synchronized and self-organize in the layer of cells as periodic waves. Due to the excitable nature of the cAMP relay response, the resulting patterns of extracellular cAMP take the form of concentric and spiral waves similar to those observed in the Belouzov-Zhabotinsky reaction. The self-organized cAMP waves provide spatiotemporal cues for directional sensing and thus are essential for aggregation of Dictyostelium cells. The oscillatory behavior of cAMP in Dictyostelium is a collective phenomenon that occurs when the basal level of extracellular cAMP becomes sufficiently high to invoke mutual excitation of cAMP synthesis and secretion. Recent perfusion experiments based on live-cell imaging of cAMP synthesis revealed that when cell density is low, or when the rate of cAMP dilution is high, the excitatory events are rare; one pulse is generated every 20–30 min. As cell density is increased, or dilution rate is decreased, the frequency of pulses increases and reaches the maximum— ∼1 pulse every 5 min. These experiments were performed in a perfusion chamber for cells uniformly matured in shaken buffer for 4–5 h, so they greatly simplify the requirement of pulse generation. First, instead of assisted dilution by perfusion, clearance of elevated extracellular cAMP requires endogenous extracellular phosphiodiesterase, which hydrolyzes cAMP to adenosine. Moreover, starving Dictyostelium cells increases their competence to relay cAMP during the developmental time course by inducing the required components, such as the cAMP receptor CAR1, adenlylyl cylase ACA, and extracellular PDE. Thus, the control parameters in the perfusion experiments, the effective synthesis rate, and the dilution rate are changing in time as cells develop. One of the major issues in self-organizing dynamics in general is how to optimally tune the system to obtain a desired behavior. Because the dynamics are transient and partly noise-driven, a small modification in the local dynamics and parameters could result in qualitatively different behavior with nontrivial outcomes at the population level. It has been shown theoretically that in the presence of autoregulation, i.e., a feedback regulation of cellular excitability by cAMP itself, cells can reproducibly develop a large aggregation territory in the form of a spiral. Autoregulation is well known in Dictyostelium, as most of the early genes required for cAMP relay response are upregulated by cAMP and cAMP-dependent protein kinase. The importance of such feedback for wave patterns has been demonstrated experimentally, as mutants in the PKA pathway fail to develop large spiral-wave territories. There is a risk in excitable systems that oscillations and waves will die out unless excitability is elevated to support random wave nucleation. On the other hand, experiments have shown that if excitability is elevated uniformly in the population, the systems fall into bulk oscillations where all cells are synchronized to a common phase without forming waves to assist cell aggregation. Such studies indicate that autoregulation plays a critical role in robust spatial patterning during the aggregation stage of Dictyostelium. Due to the abstract nature of the model, however, the exact source of heterogeneity and its underlying autoregulation remain unclear. Both ACA and CAR1, the major determinants of cAMP-induced cAMP synthesis, are expressed early and there is no evidence of heterogeneous expression. Overexpressing carA in carA/C null cells under a constitutive promoter do not influence the overall wave patterns. On the other hand, degradation of cAMP by extracellular PDE secreted by the cells is the other major factor that determines the level of extracellular cAMP, with some evidence of heterogeneous expression. Either overexpression or knockout of PDE blocks cell aggregation, indicating the importance of its native gene regulation. A recent perfusion experiment indicated that the presence of PDE is absolutely essential for cAMP oscillations. Moreover, the presence of PDE helps cells migrate in head-to-tail fashion toward the external chemoattractant gradient. It has also been proposed that regulation by plasma-membrane-bound and secreted forms of PDE works to regulate aggregate size, although the role of the plasma-membrane-bound form of PDE in this regulation is presently under debate. In this study, by employing live-cell dual imaging of both cAMP and mRNA, we analyzed how expression of extracellular PDE is regulated by chemoattractant stimuli. We show that transcription of pdsA appears in pulses and in synchrony with cAMP oscillations in a dense population. Analysis of isolated cells demonstrated that pdsA is induced precisely at 1 nM extracellular cAMP, thus providing an ideal bandpass filter that responds only to a concentration at the onset of cAMP waves. Model analysis predicts that the observed positive regulation works like a thermostat; it keeps the extracellular cAMP level near the threshold concentration for the cAMP relay response, thereby obviating the need to hard-tune adenylyl cyclase to a narrow range. The exact input-output relation of pdsA expression thus underlies the robust developmental trajectory in Dictyostelium. Materials and Methods Imaging and analysis of MS2GFP-RNA complex An inverted microscope equipped with an EM-CCD camera and a 60× oil-immersion objective lens mounted on a piezo-driven z -positioner was used to acquire fluorescence images of MS2-green-fluorescent-protein complex. Image acquisition was performed using the Metamorph software. In addition, an intermediate 1.6× magnification module was inserted into the optical path. Each acquisition consists of taking 38 gray-scale 16-bit images in steps of 250 nm along the z axis at the video frame rate. A two-dimensional Laplacian of Gaussian filter was applied to each slice for noise reduction. MS2GFP-RNA complexes are manually identified as pixels of submicrometer size within a cell that has signal intensity >10% of the background for more than three consecutive z -sections. We used an automated stage to sample from multiple locations in the xy plane, following the time course of over 20 cells in a round of timelapse recording. All sample time points consist of ∼100 cells observed in three to five experimental days. The kinetics of transcription was characterized by two parameters, lifetime and resting time. Lifetime is defined as the time during which a fluorescent spot can be seen without interruption in the same cell. If a cell has multiple fluorescent spots, the lifetime of the n th spot is defined as the time during which the number of spots in a cell increased from n − 1 to n before returning to n − 1 again. The analysis is performed on a per-cell, and not a per-particle, basis, because our time resolution does not allow continuous tracking of each fluorescent spot. Resting time is defined as the time during which no newly formed fluorescent spot is found in the cell, i.e., the time from disappearance of a single fluorescent spot to appearance of a new spot. In the same way as lifetime, if a cell has multiple fluorescent spots, the resting time of the n th fluorescent spot is defined as the time during which the number of spots changed from n to n − 1 before recovering to n. Again, because our time resolution does not allow continuous tracking of all fluorescent particles, all statistics are obtained on a per-cell basis. Mathematical model A model by Goldbeter and Martiel describes time evolution of cAMP in a well-mixed cell suspension. The model consists of three variables, γ, β, and ρ T, which denote extracellular and intracellular cAMP concentrations, and fraction of the receptor in the active state, respectively. The rate equations are d γ d t = ρ V d β d t = q σ K R Φ − β d ρ T d t = − f 1 ρ T + f 1, where Φ represents regulation downstream of the cAMP receptor Φ = α 2 ) 1 + α θ + ε 2 ; f 1 = k 1 K R + k 2 γ K R + γ ; f 2 = k 2 L 1 K R + k 2 L 2 c γ K R + c γ. A minor change is that variables γ and β that had dimensions of concentration in the original model were normalized by the dissociation constant of cAMP from the cAMP receptor. Parameters in Eqs. 1 and 2 are identical to those of the original model, except in the case of volume fraction of cell density, h −1, which was replaced with ρ V for the sake of clarity. Several parameter values were revised to account for our recent experimental observations, specifically that the threshold level for the cAMP relay response is 1 nM extracellular cAMP. Parameter q is inversely proportional to K R and thus changed accordingly. χ denotes the concentration of secreted PDE normalized by its Michaelis constant. cAMP degradation rate, k e, in the original model corresponds to k e χ in Eq. 1. Experimental Results Following a method used previously in Dictyostelium and other systems, we inserted a single copy of 24× repeats of the MS2 binding sequence immediately after the start codon in the pdsA locus, a gene that encodes the extracellular cAMP PDE. The MS2 coat protein that specifically binds to this sequence was fused to GFP and constitutively expressed under the actin15 promoter. Thus, pdsA transcripts are detected as fluorescent spots of bound MS2-GFP protein. To check the validity of our live-cell imaging analysis using the MS2 system, we first studied expression of the pdsA gene in cells starved for 30 min to 1 h. Earlier observations showed that the pdsA gene was transcribed within 30 min after removal of nutrient, and that the level of transcript was enhanced by addition of 1 mM extracellular cAMP. Consistent with the earlier studies, our real-time PCR analysis indicated that pdsA transcripts appear when cells are treated with 1 mM extracellular cAMP but were almost completely absent in nontreated cells. As expected, the pdsA transcripts were observed in live cells as fluorescence spots of MS2GFP-RNA complex almost immediately after cAMP treatment. On average, we detected 0.6 fluorescence spots/cell in cAMP-treated cells and 0.08 spots/cell in untreated cells. The fluorescence spots were found in the nucleus or near the nuclear membrane, with some also found in the cytosol. These localized patterns are similar to previous live-cell observations of the dscA gene transcript in Dictyostelium. Figure 1 Live-cell imaging of the pdsA gene transcript in cells early in starvation. Schematics of mRNA visualization; 24 repeats of the MS2 binding sequence are inserted at the 5′-end of the pdsA coding region. The MS2 coat protein fused to GFP... We saw almost no sign of induction when 1 mM cAMP was directly applied to harvested cells without the 30-min preincubation period. This effect was not rescued by addition of conditioned medium, indicating that cAMP is inhibitory to pdsA expression when cells have not experienced starvation for some time. Note that the carA gene, which encodes a plasma-membrane-bound cAMP receptor, is also induced in the cAMP-treated cells. Because the pdsA expression level remains low in a null mutant of carA / carC, the cAMP-induced pdsA expression in the very early stages of development is most likely mediated by cAMP receptors. In the 30-min-starved cells described above, we noticed marked cell-to-cell heterogeneity in the occurrence of pdsA transcripts. In the absence of exogenous cAMP, the fraction of cells exhibiting spots of MS2-GFP was very small. Even in the presence of extracellular cAMP, close to one half of the cells showed no accumulation of MS2-GFP spots. Heterogeneity was further confirmed by observing pdsA expression during the first 10 h of development using GFP as a reporter. An integrating plasmid harboring pdsA-promoter/GFP was inserted randomly in the genome, and a clonal cell line was analyzed. Fig. 2 b shows a fluorescence histogram from flow-cytometric measurements of cells expressing GFP under a pdsA promoter. In the growth condition, we detected only a single-peak distribution from the low-level autofluorescence. After starvation, cells expressing GFP began to appear and increased in number during the next 8 h, with a concomitant change to a bimodal profile of fluorescence distribution. The fraction of GFP-positive cells reached the maximum after 4 h starvation. These observations are consistent with earlier reports suggesting heterogeneous expression based on Xgal staining in aggregating fields of cells. Taken together, these findings indicate that there is a cell-intrinsic difference in the ability of cells to express the pdsA gene, and that this individuality appears to be already present in the very early hours after starvation begins. Figure 2 A cell-to-cell heterogeneity in the number of pdsA transcripts. The fraction of cells with no detectable fluorescence spots of MS2GFP-RNA complex: for cAMP, N = 517 of 616 cells; for cAMP, N = 666 of 1049 cells. Error... We next asked how the pdsA gene is turned on in individual cells in the developing population. In natural cell populations, extracellular cAMP is not available immediately after starvation, and it does not reach as high as 1 mM. Before and during aggregation, nanomolar extracellular cAMP pulses are generated every 5–10 min. The onset time of the nanomolar cAMP pulses thus overlaps with the timing of pdsA gene expression. To study the relation between cAMP and pdsA expression in a more naturally occurring condition, we employed FRET-based cAMP sensor epac1-camps to image both the cAMP signals and the pdsA transcript. Here, MS2-GFP was replaced with MS2 coat protein fused to red fluorescent protein to avoid a spectral overlap with the FRET sensor, which uses the GFP variants CFP and YFP. Cells starved in buffer for 4 h were placed in a perfusion chamber at 1/2 monolayer density and were exposed to continuous flow of fresh buffer at the rate of 4 ml/min. Under this condition, degradation of extracellular cAMP by extracellular PDE was substituted by dilution, and as a result, synchronized pulsing of cAMP was observed. Figure 3 Appearance of pdsA transcripts correlates with synchronized pulses of cAMP in the cell population. Synchronized pulses of cAMP are observed by FRET-based sensor epac1-camps. In this representative data, flow of buffer was stopped just before the... In cells undergoing synchronized pulsing of cAMP in the population, we observed stochastic appearance and disappearance of MS2-RFP spots in about one half of the cells. The remaining cells appeared transcriptionally quiescent during the course of our timelapse imaging. The number of MS2-RFP spots in the transcriptionally active cells was, on average, 1.27 counts/cell, and fluctuation of this number appeared to correlate with the phase of cAMP oscillations. To quantitatively characterize this relationship, we examined the number of MS2-RFP spots and their timing of appearance and disappearance in reference to the phase of cAMP pulses. We discovered that the average expression level increases by ∼0.25 spots/cell at the rising phase of cAMP pulses. In contrast, the average expression levels in other phases were the same as or lower than the average. The majority of MS2-RFP spots had lifetimes of 2 to 10 min. Fluorescent spots with lifetime >10 min appeared from the upward to the downward phase of cAMP oscillations, whereas all spots that appeared at the bottom phase lasted 10 min or less. The above observations lead us to closely examine transcriptional pulses of pdsA in isolated cells under well-defined concentrations of extracellular cAMP. When cells developed for 4 h were isolated in a perfusion setup at a low cell density to prevent generation of endogenous cAMP pulses, the pdsA transcript is almost completely extinguished. This clearly shows that expression of the pdsA gene after 4–6 h starvation is also not cell-autonomous. To study whether pdsA expression can be recovered by addition of extracellular cAMP, we next continuously exposed these well-washed and well-isolated quiescent cells to fresh buffer containing 100 pM to 10 μ M cAMP. We discovered that the pdsA gene is induced at 1 nM cAMP, but is almost completely suppressed at other concentrations. Fig. 4 b shows how the fraction of cells without MS2-GFP spots increased after exposure to 1 nM cAMP. In the absence of extracellular cAMP, spots of MS2-RNA were absent in almost all cells ). After the switch to buffer containing 1 nM cAMP, the fraction of cells without MS2-RFP spots decreased gradually, reaching the minimum by 15 min and staying at that level for the remainder of our observation. The change in number of spots/cell is also shown by the histograms in Figs. 4, c–e. After 1 min of exposure to 1 nM cAMP, <5% of the cells transcribed pdsA. After 30 min, ∼50% of the cells transcribed pdsA, and the number of cells with two or more spots increased during the next 30 min. Figure 4 Induction of pdsA by extracellular cAMP in cells starved of nutrients for 5 h. Well-isolated cells are placed in a perfusion chamber and first exposed to constant flow of buffer without cAMP to remove the effect of endogenous cAMP secreted by the cells... The appearance and disappearance of MS2-GFP spots were random events. Fig. 5, a and b, shows representative time sequences of the number of fluorescent spots in isolated cells in the absence and presence, respectively, of cAMP stimulation. In the absence of cAMP, the majority of cells did not carry detectable fluorescent spots. In the rare cases when we did see spots, they were short-lived, with a lifetime of 6 min or less. In the continuous presence of 1 nM extracellular cAMP, the number of MS2-GFP spots increased, and the spots appeared to persist, with some showing a lifetime >10 min. Resting time was distributed relatively broadly in the absence of cAMP, whereas the majority of resting times became <2 min in the presence of cAMP. Based on the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, the difference between these two distributions is statistically significant. Figure 5 The appearance and disappearance of MS2GFP-RNA complex is stochastic and pulsatile. Images show the time course of changes in the number of spots in single cells. Cells are well isolated in a perfusion chamber. The number of MS2-GFP spots in individual... Mathematical Model To address the effect of precise pdsA induction, we extended the Martiel and Goldbeter model of cAMP oscillations, which describes cAMP oscillations in cell suspension. Several of the parameters from the original model were revised for quantitative adjustments based on recent experimental findings. In addition, the model is expanded to include cAMP-dependent regulation of pdsA expression. The GFP reporter and qPCR results suggest that the level of protein synthesis directly reflects the average level of mRNA. The rate of protein degradation, k deg, is set to the average half-life of the protein, on the order of 0.01. The rate of protein synthesis, k syn, is chosen so that degradation rate of cAMP when pdsA is maximally induced will be within the range described in the literature. Accordingly, the concentration of PDE χ follows d χ d t = k s y n g − k deg χ. The exact form of g was estimated by fitting the dose dependence of pdsA transcript using g = γ 2 K 2 2 + b, which assumes a bell-shaped response curve and a basal expression, b, both normalized to the peak expression level. The function g could take other forms, as discussed below. Using this expanded model, we first studied the dependence of cAMP oscillations on adenlylyl cyclase activity. Expression of ACA could also depend on cAMP; however, to isolate the effect of PDE gene regulation, we studied the occurrence of cAMP oscillations at a given range of σ. We found that the range of ACA activity that can support oscillations is confined to σ = 0.08 to 0.7 in the absence of PDE regulation. In the presence of PDE regulation, σ could range between 0.01 and 0.4. In other words, the oscillatory region was expanded fourfold by the introduction of PDE regulation. Expansion of the oscillatory region was also observed when we assumed a simple positive regulation, g = γ 2 / + b, but not when we assumed a negative regulation, g = K 2 / + b. The model simulations thus indicate that the observed induction of pdsA by cAMP renders the oscillations markedly insensitive to precise values of adenylyl cylase activity. Figure 6 cAMP-dependent induction of PDE renders the cAMP oscillations robust to parameter change in the mathematical model. The dynamics of extracellular cAMP concentration switch between stationary and oscillatory states as adenlylyl cyclase... Furthermore, we discovered that the range of the oscillatory domain is maximized when the pdsA induction takes place at 1 nM. Fig. 6 c shows a phase boundary between oscillatory and nonoscillatory states in the parameter space. When PDE is positively regulated by extracellular cAMP, the range of σ that supports oscillations increases as K increases, and it is maximal near K = 1 nM. For K > 1, the oscillatory domain shrinks. In the limit of low K, the positive regulation is always saturated, so that g = 1. Thus, the oscillatory domain shrinks to a size comparable to the case without PDE regulation. If cAMP acts merely as a suppressor, there would be no such local maximum for the oscillatory domain. Thus, a negative regulation on its own has no effect on the size of the oscillatory domain. In light of the fact that the pdsA gene was induced at 1 nM cAMP, the simulation results suggest that the precise dose dependence is a property optimized to support cAMP oscillations. In the simulations, 1 nM extracellular cAMP was chosen as the threshold level for the cAMP relay response based on earlier experimental observations. As a result, oscillations take place around γ = 0.2–2 nM. From Fig. 6 a, one can see that the region of σ that allows γ to take such values is expanded by introducing PDE regulation. This property could be examined analytically as follows. Steady-state approximation of synthesis and degradation of cAMP and PDE yields σ Φ ∝ g γ, where the lefthand side signifies the synthesis rate of intracellular cAMP. For the sake of generality, let us first assume that Φ is fixed at the steady state, i.e., Φ = const., which is equivalent to approximating that the cAMP relay response exhibits perfect adaptation. Thus, irrespective of the molecular mechanisms underlying intracellular cAMP regulation, Eq. 5 simplifies to σ ∝ g γ. Fig. 6 d shows a curve defined by Eq. 6 that describes the level of steady-state extracellular cAMP as a function of adenylyl cyclase activity. The most salient feature of this relation is the slope of the curve that defines a logarithmic gain function | ∂ log γ ∂ log σ | = | ∂ log σ ∂ log γ | − 1 = | ∂ σ ∂ γ | − 1 σ γ = | 1 + g ′ γ g | − 1. The shallower the gradient the more insensitive the extracellular cAMP level is to the value of σ. In the absence of PDE regulation = 1), the slope in the log-log plot is equal to 1, because σ is proportional to γ. When there is positive regulation = γ 2 / + b ), and black line ), the gain is 1/3 at 0.2 < γ < 1 nM, because g ∼ γ 2. Above γ = 1 nM, the gain becomes close to unity due to a saturation of sigmoidal function. Likewise, below γ = 0.2 nM, g ∼ b, so that again the gain is close to unity. The shape of the gain function predicts relatively quick developmental progression until the extracellular cAMP concentration reaches 0.2 nM. Between 0.2 and 1 nM, the increase in the average extracellular cAMP concentration would slow down to prolong the oscillations. On the other hand, if g obeys a negative regulation = 1/ + b ), the gain is also one below γ = 1 nM, because in such a limit, g = 1. Why the threshold for cAMP relay and that for pdsA induction should match can be understood from the following theoretical analysis. Fig. 6 e summarizes the gain function for the curves in Fig. 6 d. Here, 0.2 nM and 2 nM correspond to the lower and upper bounds of cAMP concentrations that result in steep positive regulation. Without losing generality, it could be analytically shown that in order for the gain to be reduced, b b + 1 K < γ < K needs to be satisfied. This condition derives from the fact that the gain follows a concave curve with inflection points at γ = K b / and γ = K, so that the increase of γ with σ is minimized around K. Since the relative basal expression is expected to be small, K must be ∼1 nM for Eq. 8 to match the oscillatory region γ = 0.2∼2 nM. When the condition for gain reduction is not satisfied, i.e., K < 0.2 nM or K > 2 nM, the gain increases to unity, resulting in a smaller window of σ allowed to support the oscillations. Furthermore, expansion in the oscillatory domain can be realized when the positive regulation follows a Hill function with cooperativity n, namely, g = γ n γ n + K n. By substituting Eq. 9 into Eq. 7, we see that the gain around γ = K is 1/ which decreases monotonically as a function of n. Fig. S1 c compares the phase boundaries for different n. In the presence of cooperativity, we observed a fivefold and a 10-fold increase in the oscillatory range of σ around K = 1 nM. Note that this effect is not observed when K is away from 1 nM. To summarize, cells should be able to keep the extracellular cAMP level around 1 nM under a wide range of adenylyl cyclase activity due to the observed nonlinear positive regulation of pdsA expression. Discussion A number of early developmental genes are turned on in suspended Dictyostelium cells by applying pulsatile cAMP but not by continuous exposure and references therein). To date, the exact nature of selective induction by pulsatile cAMP is unclear. A genome-wide microarray study has shown that basal expression of pdsA, carA, and gpaB are independent of cAMP signals, but they are maximally induced by pulsatile nanomolar extracellular cAMP. This is in accordance with earlier reports indicating that the aggregation-stage promoter of pdsA is inducible by cAMP. Our qRT-PCR analysis of various mutants confirmed that extracellular cAMP synthesized by adenylyl cylase ACA induces pdsA expression, and that this is mediated by plasma-membrane-bound cAMP receptors. Because cells secrete cAMP transiently, and because it is degraded by none other than the PDE itself, the exact manner by which expression of PDE is regulated by cAMP has been difficult to reveal using conventional assays. Our analysis clarified that both induction and shutoff take place quickly on the order of minutes in a very narrow window of extracellular cAMP concentration, and that the dynamics are in synchrony with the oscillations of cAMP in the population. The results point to an advantage of live imaging, which allowed quantification of temporal dynamics of gene transcripts that otherwise would have been hidden from view. By studying single cells in isolation, we demonstrated that cells starved for 4–5 h require precisely 1 nM extracellular cAMP to increase pdsA transcription—within the range of extracellular cAMP concentration during early wave propagation. We observed increases in both the fraction of transcriptional positive cells and the number of mRNAs in isolated single cells by the chemoattractant cAMP at single-cell-level resolution. The resting time, i.e., the time interval during which cells had no newly formed transcriptions, shortened significantly upon application of 1 nM cAMP. As for the lifetime, the rarity of the event precluded us from obtaining enough sample points for statistically meaningful comparison of the histogram. However, it is tempting to speculate that mRNA induced by 1 nM cAMP stimulation may be more stable than the basal transcripts. MS2-RNA spots of duration >10 min were also observed during the cAMP oscillations. An earlier study based on Northern blot analysis showed that developmentally regulated mRNAs in Dictyostelium are stabilized by application of cAMP. A more recent study that compared transcriptional dynamics of several housekeeping and developmental genes in Dictyostelium showed that durations of the MS2-GFP spots faithfully reflect their relative stability and point to the importance of the 5′-untranslated region to mRNA stability. For pdsA, three distal promoter elements govern its expression during the stages of growth, aggregation, and late development. The basal and induced MS2-GFP spots may thus each represent RNA with distinct 5′ extensions. Further caution needs to be taken, since the lifetime of the MS2GFP-RNA complex is close to our time resolution, which may have prevented us from discriminating between two independent spots of duration <2–3 min that occur in succession in some cases. Attempts to shorten the time resolution have so far been hindered by phototoxicity and photobleaching. The concentration of extracellular cAMP required to induce the pdsA gene was close to the threshold concentration for cAMP relay response at the single-cell level. In fact, dual imaging of pdsA transcripts and the oscillatory cAMP pulses indicated elevated induction of pdsA at the rising phase when the cells are experiencing the threshold concentration for the cAMP relay response. This implies that the breakdown of extracellular cAMP by PDE is withheld until cAMP reaches a level high enough to generate pulsatile cAMP. Our theoretical model showed that positive regulation of PDE helps cells not only to rapidly reach 1 nM extracellular cAMP but also to maintain that level even when adenylyl cyclase activity further increases. This robustness in the system arises from the fact that induction of PDE by extracellular cAMP forms a negative feedback loop. As originally analyzed by Savageau, in general, a negative feedback reduces the gain function, i.e., it decreases parameter sensitivity of the system. Furthermore, proximity of two thresholds—one for the cAMP relay response and the other for transcriptional regulation suggests that the level of robustness is maximized. It can be seen from our model analysis that the size of an oscillatory domain is maximized when pdsA is expressed at 1 nM. The observed transcriptional regulation could thus, within a narrow range, realize self-organizing waves without hard-tuning adenylyl cyclase and PDE activities. In other words, the precise regulation of PDE in Dictyostelium realizes canalization of development, i.e., robustness of the developmental trajectory. We found that pdsA is not induced in isolated cells exposed to high extracellular cAMP concentrations. This is consistent with the dual imaging analysis of MS2 and cAMP oscillations that indicated downregulation of pdsA transcription at the peak of cAMP pulses, when extracellular cAMP is expected to rise above 1 nM. Because this downregulation continues into the falling phase of the cAMP oscillations, where the cells again experience the 1 nM range of extracellular cAMP, repression appears to persist for a few minutes after cells have experienced the peak of cAMP oscillations. The absence of PDE expression at high extracellular cAMP concentrations is also consistent with the longer-timescale change in the level of pdsA transcripts, which begins to decrease at a time when extracellular cAMP is expected to accumulate in the cell population. The origin of suppression appears to be mediated at least in part by intracellular cAMP, since a null mutant in the catalytic subunit of PKA exhibits prolonged pdsA expression. Such a view is in good agreement with an earlier study indicating that intracellular cAMP acts negatively on PDE expression. In terms of robustness of the oscillations, the absence of PDE expression at high extracellular cAMP plays almost no role. Rather, its role appears to be mainly switching off PDE expression at the late aggregation stage. The bell-shaped response curve means that cAMP and PDE synthesis are mutually repressive when extracellular cAMP level is high; thus, there can be bistability in the system. In fact, the mathematical model predicts two stable states: one at ∼1 nM and the other at ∼10 nM extracellular cAMP. The switch also causes pdsA expression to be in either the on or off state. Simulations of cell suspension show that when oscillations ceased at high σ, the level of extracellular cAMP switched from low to high extracellular cAMP concentration. When extracellular cAMP is close to 1 nM, PDE is expressed and synchronized pulses of cAMP relay response appear in experiments. The relative change in cAMP concentration produced by this switch is inversely proportional to the fraction of basal activity, b, in Eq. A12, we see that the extracellular cAMP level should be elevated 10-fold. If the transition takes place gradually in time and space, the genetic toggle switch could potentially create local heterogeneity in the excitable field by creating a steady source of cAMP supply that could give rise to pacemakers and spirals during aggregation. When the switch turns off globally, it could terminate the early stage of development. For example, an abrupt change is observed at ∼7 h after starvation, when optical density waves suddenly become undetectable. In addition to turning off the pdsA gene at the appropriate developmental stage, the bell-shape response curve may have an additional role. As mentioned above, development of Dictyostelium discoideum and associated gene expression can be induced by applying exogenous cAMP at 5- to 6-min intervals for several hours. It is known that 5-min periodic stimuli are more efficient than shorter-interval pulses or aperiodic pulses. To test this aspect, we studied the efficiency of induction to dynamically changing stimulus. Simulations suggest that PDE is indeed induced maximally when cells are stimulated at 6-min intervals. At relatively long time intervals, PDE has less chance of being synthesized, because cells are exposed to 1 nM extracellular cAMP less often. When the interval becomes shorter than the refractory period ) and the degradation time of extracellular cAMP ), the extracellular cAMP is elevated at each stimulus before it has a chance to come down to 1 nM. Thus, in such cases, the PDE synthesis is continuously suppressed. On the other hand, there is no such frequency selectivity when PDE expression follows a simple positive regulation. Since cells persistently bathed in 1 nM continue to express pdsA, the pulse-dependent induction does not involve a mechanism that strictly requires temporal change in the cAMP concentration. Rather, this analysis suggests that the key property of frequency-dependent pulse-induction is the bell-shaped dose dependence. Based on the time-lapse observation and GFP-reporter study, ∼1/4–1/2 of all cells do not express the pdsA gene. Because heterogeneity is observed even during perfusion experiments, where cells are exposed to a common extracellular cAMP level and its dilution rate, the bistability described above cannot be the source of the heterogeneity. In general, heterogeneity may arise from cell-to-cell variation in sensitivity to the induction stimulus. As for positive regulation, heterogeneity may be brought about by cell-to-cell variability in effectors downstream of the cAMP receptor. In addition, sporogeneous pkaC − mutant shows a markedly high expression level of pdsA in the aggregation stage, implying that the PKA-dependent suppression of pdsA may be another source of heterogeneous expression. Because heterogeneity is already observed in cells starved for 30 min, the cell state during the growth stage, such as the position in the cell cycle, may continue to bias cell fate. Since spatial heterogeneity in the activity of PDE is thought to play a major role in determining both the signaling centers of cAMP wave propagation and the aggregate size, incorporating a spatial degree of freedom into the model should further clarify the adaptive purposes of precise PDE regulation. How differentiating cells define and readout positional information has been well worked out in the Drosophila embryo. There, stationary gradients of transcription factors are read out by bell-shaped response curves and translated to spatially constricted regions of transcription-factor expression. In the case of Dictyostelium, because cells need to read out dynamically changing stimulus to make sure that they are surrounded by cells preparing to aggregate, the pdsA gene uses a similar signal-processing filter but instead reads out the phase information of temporal change in the chemoattractant cAMP concentration. It would be interesting in the future to investigate whether or not other pulse-induced genes in Dictyostelium, as well as those similarly regulated in other systems, such as circadian rhythms, share a common signal-processing strategy. 