 Genes with sequence similarity to the yeast tRNA His guanylyltransferase gene have been identified in all three domains of life, and Thg1 family enzymes are implicated in diverse processes, ranging from tRNA His maturation to 5′-end repair of tRNAs. All of these activities take advantage of the ability of Thg1 family enzymes to catalyze 3′-5′ nucleotide addition reactions. Although many Thg1-containing organisms have a single Thg1-related gene, certain eukaryotic microbes possess multiple genes with sequence similarity to Thg1. Here we investigate the activities of four Thg1-like proteins encoded by the genome of the slime mold, Dictyostelium discoideum. We show that one of the four TLPs is a bona fide Thg1 ortholog, a cytoplasmic G −1 addition enzyme likely to be responsible for tRNA His maturation in D. discoideum. Two other D. discoideum TLPs exhibit biochemical activities consistent with a role for these enzymes in mitochondrial 5′-tRNA editing, based on their ability to efficiently repair the 5′ ends of mitochondrial tRNA editing substrates. Although 5′-tRNA editing was discovered nearly two decades ago, the identity of the protein that catalyze this activity has remained elusive. This article provides the first identification of any purified protein that appears to play a role in the 5′-tRNA editing reaction. Moreover, the presence of multiple Thg1 family members in D. discoideum suggests that gene duplication and divergence during evolution has resulted in paralogous proteins that use 3′-5′ nucleotide addition reactions for diverse biological functions in the same organism. Keywords: 3′-5′ polymerase, G −1 addition, RNA editing, tRNA repair, tRNA His INTRODUCTION The enzyme Thg1, whose gene was originally identified in yeast, is part of a family of enzymes found in all three domains of life and united by the ability to catalyze the 3′-5′ addition of nucleotides to nucleic acid substrates. Thg1 is widely distributed throughout eukaryotes, where it uses 3′-5′ nucleotide addition to attach a single essential guanylate residue to the 5′ end of tRNA His species. The presence of G −1 is unique to tRNA His and acts as a necessary recognition element for efficient histidylation, both in vitro and in vivo in yeast. The biological functions of Thg1-like proteins found in the domains Bacteria and Archaea are less well understood. In some archaeons, such as Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicus and Methanopyrus kandleri, TLPs likely add the required G −1 to tRNA His, similar to their eukaryotic counterparts. However, in other archaeons, such as Methanosarcina acetivorans and Methanosarcina barkeri, and in nearly all bacterial species, tRNA His genes already contain an encoded G −1 residue. The genomically encoded G −1 is presumably incorporated into the precursor tRNA during transcription, and can be retained in the mature tRNA His due to an unusual 5′-end processing reaction catalyzed by RNase P, as occurs in Escherichia coli. The lack of an obligate requirement for post-transcriptional G −1 addition in these Thg1-containing species suggests that some Thg1 family members may use 3′-5′ addition for alternative functions, beyond a simple role in tRNA His maturation. Thg1/TLP family members from Archaea and Bacteria exhibit at least two biochemical differences from eukaryotic family members studied so far. First, unlike yeast Thg1, bacterial/archaeal TLPs only add Watson–Crick base-paired nucleotides in the 3′-5′ addition reaction. Template-dependent 3′-5′ addition activity appears to be an ancestral property, as Thg1/TLP enzymes from all domains of life, including eukaryotes, catalyze this reaction. Second, TLPs from Bacteria and Archaea exhibit a strong kinetic preference for the templated addition of nucleotides to the 5′ end of truncated tRNA substrates over the addition of −1 nucleotides to full-length tRNAs, and they add the missing 5′-nucleotides to tRNAs other than tRNA His. Neither the addition to 5′-truncated tRNAs nor the addition to other tRNAs is catalyzed efficiently by yeast Thg1. The ability of bacterial/archaeal TLPs to restore a fully base-paired aminoacyl stem suggests a role for TLPs in previously unidentified pathways of tRNA 5′-end repair. Interestingly, TLPs from Archaea that require post-transcriptional G −1 addition to tRNA His also catalyze the 5′-end repair reaction, suggesting that some Thg1 family members may participate in both tRNA His maturation and general tRNA repair activities. 5′-End repair of tRNA is also an essential component of a 5′-tRNA editing activity that occurs in the mitochondria of a number of distantly related eukaryotic microbes. In these protists, such as the amoebozoon Acanthamoeba castellanii, where 5′-tRNA editing was first discovered, certain mitochondrially encoded tRNAs are predicted to contain up to three mismatched nucleotides at the first three positions in their aminoacyl-acceptor stem. The 5′-tRNA editing activity is thought to comprise at least two components: first, a nucleolytic activity that removes the incorrectly paired nucleotides from the 5′ end of the tRNA, and second, a 3′-5′ nucleotide addition activity that restores the missing nucleotides, using the 3′ end of the tRNA as the template to generate a fully paired aminoacyl-acceptor stem. Although 5′-tRNA editing was the first of a number of tRNA editing activities to be described, the identity of the protein that catalyze this reaction has remained unknown. However, the striking similarity of the 3′-5′ addition component of the 5′-tRNA editing reaction to the 5′-end repair activity recently associated with bacterial and archaeal TLPs suggested that enzymes from the Thg1 superfamily could play a role in 5′-tRNA editing. In support of this hypothesis, multiple Thg1-related sequences have been identified in the genomes of several protists predicted to require 5′-tRNA editing to produce functional mitochondrial tRNAs. BLAST searches using yeast Thg1 have revealed the presence of two Thg1-related sequences in A. castellanii and in the chytid fungus, Spizellomyces punctatus, as well as four different genes with sequence similarity to yeast Thg1 in another amoebozoon, the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. We chose the D. discoideum enzymes for further investigation based on the availability of a well-characterized genomic assembly for this organism and because of its biochemical tractability. Interestingly, one of the four D. discoideum sequences shares more sequence similarity with eukaryal Thg1 enzymes, such as yeast Thg1, than with prokaryal TLPs, such as M. acetivorans TLP, consistent with a function for DdiTLP1 in cytoplasmic tRNA His maturation. The other three DdiTLPs share more sequence identity with bacterial and archaeal family members, suggesting that one or more of these could be components of the 5′-tRNA editing enzyme. Two of the DdiTLPs are predicted to contain mitochondrial targeting sequences, which would also be consistent with a role for these enzymes in mitochondrial 5′-tRNA editing. FIGURE 1. Sequence alignment of D. discoideum TLPs with Thg1 family members. Sequences of the four D. discoideum TLPs were aligned with representative Thg1/TLP sequences from Eucarya, Archaea... To test these hypotheses, we characterized the biochemical activities of each of the four Thg1-related sequences found in D. discoideum. Here we demonstrate that the bona fide Thg1 ortholog from Ddi adds G −1 to tRNA His, both in vitro and in vivo consistent with its predicted function from sequence analysis and predicted cytoplasmic localization. Using an assay for 3′-5′ nucleotide addition to 5′-truncated mitochondrial-tRNA substrates from D. discoideum, we also show that two of the TLPs exhibit biochemical activities consistent with their participation in editing. These results constitute the first identification of any purified protein that could play a role in 5′-tRNA editing in eukaryotes. As 5′-tRNA editing reactions require the addition of any of four nucleotides to complete the acceptor stem of substrate tRNAs, and occur with many different mt-tRNA species, this observation suggests more generalized roles for 3′-5′ nucleotide addition than the simple addition of a single nucleotide to tRNA His first associated with members of this enzyme family in yeast and multicellular eukaryotes. RESULTS Purification of D. discoideum TLP enzymes The four D. discoideum Thg1-related sequences identified by BLAST search were amplified by polymerase chain reaction from a D. discoideum cDNA library and cloned with an N-terminal His 6 tag into a vector for overexpression in and subsequent purification from E. coli. Based on the BLAST results, one of the four sequences appeared to be more closely related than the others to yeast Thg1 and was consequently the strongest candidate to be the Thg1 ortholog in D. discoideum. Nonetheless, so as not to bias our approach, we initially chose to call the four genes DdiTLPs 1–4. FIGURE 2. DdiTLP1 exhibits Thg1 activity in vitro. SDS-PAGE analysis of purified TLPs from D. discoideum. Purified proteins were resolved by 15% SDS-PAGE; lane MW, molecular weight markers. Predicted molecular weights: TLP1, 32 kDa; TLP2... All four genes contain a 3′-5′ nucleotidyltransferase domain marked by the presence of several highly conserved residues that are critical for catalysis by yeast and human Thg1. DdiTLP2 and DdiTLP3 both contain a predicted mitochondrial targeting peptide. For DdiTLP2, this sequence was removed during cloning so that the final protein product expressed in E. coli lacked the N-terminal mitochondrial peptide. For DdiTLP3, the predicted sequence also contains an additional unusual Q/N-rich domain between the predicted N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence and the 3′-5′ nucleotidyltransferase domain. The Q/N-rich coding sequence is present in the PCR product derived from the cDNA expression library, indicating that this sequence is not attributable to an incorrect gene model but is contained in the DdiTLP3 mRNA. We cannot exclude the possibility that a translational start site downstream of the Q/N-rich domain is actually utilized in this case, although an unusually high number of predicted protein-coding sequences in D. discoideum contain poly Q/N sequences. Due to the uncertainties regarding translation start site and the role of the Q/N domain, the full-length DdiTLP3 sequence was cloned for expression and purification in this study. We note that the Q/N domain-containing DdiTLP3 product was purified in similar yields to the other TLPs and was active in our assays. DdiTLP1 catalyzes the addition of G −1 to tRNA His in vitro We first tested the activity of all four purified DdiTLPs with a 5′- 32 P-labeled yeast tRNA His substrate, using a phosphatase protection assay described previously. Briefly, the addition of a −1 nucleotide results in protection of the 5′-labeled phosphate from dephosphorylation by alkaline phosphatase, and, after RNase A digestion, the resulting phosphatase-treated oligomeric reaction product can be resolved from inorganic phosphate using thin-layer chromatography. In these assays, only DdiTLP1 catalyzed any detectable amount of G −1 addition to the yeast tRNA His substrate, although the overall specific activity of the D. discoideum protein was ∼20-fold lower than that observed with yeast Thg1. To test whether the reduced level of activity was due to the use of the nonnative yeast tRNA substrate instead of D. discoideum cytoplasmic tRNA His, we used in vitro transcription to generate a tRNA with the sequence of Ddi-tRNA His and tested G −1 addition activity using the same assay. However, although specific activity improved slightly, DdiTLP1 was still ∼10-fold less active than yeast Thg1 in this assay, even with a D. discoideum tRNA His. DdiTLP1 catalyzes the addition of G −1 to tRNA His in vivo in yeast We used a yeast genetic assay to determine whether the relatively weaker G −1 addition activity catalyzed by DdiTLP1 is robust enough to support the growth of the yeast thg1Δ strain when DdiTLP1 is expressed as the sole source of Thg1 in the cells. A plasmid shuffle assay was performed, using a previously described yeast thg1Δ strain that contains a wild-type copy of yeast THG1 on a plasmid to maintain viability of the strain. Plasmids containing each of the four DdiTLPs under control of a galactose-inducible promoter were transformed into the thg1Δ strain. For these constructs, the putative mitochondrial targeting sequences for DdiTLP2 and DdiTLP3 were removed, as G −1 addition occurs with cytoplasmic tRNA His in yeast. Positive transformants were tested for their ability to support growth on media containing 5-fluoroorotic acid, which causes loss of the URA3 yeast THG1 plasmid. If the TLP supports growth of the thg1Δ strain, this result indicates that it is able to catalyze the essential G −1 addition reaction with tRNA His in vivo. Of the four TLP-containing plasmids tested, complementation was only observed in the DdiTLP1-containing strain, consistent with the in vitro assay results. The in vivo G −1 -addition activity of DdiTLP1 in yeast is sufficient to fully substitute for the deletion of yeast THG1, as the DdiTLP1-complemented thg1Δ strain exhibits no growth defect relative to the wild-type strain on either rich or minimal media at a range of growth temperatures. As both in vitro and in vivo data support a function for DdiTLP1 in G −1 addition to cytoplasmic tRNA His, similar to yeast Thg1, we have renamed this gene product DdiThg1. FIGURE 3. DdiTLP1 catalyzes Thg1 activity in vivo in yeast. Complementation of the yeast thg1Δ growth defect by each of the D. discoideum TLPs was tested using a plasmid shuffle assay, as previously described. DdiTLPs, as indicated, expressed... DdiTLP3 and DdiTLP4 add a missing G +1 to mt-tRNA Ile CAU In D. discoideum, nine of 18 mtDNA-encoded tRNA genes contain predicted mismatched nucleotides at their 5′ ends. Although 5′ editing has not been directly demonstrated in D. discoideum through comparison of tRNA gene sequences with the sequences of isolated mt-tRNA, the observation of nucleotide mismatches at any of the first three positions of the tRNA aminoacyl-acceptor stem is strongly predictive of the occurrence of 5′-tRNA editing in other protists. Moreover, mitochondrial 5′-tRNA editing has been directly demonstrated in a close relative of D. discoideum, the amoebozoon Polysphondylium pallidum. The two-step 5′-tRNA editing reaction requires first, removal of the mismatched nucleotides from the 5′ end of the transcript, and second, the 3′-5′ addition of the correct residues to the resulting 5′-truncated tRNA to generate a fully paired aminoacyl-acceptor stem. FIGURE 4. Mitochondrial tRNA sequences from D. discoideum indicate a need for 5′-tRNA editing. Aminoacyl-acceptor stems of the 18 mt-tRNAs encoded in the D. discoideum mitochondrial genome are shown; the remainder of each tRNA sequence is omitted for clarity.... We tested the ability of each of the four TLPs to catalyze the second step of the editing reaction, and added back in the missing 5′-end nucleotides to mt-tRNA Ile CAU from D. discoideum. A 5′-truncated mt-tRNA Ile CAU substrate was designed to mimic the tRNA species after removal of the original mismatched nucleotides by the as-yet-unidentified nuclease activity. In this case, deletion of the encoded A +1 that forms a mismatch with C 72 yields a C +2 -initiating tRNA coding sequence, which is not a preferred template for in vitro transcription using T7 RNA polymerase. Therefore, the tRNA sequence was cloned with a 5′-hammerhead ribozyme sequence that catalyzes cotranscriptional cleavage, yielding a 5′-hydroxylated C +2 -initiating tRNA. The tRNA was 5′- 32 P-labeled and tested for the addition of the missing G +1 nucleotide using the phosphatase protection assay. The nucleotide incorporation activity previously observed in partially purified mitochondrial extracts with 5′-monophosphorylated tRNA transcripts required ATP, so ATP was included in the reactions. FIGURE 5. DdiTLP3 and DdiTLP4 repair 5′-truncated mt-tRNA Ile CAU. Schematic of phosphatase protection assay used with 5′- 32 P-labeled tRNA to detect G +1 addition catalyzed by TLPs in the presence of ATP and GTP. Only aminoacyl-acceptor... The addition of G +1 yields a Gp*C product following treatment of the reaction products with RNase A and phosphatase. DdiTLP3 and DdiTLP4 both catalyzed robust formation of a major reaction product in the presence of GTP and ATP ; this product contains a G residue linked to the labeled phosphate as revealed by release of Gp* following RNase T2 digestion of the TLC-purified reaction product. In reactions with DdiTLP4, a small amount of the activated precursor for G +1 addition was also observed. DdiThg1 did not exhibit detectable 5′-end repair of mt-tRNA Ile, consistent with a distinct role for this enzyme in cytoplasmic tRNA His maturation. Barely detectable levels of G +1 addition were observed with DdiTLP2, suggesting that this is not a preferred activity for this enzyme. Steady-state kinetic parameters for the addition of the missing G +1 residue were determined for DdiTLP3 and DdiTLP4. The k cat for G +1 addition catalyzed by DdiTLP4 is approximately fivefold greater than k cat measured for DdiTLP3. Precise determination of K M exhibited by DdiTLP3 was somewhat difficult due to the slow rates of reaction, but saturation of the initial rates at tRNA substrate concentrations >0.2 μM, observed repeatedly in the steady-state assays, suggests that K M is lower for DdiTLP3 than for DdiTLP4, and therefore the overall catalytic efficiencies of both enzymes are similar. Notably, the measured k cat / K M for 5′-end repair reactions catalyzed by TLPs are in close agreement with k cat / K M values measured previously for the physiological G −1 addition reaction catalyzed by yeast Thg1 with monophosphorylated tRNA substrate. As with G −1 addition to tRNA His, the measured in vitro rates for 5′-repair of mt-tRNAs are lower than might be expected for a typical enzyme-catalyzed reaction and may indicate participation of other factors in enhancing activity in vivo. TABLE 1. Steady-state kinetic parameters for 5′-end repair catalyzed by DdiTLPs DdiTLP3 and DdiTLP4 catalyze 5′-end repair of mt-tRNA Leu UAG For 5′-tRNA editing in vivo, the addition of the missing nucleotides is not limited to the addition of G, and requires 3′-5′ polymerization of more than one nucleotide for some substrates. Therefore, we tested addition to 5′-truncated mt-tRNA Leu UAG missing both C +2 and G +1 residues. The 5′- 32 P-labeled U +3 -initiating transcript was first used to test for the addition of the missing C +2 nucleotide in the presence of ATP and CTP. Phosphatase protection assays were performed as above, except that RNase T1 was used instead of RNase A, yielding labeled products terminating with G +4. As with the mt-tRNA Ile substrate, prominent reaction products were observed in reactions containing DdiTLP3 and DdiTLP4, but not with the other two DdiTLPs. FIGURE 6. DdiTLP3 and DdiTLP4 add a missing C +2 to 5′-truncated mt-tRNA Leu UAG. Schematic of phosphatase protection assay used with 5′- 32 P-labeled tRNA to detect addition catalyzed by TLPs in the presence of ATP and CTP. Only... In the absence of oligonucleotide standards, the identities of the two major products isolated from the TLC plates were determined by further nuclease digestion. Both P1 and P2 are C +2 -containing products, as evidenced by the production of Cp* and p*U by RNase T2 and nuclease P1, respectively. However, the different behavior of P1 and P2 upon RNase A treatment suggests that P2 corresponds to C +2 p*UpG, whereas P1 corresponds to A +1 pC +2 p*UpG. This assignment is based on the fact that, unlike for P2, treatment of P1 with RNase A did not yield Cp*, indicating that another RNase A-resistant nucleotide has been added at the +1 position. As ATP was the only other nucleotide included in the reactions, we conclude that the product results from the addition of a non-Watson–Crick-pairing A +1 nucleotide, after C +2 is added. C +2 addition by yeast Thg1 was barely detectable, consistent with the inefficient 5′-end repair activities observed previously with yeast Thg1 using other 5′-truncated tRNA substrates. We then tested the ability of TLPs to add both missing nucleotides to U +3 -tRNA Leu. As complete repair of the p*U +3 -initiating tRNA would generate labeled products that are sensitive to both RNase A and RNase T1, a different assay was used to detect product formation. Following incubation of labeled substrate with each enzyme and the indicated NTPs, reactions were first treated with phosphatase, then purified by phenol extraction and ethanol precipitation, and treated with various nucleases. For clarity, the results shown in Figure 7 are only those for reactions containing DdiTLP4; however, DdiTLP3 generated identical reaction products in parallel assays. The labeled 5′-phosphate was not completely removed from unreacted substrate by the phosphatase treatment, as evidenced by the labeled p*Up product generated by RNase A and T2 digestion and p*U generated by nuclease P1 digestion in control reactions that lack enzyme. Nonetheless, pre-treatment with phosphatase was important to remove unlabeled 5′-phosphates from the various nucleotide addition products. As expected, C addition does not occur in the absence of ATP for 5′ end activation. As only p*U was observed after nuclease P1 digestion, the activated intermediate for C +2 addition does not accumulate in any of the reactions. Consistent with the results above, reactions that contained only ATP and CTP generated predominantly Cp* after RNase T2 or RNase A digestion, and a second minor reaction product that remains at the origin. However, in reactions that contained all three NTPs, no Cp* product was detected after RNase A digestion, indicating that the C +2 -containing intermediate species does not accumulate. Instead, the major RNase A reaction product is a spot that remains at the origin, and the observation of Cp* by RNase T2 digest reveals that this major product contains an RNase A-resistant +1 nucleotide, linked by standard phosphodiester bond to C +2, as expected for the G +1 -containing product. The two RNase A-generated products remaining at the origin can be further resolved by silica TLC, which reveals that the dinucleotide reaction products formed in the presence and absence of GTP are not the same and the presence of GTP drives the addition reaction to completion, as there is no evidence for accumulation of products that contain only C +2. Thus, although nontemplated A +1 addition can occur when only ATP is present in the assays, this reaction is less efficient than the addition of the correct Watson–Crick base-pairing G +1 nucleotide. This result is consistent with the preference for formation of Watson–Crick base pairs exhibited by Thg1/TLP family enzymes. FIGURE 7. DdiTLP4 fully repair 5′-truncated mt-tRNA Leu UAG using 3′-5′ polymerization. Schematic of nuclease digestion assay used with 5′- 32 P-labeled tRNA to detect addition catalyzed by TLPs in the presence of various... DISCUSSION Despite identification of mitochondrial 5′-tRNA editing in certain protists nearly 20 years ago, the identities of any of the protein components of the 5′-tRNA editing machinery has remained unknown. By studying the activities of four Thg1-like proteins from the slime mold D. discoideum, we have identified the first purified proteins that are likely to participate in the 5′-tRNA editing process. Two of the four TLPs encoded by D. discoideum catalyze 5′-tRNA repair of mt-tRNA substrates derived from D. discoideum in vitro, and thus are well-suited to participate in the second step of the 5′-editing reaction, forming a fully base-paired aminoacyl-acceptor stem for each tRNA. During the course of our investigation we also demonstrated that one of the TLPs is the likely cytoplasmic G −1 addition enzyme in D. discoideum, based on its ability to catalyze G −1 addition to tRNA His both in vitro and in vivo in yeast. 3 ). These results are the first demonstration of multiple uses for 3′-5′ nucleotide addition reactions catalyzed by Thg1/TLP family enzymes in the same organism. The potential for an evolutionary relationship between the 5′-editing enzymes and the enzyme that catalyzes tRNA His maturation in eukaryotes, the identity of which was also unknown at that time, was suggested soon after the discovery of the 5′-editing activity. This hypothesis was based on the fact that both activities required nucleotide addition at the 5′ end of tRNA, potentially through the involvement of a 3′-5′ nucleotide polymerase. The unexpected discovery of Watson–Crick-templated 3′-5′ polymerase activity catalyzed by yeast Thg1 further supported this hypothesis. However, attempts to demonstrate an “editing-like” activity of yeast Thg1 were not successful, as yeast Thg1 does not efficiently add missing nucleotides to 5′-truncated tRNAs. Instead, the connection between 5′ editing and the Thg1 enzyme family became evident only recently upon characterization of TLPs found in Bacteria and Archaea. Like DdiTLP3 and DdiTLP4, bacterial and archaeal TLPs catalyze efficient repair of 5′-truncated tRNA substrates. Moreover, they exhibit a strong kinetic preference for 5′-end repair over nucleotide additions at the −1 position of tRNA substrates, suggesting that this is the preferred activity for bacterial and archaeal TLPs in vivo. Endogenous substrates for tRNA 5′-end repair in Bacteria and Archaea have not yet been identified, as genomic tRNA sequences from TLP-containing species do not contain aminoacyl-acceptor stem mismatches. Thus, the occurrence of 5′ editing in Bacteria and Archaea seems unlikely. Instead, the 5′-end repair activity in these species is proposed to play a more general role in repair of tRNA that has been damaged or misprocessed. Nonetheless, the results presented here are the first demonstrated involvement of tRNA 5′-end repair in a known physiological activity, and further support the proposed repair function of TLPs in Bacteria and Archaea. The lack of apparent 5′-end repair activity catalyzed by bona fide Thg1 enzymes such as yeast Thg1 and DdiThg1 is intriguing with respect to the evolution of the Thg1/TLP enzyme family. The universal ability of members of the Thg1/TLP enzyme family from all domains of life to catalyze 3′-5′ Watson–Crick polymerization suggests that this is an ancestral activity of Thg1 enzymes. Evolutionary pressure on eukaryotic Thg1 enzymes to catalyze the nontemplated addition of G −1 opposite A 73 with strong selectivity for tRNA His may have resulted in a concurrent reduction in their ability to add, in a templated fashion, different nucleotides in repairing a diverse set of tRNA substrates. However, the possibility remains that even eukaryotic Thg1 enzymes may similarly be able to catalyze 5′-end repair, perhaps for other substrates or under certain conditions. The demarcation between enzymes that are involved in G −1 addition and those that appear to be involved in 5′-end repair is not always clear. In some archaeons, such as M. thermoautotrophicus, the single encoded TLP exhibits a biochemical and kinetic preference for 5′-end repair of 5′-truncated tRNA similar to that shown by other archaeal TLPs. Yet the lack of a genomically encoded G −1 residue on tRNA His in M. thermoautotrophicus suggests that MtTLP predictably functions in post-transcriptional G −1 addition. Further investigation of mt-tRNA editing in certain protists appears likely to reveal a similar situation. In A. castellanii, we have identified only two TLPs in the virtually complete draft genome sequence, but unlike in D. discoideum, neither of these TLPs appears to be an authentic ortholog to the canonical “Thg1” enzymes from yeast and humans. However, cytoplasmic G −1 addition to tRNA His is presumably also required in A. castellanii, so that one of the A. castellanii TLPs may catalyze this reaction, despite its lack of similarity to yeast Thg1. Investigation of the functions of these members of the Thg1/TLP enzyme family are likely to be important for understanding the evolution of the distinct activities catalyzed by Thg1/TLP enzymes. Steady-state kinetic analysis of 5′-end repair catalyzed by DdiTLP3 and DdiTLP4 compared with G −1 addition catalyzed by yeast Thg1 revealed similar in vitro activity for each enzyme with respect to its expected substrates. However, questions remain about the nature of the editing enzymes in vivo. In particular, the reason for the presence of two enzymes in D. discoideum with apparently similar abilities to catalyze the same reaction is intriguing. DdiTLP3 and DdiTLP4 may exhibit distinct tRNA substrate recognition properties not yet observed with the limited number of substrates tested so far, and thus both enzymes could be required in vivo to repair the full complement of mt-tRNAs to be edited. It is also possible that the in vivo editing enzyme contains both DdiTLP3 and DdiTLP4, and that the activity of the in vivo enzyme is enhanced over that of each enzyme in isolation, a possibility that could also explain the relatively low rates observed in vitro. The k cat for the 5′-repair activity is not enhanced above that observed with either enzyme alone when purified DdiTLP3 and DdiTLP4 are mixed in the reactions. Nonetheless, the recently observed tetrameric structure of human Thg1 suggests the possibility of formation of heteromultimeric complexes in organisms that encode more than one Thg1/TLP gene, as is the case in D. discoideum. Finally, the possibility that only one of the enzymes catalyzes 5′-tRNA editing in vivo cannot be ruled out; in this case, the other enzyme may be required for another biological function, perhaps related to other tRNA repair activities. With respect to this possibility, it is interesting to note that only DdiTLP3 possesses an identifiable targeting signal for mitochondrial localization. Although a nonstandard targeting signal in DdiTLP4 may yet be identified, or interactions with other proteins may bring DdiTLP4 into the mitochondria, the possibility of a cytosolic function for DdiTLP4 remains intriguing. Of the four TLPs investigated in this work, DdiTLP2 remains the only enzyme so far not associated with any of the typical biochemical activities of Thg1/TLP family enzymes. As the gene was cloned from a D. discoideum cDNA library, the mRNA is expressed, although DdiTLP2 protein expression in vivo has not been tested. Possibilities for this protein include noncatalytic roles in G −1 addition and/or 5′-editing activities, perhaps by association with other TLPs, or the possibility that DdiTLP2 exhibits activity with other as-yet-unidentified substrates. In vitro mixing experiments again revealed no stimulation of G −1 addition or 5′-editing activities by inclusion of purified DdiTLP2 in the assays. Nonetheless, DdiTLP2 does not lack any of the highly conserved residues that function in 3′-5′ nucleotide addition, including critically important metal-binding residues, an absence of which could readily explain the lack of in vitro activities observed in these assays. The strongly predicted mitochondrial localization of DdiTLP2 suggests a likely function for the protein in the organelle, but further studies regarding this function will be necessary to elucidate the role of DdiTLP2 in D. discoideum. Although this investigation establishes the foundation for the detailed biochemical analysis of 5′-tRNA editing and suggests that at least some of the protein components of the in vivo editing enzyme have been identified, many questions remain about the complete form of the editing holoenzyme, including identification of the postulated nuclease needed to remove the initial 5′-mismatched nucleotides from the transcript. Further investigations of the functions of the multiple Thg1/TLP family enzymes in protists will likely yield important insights into the evolution and mechanism of 3′-5′ nucleotide addition reactions in biology. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cloning and purification of DdiTLPs The four Ddi TLP sequences were identified by BLAST search and amplified by PCR from purified DNA recovered from a D. discoideum cDNA library. For ligation-independent cloning into a pET vector, appropriate sequences for expression with an N-terminal His 6 tag were introduced with the PCR primers. The gel-purified PCR products for each DdiTLP were inserted into AVA421 vector using LIC with T4 DNA polymerase according to the manufacturer's instructions; clones were verified by sequencing. Plasmids encoding the four TLPs were transformed into E. coli strain for expression. Cultures were grown in LB media with 100 μg/mL ampicillin at 37°C and induced with isopropyl-β-thiogalactose upon reaching OD 600 = 0.4. After incubation for 4–5 h at 37°C, cells were harvested by centrifugation and lysed by French press, followed by centrifugation to obtain a cell-free crude extract. Purification was performed using immobilized metal-ion affinity chromatography with TALON resin, as previously described. Following dialysis into buffer containing 50% glycerol, concentrations of the purified proteins were determined by BioRad protein assay. Each of the purified TLPs was estimated to be >90% pure by SDS-PAGE, as judged by intensity of the Coomassie-stained protein bands. Cloning and preparation of D. discoideum mt-tRNA constructs Plasmids for in vitro transcription of mt-tRNAs were constructed using pairs of overlapping oligonucleotides and successive rounds of fill-in polymerization to yield DNA fragments with the final sequence: ––, as described in Morl et al.. A final round of PCR was performed to introduce a Bst NI restriction site for run-off transcription, and Bam HI/ Pst I restriction sites for cloning by ligation into a digested pUC19 vector. Final constructs were verified by sequencing. tRNAs were produced from the Bst NI-digested plasmid by in vitro transcription using T7 RNA polymerase under standard conditions, except that an additional cycling step was added following the initial 1 h transcription reaction at 37°C. The cycling step ensures maximal formation of ribozyme-cleaved tRNA initiating at the desired position. The gel-purified 5′-hydroxylated tRNA that results from transcription/hammerhead cleavage was subsequently 5′-monophosphorylated using T4 polynucleotide kinase and either unlabeled or -labeled ATP, according to standard protocols. Unreacted ATP was removed by spin column chromatography using BioGel P6 columns. 3′-5′ Nucleotide addition assay Phosphatase protection assays were performed using 5′- 32 P-labeled tRNA substrates, as previously described. Reactions were initiated by the addition of fivefold serial dilutions of purified enzyme. Concentration ranges spanned for each enzyme varied depending on the concentration of each purified protein preparation and were: DdiTLP1, 6–0.01 μM; DdiTLP2, 100–0.2 μM; DdiTLP3, 3–0.005 μM; and DdiTLP4, 34–0.05 μM. Reactions were allowed to proceed for 2 h at room temperature, stopped by the addition of nuclease and subsequently treated with phosphatase. The resulting reaction mixtures were resolved by silica TLC in a 55:35:10 solvent system. Plates were dried and visualized using a Typhoon Trio imager. For product identification experiments, labeled products were eluted from silica TLC plates with water, dried, and resuspended in ddH 2 O for further digestion. Nuclease digestion reactions were performed in 20 mM sodium acetate, pH 5.2; nuclease P1 digestion reactions also contained 200 μM ZnCl 2, whereas RNase A, T2 and T1 digestions additionally contained 100 μM EDTA. Steady-state kinetic parameters for addition to monophosphorylated tRNAs were determined by measurement of initial rates for TLP-catalyzed G +1 addition at varied tRNA substrate concentrations using the above-mentioned assay, also as previously described. For C +2 /G +1 addition to mt-tRNA Leu, reactions were first treated with phosphatase and subsequently purified by phenol extraction and ethanol precipitation. The labeled products were then subjected to digestion with various nucleases, under the same conditions described above. Yeast complementation assay The DdiTLP genes were cloned to a shuttle plasmid containing a galactose-inducible promoter. Four DdiTLP gene inserts, TLP1, TLP2-mito, TLP3-M107 and TLP4, were generated by PCR using pairs of primers that introduce Bam HI or Pst I restriction sites for cloning. Bam HI/ Pst I-digested PCR products and vector were ligated using T4 DNA ligase according to the manufacturer's protocol. Each construct was verified by DNA sequencing. Five plasmids were transformed to a yeast thg1 Δ strain containing a yeast THG1 gene on a URA3 plasmid, which is needed to maintain viability. Positive transformants were selected at 30°C on synthetic dextrose media, and tested by replica plating at 30°C to synthetic galactose media containing 5-fluoroorotic acid, to induce expression of the DdiTLPs and select against the URA3 plasmid-containing wild-type yeast THG1. 