 Soluble adenylyl cyclase is an evolutionarily conserved bicarbonate sensor. In mammals, it is responsible for bicarbonate-induced, cAMP-dependent processes in sperm required for fertilization and postulated to be involved in other bicarbonate- and carbon dioxide-dependent functions throughout the body. Among eukaryotes, sAC-like cyclases have been detected in mammals and in the fungi Dictyostelium ; these enzymes display extensive similarity extending through two cyclase catalytic domains and a long carboxy terminal extension. sAC-like cyclases are also found in a number of bacterial phyla, but these enzymes generally possess only a single catalytic domain and little, if any, homology with the remainder of the mammalian protein. Database mining through a number of recently sequenced genomes identified sAC orthologues in additional metazoan phyla and additional bacterial phyla. Interestingly, the Chloroflexi sAC-like cyclases, a family of three enzymes from the thermophilic eubacterium, Chloroflexus aurantiacus, are more similar to eukaryotic sAC-like cyclases than they are to other bacterial adenylyl cyclases. The Chloroflexus sAC-like cyclases each possess two cyclase catalytic domains and extensive similarity with mammalian enzymes through their carboxy termini. We cloned one of the Chloroflexus sAC-like cyclases and confirmed it to be stimulated by bicarbonate. These data extend the family of organisms possessing bicarbonate-responsive ACs to numerous phyla within the bacterial and eukaryotic kingdoms. Keywords: Chloroflexus aurantiacus, Evolution, Photosynthesis, Cyclic AMP Introduction Cyclic adenosine monophosphate is a nearly ubiquitous second messenger that mediates a wide variety of signal-transduction processes in organisms from bacteria through higher eukaryotes. In mammals, two types of adenylyl cyclase synthesize cAMP: a widely studied family of isoforms, transmembrane ACs, and a more recently isolated soluble AC. sAC and tmACs seem to modulate distinct cAMP signaling cascades within mammalian cells. sAC lacks transmembrane domains, is insensitive to G-protein or forskolin regulation, and is localized to distinct compartments within cells, where it is postulated to regulate intracellular targets of cAMP. Full-length sAC protein is comprised of two N -terminal domains with homology to catalytic domains from all class III cyclases, the largest of the six known classes of nucleotide cyclases, which comprises many bacterial and all known eukaryotic adenylyl and guanylyl cyclases. Similar to tmACs, the two catalytic domains are sufficient for enzymatic activity. These two catalytic domains are followed by a consensus nucleotide-binding P-loop sequence of unknown function and a long carboxy-terminal sequence with little homology to known functional domains. A structurally related cyclase was identified in the eukaryotic Fungi, Dictyostelium ; SgcA possesses two cyclase catalytic domains, followed by a P-loop consensus sequence. sAC’s catalytic domains are more closely related to catalytic domains found in bacterial ACs than to catalytic domains from other mammalian cyclases. The sAC-like cyclases described from bacteria differ from mammalian and Dictyostelium sAC; they possess only a single catalytic domain. It has been assumed that a second cyclase catalytic domain was added in the course of evolution to the eukaryotic enzyme. Fig. 1 Soluble adenylyl cyclase orthologues in different species. a Diagram of eukaryotic and Chloroflexusaurantiacus adenylyl cyclases along with bacterial ACs. The relative similarities are “expect values” taken directly from a... Mammalian sAC and a subset of the bacterial sAC-like ACs are directly stimulated by bicarbonate anions. The mechanism of bicarbonate stimulation is conserved between bacterial and mammalian enzymes. Bicarbonate elevates V max and alleviates substrate inhibition of both mammalian and cyanobacterial sAC-like enzymes. Bicarbonate regulation of mammalian sAC is thought to be responsible for the cAMP-dependent changes in capacitation and motility in sperm and the pH-dependent mobilization of proton pumps in the epididymus required for acidification of the lumen. Bicarbonate regulation of cyanobacterial ACs has been postulated to provide a mechanism for sensing availability of inorganic carbon in these photosynthetic bacteria. We explored the evolutionary conservation of sAC-like enzymes across several phyla in the eukaryal and bacterial kingdoms, using database mining and molecular cloning. We detected additional sAC orthologues in rabbit, sea squirt, mosquito, and a very well conserved sAC orthologue in Chloroflexi eubacteria. Chloroflexusaurantiacus is a thermophilic, anoxygenic, green, phototrophic eubacterium that is found in alkaline hot springs at temperatures up to 70°C. C. aurantiacus represents the earliest branch of eubacteria capable of photosynthesis, and many of its characteristics can be found in diverse groups of phototrophic bacteria. Chloroflexus sAC is unique among bacterial orthologues; its domain organization is more similar to eukaryotic enzymes than other bacterial sAC-like enzymes. Materials and methods Recombinant DNA Rabbit sAC was cloned from rabbit testis. Total RNA was isolated with TRIzol, and a cDNA template was prepared by using the 3′ rapid amplification of cDNA ends system. Using 20 pmol of each primer and 5 µl of the synthesized cDNA, polymerase chain reaction amplifications were performed for 35 cycles with 2.5 U of Ex- Taq DNA polymerase. Primer sets used are as follows: LRL1295, LRL1296, LRL866, LRL741, LRL1319, LRL786, LRL1339, and LRL788. LRL1339–AUAP and LRL787–AUAP primer combinations were used for 3′ RACE reactions. The 5′ end of the mRNA was determined using 5′ RACE system, using primer LRL1317 for synthesizing RNA. LRL577–AUAP and LRL1318–AUAP combinations were used for 5′ RACE reactions. Amplified fragments were cloned into a pCRII-TOPO vector. Sequences of the primers were: LRL577: 5′-CTCCACCAGCTGCTCGGC-3′ LRL741: 5′-CCGCTCGAGTCAGTTCTTTAGTCTGACACCACT-3′ LRL786: 5′-GGGCCAGAGGCAAGATGACAA-3′ LRL787: 5′-GGCGTGTGGTTCAAATATGAA-3′ LRL788: 5′-GTCCCATTCCTGAAGTCTGGC-3′ LRL866: 5′-GACCTGCGACTCTGTCACCTAC-3′ LRL1295: 5′-TAGCTGCTCACTTACCAGACCTCAT-3′ LRL1296: 5′-ACGCCATACCAAACATGACTTTCTC-3′ LRL1317: 5′-CGCACTGATGTAGTAGTTGAGGATCTCCAC-3′ LRL1318: 5′-GTACATGGCTGTGCTGAACTTCTC-3′ LRL1319: 5′-AAGAACCTCGACCACCACAGGGTG-3′ LRL1339: 5′-GGAAGACATCATCCCTCTGGAATC-3′ Open in a separate window Chloroflexus sAC was cloned from C. aurantiacus. Cells were freeze-dried in liquid nitrogen, homogenized with mortar and pestle, dissolved in water, and used as a template for PCR. After denaturing at 94°C for 5 min, using 20 pmol each of primers LRL1351 and LRL1352, PCR amplification was performed for 35 cycles with 2.5 U of Ex- Taq DNA polymerase. The amplified fragment was cloned into a pCRII-TOPO vector. The plasmid was digested with Eco RI and the 1.4-kb fragment cloned into pGSX-3T vector. Sequences were verified using the Rockefeller University DNA sequencing resource center. Expression and purification of recombinant AC proteins Chloroflexus protein was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 as a GST fusion protein. Bacteria were grown at 37°C in Luria Broth containing ampicillin until the A 595 was 0.5. Isopropyl-1-thio-β- d -galactopyranoside was added to the final concentration of 0.5 mM, and the expression was induced for 3 h at room temperature. Cells were pelleted, and protein was purified through a glutathione Sepharose 4B column as previously described. The sAC portion of the fusion protein was excised with thrombin for 20 h at 16°C, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein was purified using DE52 anion exchange chromatography. Cyclase assay Cyclase assays were performed in a final volume of 100 µl, using ~10 ng of purified cyclase protein in the presence of 50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM ATP, and either 5 mM MnCl 2, MgCl 2, CoCl 2, ZnCl 2, or CaCl 2, as indicated. Reactions were incubated at 30°C for 30 min unless otherwise noted and were stopped by adding 100 µl 0.2 N HCl. cAMP formed was measured using a Correlate-EIA Direct cAMP Enzyme Immunoassay Kit, and kinetic analyses were performed using the program EnzymeKinetics, version 1.11. Results Identification of sAC orthologues in several organisms The sAC gene was first identified in rat, and orthologues have been described from human and mouse. In an attempt to identify sAC orthologues in other species, we used PCR and degenerate oligonucleotide primers derived from rat, mouse, and human sAC genes and searched several databases, using the human sAC catalytic region as the query. We were able to PCR amplify a sAC orthologue from rabbit mRNA, and we found sAC-like sequences in Arthropod and Chordates in the completed genomes of the mosquito, and the sea squirt. A putative sAC-like cyclase, with tandemly arranged catalytic domains, was recently detected within a hypothetical open reading frame from the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, but its complete domain organization is not yet known. We also found a number of interesting sAC -like sequences in the genome of the thermophilic bacterium, C. aurantiacus. These Chloroflexus sAC -like genes were structurally more similar to mammalian sAC than they were to other bacterial sAC-like ACs. Phylogenic analysis of sAC proteins Three genes from Chloroflexus possess two sAC-like catalytic domains, followed by a conserved P-loop nucleotide-binding motif. The deduced amino acid sequence of the most similar of these, Chlo1187, received a BLAST score of 173 over its entire length and shares 30% identity within its catalytic domains when compared with human sAC. Not only does its domain structure more closely resemble mammalian sAC, but BLAST and phylogenetic analysis reveal its individual catalytic domains are more similar to those of mammalian sAC than are any of the bacterial ACs containing only a single catalytic domain. As expected, rabbit sAC and the putative Anopheles sAC also possess this domain architecture, and although information regarding its C terminus is missing, the Ciona sAC -like gene also appears to be similarly organized. A recent phylogenetic analysis of a number of class III cyclases in bacteria and archaebacteria revealed only one other species that possessed a putative AC sharing this domain structure. Two genes within Leptospira interrogans share overall structural similarity and a BLAST similarity score of 120 with mammalian sAC. Enzymatic characterization of Chloroflexus sAC The enzymatic properties of a number of bacterial sAC-related cyclases have been explored and their bicarbonate responsiveness investigated. However, the cyclases selected for these analyses all consisted of a single catalytic domain. Due to its structural similarity and conserved sequence, the sAC-like cyclase from L. interrogans was predicted to be bicarbonate responsive, but this was never tested. We PCR-amplified the sAC-like cyclase, Chlo1187, from Chloroflexus genomic DNA. Because the P-loop containing, C-terminal portion of mammalian sAC has been purported to have an inhibitory effect on catalytic activity, we heterologously expressed and purified from E. coli the portion of Chlo1187 containing its two catalytic domains. Fig. 2 Characterization of Chloroflexus sAC activity. a Coomassie Blue-stained 10% SDS-PAGE demonstrating the purity of Chloroflexus sAC protein used in this study. b Chloroflexus sAC activity measured in the presence of different cations. c Chloroflexus sAC activity... We first tested cyclase activity of recombinant sAC in the presence of the divalent cations present in Chloroflexus growth medium. As is the case with mammalian sAC, Chlo1187 has higher activity in the presence of ATP-Mn 2+ compared to ATP-Mg 2+. Also similar to mammalian sAC, cobalt also supports catalytic activity, and like mammalian sAC, ATP-Co 2+ supports more activity than ATP-Mg 2+ but less than ATP-Mn 2+. Interestingly, zinc was found to have opposite effects on mammalian and Chloroflexus sAC-like enzymes. Zinc supported approximately ten times greater activity of Chloroflexus sAC-like cyclase relative to ATP-Mg 2+, while it is a potent inhibitor of the mammalian enzyme. The K m for ATP-Mn 2+ of Chloroflexus sAC-like cyclase was 0.7 mM, which is very similar to the value of 0.8 mM reported for the mammalian enzyme. Chloroflexus grow optimally at 55°C. The in vitro cyclase activity of Chlo1187 was unchanged by incubation at 55°C, revealing that a class III cyclase domain is capable of functioning at this elevated temperature. Bicarbonate activation of Chloroflexus sAC Chlo1187 possesses a threonine at the position thought to be predictive of bicarbonate responsiveness. We confirmed that heterologously expressed and purified Chlo1187 could be stimulated by bicarbonate. We measured bicarbonate responsiveness in the presence of ATP-Mn 2+, which is more commonly used to reflect the substrate of bacterial cyclases during growth under natural conditions. Activation was dose responsive, leading to nearly tenfold stimulation of activity with an EC 50 of 25 mM NaHCO 3. Fig. 3 Bicarbonate activation of Chlo1187. a Sequence alignment of a portion of the catalytic domain of Chlo1187 with the homologous region of other cyclases. Arrowhead indicates the conserved threonine residue suggested to be responsible for bicarbonate activation.... Discussion Upon cloning mammalian sAC, we postulated that the mammalian enzyme originated from an evolutionary fusion of distinct bacterial AC genes. Each species of Cyanobacteria or Myxobacteria possessing a related sAC-like cyclase was found to have at least two genes encoding sAC-like cyclases, each with a single catalytic domain; one cyclase was always more similar to mammalian sAC C1, with the other being more similar to sAC C2. Not surprisingly, the known eukaryal sAC-like cyclases contain this two catalytic domain organization; however, we now demonstrate tandem catalytic domains are also found in eubacterial cyclases as well. Eukaryotic sAC-like cyclases, including those found in mammals, Arthropods, Chordates, and slime molds, also possess a third conserved domain: a consensus P-loop nucleotide-binding motif, not previously found in any of the bacterial ACs, was found downstream of the second catalytic domain. This domain structure is found in eubacteria as well. Leptospira and Chloroflexus contain cyclases with tandem catalytic domains, followed by a consensus P-loop binding motif. We selected the Chloroflexus cyclase most similar to sAC for enzymatic characterization. Similar to mammalian sAC, the P-loop consensus was not needed for catalytic activity. This P-loop binding motif remains of unknown function, but its conservation from bacteria to man suggests an important modulatory role. Also similar to mammalian sAC, the two catalytic domains were sufficient for bicarbonate-responsive enzymatic activity. C. aurantiacus was originally found in hot springs and is considered to be one of the most ancient lineages of phototrophs. We found Chloroflexus sAC to be equally active at 55°C as it was at 30°C, demonstrating that class III cyclase domains are capable of functioning at elevated temperatures. Sequences related to class III cyclase domains are found in archaebacteria ; our data demonstrating activity of Chloroflexus AC suggests that these archaeal genes may, in fact, encode functional ACs. Functioning ACs in archaea would establish that this kingdom also utilizes cAMP as a second messenger. The existence of bicarbonate-regulated cAMP signal-transduction pathways in two of the earliest photosynthetic classes of organisms, blue-green algae and green nonsulfur bacteria, suggest a link between the evolution of photosynthesis and carbon dioxide sensing. The conservation of this signaling paradigm in mammals reveals its importance to life. Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by the Uehara Memorial Foundation, National Institutes of Health grants GM62328 and HD42060 and HD38722, and by the Ellison Medical Foundation. We thank members of the Levin/Buck laboratory for discussion. Footnotes The nucleotide sequence of rabbit sAC has been deposited Article information Dev Genes Evol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 May 6. Published in final edited form as: Dev Genes Evol. 2004 Oct; 214: 503–509. Published online 2004 Aug 20. doi: 10.1007/s00427-004-0432-2 PMCID: PMC3644946 NIHMSID: NIHMS465824 PMID: 15322879 Mime Kobayashi, Jochen Buck, and Lonny R. Levin Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, Room E-505, New York, NY, 10021, USA Present address: M. Kobayashi, NTT Basic Research Laboratories, 3-1 Morinosato Wakamiya Atsugi-shi, Kanagawa, 243-0198, Japan, pj.lrbttn@emim, Tel.: +81-46-240-4627, Fax: +81-46-270-2364 PMC Copyright notice The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at Dev Genes Evol 