Hippo on the move You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Hippo on the move Cell Cycle. 2013 Feb 15; 12: 535–536. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Cell Cycle v.12; 2013 Feb 15 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Cell Cycle Taylor & Francis Hippo on the move Tumor suppressor regulates adhesion and migration Yulia Artemenko and Peter N. Devreotes Additional article information Hippo and its mammalian homologs MST1 and MST2 are important tumor suppressors best known for their effects on cell proliferation and survival; however, accumulating evidence suggests that these kinases are involved in a wide range of cellular processes, including regulation of cell morphology, adhesion and migration. In the canonical pathway activated Hippo/MST1/2 kinase phosphorylates and activates Warts/LATS kinase, which phosphorylates a transcriptional co-activator Yorkie /YAP, retaining it in the cytoplasm. In the unphosphorylated state, Yki/YAP translocates to the nucleus and drives transcription of various genes involved in cell cycle progression. The function of Hippo/MST1/2 in processes other than growth control is less clear and appears to be cell type-specific. For example, in HeLa and NIH-3T3 cell lines, activation of MST1 induces cell rounding and detachment, while in T-cells inactivation of MST1 leads to similar phenotypes. 1 - 3 Furthermore, it is unclear whether these growth-independent actions of Hippo/MST1/2 rely on gene transcription. Figure 1. A schematic of MST1/2 and KrsB signaling in mammalian and D. discoideum cells. Canonical pathway regulating growth. Activated MST1/2 kinase interacts with Sav1 to phosphorylate Mob1 and LATS1/2 kinase, which work together to phosphorylate... Using an unbiased screen for genes involved in chemotaxis of Dictyostelium discoideum, we identified Hippo/MST1/2 homolog KrsB as a novel regulator of multicellular pattern formation, cell substrate adhesion and directed migration. 4 Cells lacking KrsB kinase activity have increased contact with the substrate and are difficult to detach from the surface. This underlies defects in chemotaxis and random motility, which are corrected when cells are plated on a “slippery” surface. Changes in the actin cytoskeleton may account for the increased adhesion in cells lacking KrsB. While our findings that KrsB negatively regulates adhesion are in contrast to those in T-cells, adhesion of T-cells in response to chemokines is mediated via integrins, which are absent in Dictyostelium. 5 It would be interesting to test the role of MST1/2 in cells exhibiting amoeboid movement in an integrin-independent manner, e.g., neutrophils migrating in a 3D environment. 6 The KrsB system in Dictyostelium has several unique features that contribute to our overall understanding of these pathways. First, KrsB regulates cell adhesion and migration but, unlike its mammalian counterparts, has no effect on cell growth, proliferation or cell survival, making this model organism uniquely suited for studies of growth-independent functions of the Hippo/MST1/2 family of kinases. Second, Dictyostelium does not have Warts/Lats, Yki/YAP or Sd/TEAD homologs. 7 Although it is possible that there are functional orthologs of these proteins, the KrsB kinase may function independently of transcription in these cells. Consistently, the phenotypic changes in cell attachment disappear concurrently with the doxycycline-induced re-expression of KrsB in KrsB-deficient cells over a two hour period. Thus, Dictyostelium might offer unique advantages for studying transcription-independent roles of Hippo. Third, KrsB lacks a SARAH domain, which mediates the dimerization thought to be required for MST1/2 activation by trans-autophosphorylation. 8 However, KrsB does undergo a rapid, chemoattractant-induced trans-autophosphorylation on the conserved Thr residue in the activation loop. This suggests that either dimerization is not required for autophosphorylation or KrsB can form dimers without a SARAH domain. The autophosphorylation is functionally relevant since KrsB with a mutation in the conserved phosphorylation site cannot rescue the phenotype of KrsB-deficient cells. In summary, KrsB homologs Hippo and MST1/2 act as tumor suppressors in Drosophila and mammals and regulate cytoskeletal dynamics in several mammalian cell types but control only cytoskeletal activities in Dictyostelium. Interestingly, many other oncogenes and tumor suppressors have important roles in the maintenance of cytoskeletal dynamics and cell migration in addition to their roles in cell growth. For example, activation of the oncogenes Ras, PI3K and Akt, and inactivation of the tumor suppressor PTEN at the leading edge of a migrating cell is important for biasing pseudopod protrusion in the direction of a gradient. In Dictyostelium, as found for KrsB, these components do not alter cell growth. Identification of a Hippo homolog as a regulator of directed cell migration further highlights the overlap between the signaling networks regulating growth and the fast morphological changes observed in response to growth factor/chemokine stimulation. Notes Artemenko Y, Batsios P, Borleis J, Gagnon Z, Lee J, Rohlfs M, et al. Tumor suppressor Hippo/MST1 kinase mediates chemotaxis by regulating spreading and adhesion Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012 109 13632 7 doi: 10.1073/pnas.1211304109. Footnotes Previously published online: www.landesbioscience.com/journals/cc/article/23668 Article information Cell Cycle. 2013 Feb 15; 12: 535–536. doi: 10.4161/cc.23668 PMCID: PMC3594247 PMID: 23370390 Yulia Artemenko and Peter N. Devreotes * Department of Cell Biology; Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA * Correspondence to: Peter N. Devreotes; Email: ude.imhj@dnp Keywords: MST1/2, KrsB, morphology, growth, chemotaxis Copyright © 2013 Landes Bioscience This is an open-access article licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported License. The article may be redistributed, reproduced, and reused for non-commercial purposes, provided the original source is properly cited. See the article " Tumor suppressor Hippo/MST1 kinase mediates chemotaxis by regulating spreading and adhesion " in Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, volume 109 on page 13632. Articles from Cell Cycle are provided here courtesy of Taylor & Francis 