 ADP-ribosylation is the post translational modification of proteins catalyzed by ADP-ribosyltransferases. ADP-ribosylation has been implicated in a wide variety of cellular processes, including cell growth and differentiation, apoptosis and transcriptional regulation. Perhaps the best-characterized role, however, is in DNA repair and genome stability, where ADP-ribosylation promotes resolution of DNA single-strand breaks. Although ADP-ribosylation also occurs at DNA double-strand breaks, which ARTs catalyze this reaction and the molecular basis of how this modification regulates their repair remains a matter of debate. Here, we review recent advances in our understanding of how ADP-ribosylation regulates DSB repair. Specifically, we highlight studies using the genetic model organism Dictyostelium in addition to vertebrate cells that identify a third ART that accelerates DSB repair by non-homologous end joining through promoting the interaction of repair factors with DNA lesions. The implications of these data with regards to how ADP-ribosylation regulates DNA repair and genome stability are discussed. Key words: ADP-ribosyl transferase, PARP, double-strand break repair, nonhomologous end joining, Dictyostelium Introduction ADP-ribosylation is the post-translational modification of proteins through the transfer of ADP-ribose from NAD + to a specific amino acid within a substrate. 1 Substrates can be modified with a single ADP-ribose moiety or poly-ADP ribose chains. ADP-ribosylation is catalyzed by ADP-ribosyltransferases. These enzymes are found in a wide variety of eukaryotes, and 22 genes that contain a predicted ART catalytic domain have been identified in humans. 1 ADP-ribosylation has been implicated in a wide variety of cellular processes, including DNA repair and genome stability, cell growth and differentiation, transcriptional regulation and programmed cell death. 1 – 3 Perhaps the best-defined role of ARTs is in resolution of DNA single-strand breaks produced through disintegration of an oxidized sugar or by strand cleavage during the base-excision repair process. 4 A key factor in SSB repair is XRCC1 that recognizes DNA lesions and acts as a scaffold to recruit and/or retain repair enzymes at the break. Among these are proteins that process DNA lesions, such as polynucleotide kinase 3′-phosphatase, which removes 3′ phosphates, and aprataxin that processes aborted ligation events. DNA polymerase β adds the missing base to DNA lesions, and DNA ligase III seals the break in short-patch SSBR. However, DNA polymerases such as Pol δ and/or Polε can extend for greater distances prior to ligation by DNA ligase I in long-patch SSBR. 4 PARP1, the founding member of the ART family, is required to promote SSBR. PARP1 binds SSBs and BER intermediates in vitro, and this leads to its catalytic activation and PAR synthesis. 5 – 8 PARP1 is also recruited to SSBs in vivo, 9, 10 and resolution of DNA damage is defective in the presence of ART inhibitors or following depletion of PARP1. 11 – 15 Furthermore, mice disrupted in the parp1 gene are sensitive to DNA damaging agents that induce base damage and strand breakage and exhibit delayed kinetics of SSB resolution. 16 – 20 More recently, residual PARylation observed in parp1 -/- cells led to the identification of a second DNA damage responsive PARP. 21 Similar to parp1 -/- cells, parp2 -/- mice are sensitive to DNA damage, exhibit increased chromosome instability and a delay in repair following exposure to alkylating agents. 22, 23 However, depletion of PARP2 using siRNA leads to minimal sensitivity of cells and does not further sensitize PARP1 depleted cells to agents that induce SSBs. 14 This has led to the suggestion that PARP1 is the major responder to DNA damage, although functional redundancy at some level is implied by the embryonic lethality of the parp1 -/- parp2 -/- mice. 22 A detailed understanding of how ADP-ribosylation contributes to SSBR at the molecular level has yet to emerge. However, activation and auto-modification of PARP1 may accelerate this process by promoting accumulation of XRCC1 at DNA damage through an interaction with PARP1 9, 24 – 26 and/or via an interaction with APLF, a protein recruited to SSBs through a PAR-binding zinc finger motif. 27 – 30 Although the role of ARTs in SSBR is well-established, how this modification contributes to repair of DNA double-strand breaks is less well defined. DSBs can be repaired by different mechanisms and choice of pathway depends on a number of factors, including the stage of the cell cycle in which the break is sustained, complexity of the break site and the chromatin environment in which the break occurs. Which ARTs become activated in response to DSBs, which pathways they regulate and in what context remains unclear. In addition, the molecular basis of how ADP-ribosylation influences DSB repair remains poorly understood. Here, we highlight studies in the genetic model organism Dictyostelium and human cells that provide clues regarding the role of ARTs and ADP-ribosylation in DSBR. ADP-Ribosylation and Regulation of DSBR DNA DSBs can be repaired by homologous recombination or non-homologous end joining. 31 HR uses sequences homologous to the damaged DNA template to facilitate repair in late S and G 2 phases of the cell cycle. The initiating step of HR is 5′-3′ resection of DNA termini by multiple nuclease activities. 32 Mediators promote formation of a Rad51 nucleoprotein filament that facilitates homology searching and strand invasion. Extension of the 3′ tail by DNA polymerases then occurs using the undamaged homologous sequence as a template. Resolution of the resulting structures is achieved by the double Holliday junction model, or re-joining of the DNA DSB by synthesis-dependent strand annealing. 32 In contrast to HR, NHEJ does not require homologous DNA sequences to facilitate repair, but directly re-ligates DNA termini. 33 NHEJ can function throughout the cell cycle and often involves processing DNA ends, which results in loss of genetic information. 34 – 37 As such, NHEJ is considered an inaccurate mechanism of DSBR. The first step in NHEJ is DSB recognition by the Ku70/Ku80 DNA end-binding activity. Ku serves as a platform to recruit proteins to DSBs, including the DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit. DNA-PKcs kinase activity is activated upon DNA end binding and phosphorylates a number of substrates in vivo in addition to mediating DNA end synapsis to prevent illegitimate end joining. Several factors have been proposed to process DNA ends to make them compatible with ligation, including the nuclease Artemis, variant DNA polymerases, such as Polµ and Polλ, and PNK. 38 Finally, resealing of the break is performed by the DNA ligase IV/XRCC4/XLF protein complex. A variant NHEJ pathway can occur in the absence of core NHEJ factors such as DNA-PKcs and Ku. This pathway, termed alternative NHEJ functions through limited resection of the break to reveal short regions of homology that are subsequently used for DNA end synapsis and ligation. 39 ARTi induce sensitivity of mammalian cells to DSBs 40, 41 and delayed DSBR, 42 indicating PARylation is required for resolution of this variety of DNA lesion. PARP1 interacts with and becomes activated by DSBs in vitro 8, 43, 44 and in vivo, 45 suggesting that it is a sensor of DSBs. Indeed, PARP1 interacts with, and in some cases modifies, DSB repair components such as the NHEJ components Ku 46, 47 and DNA-PKcs. 48, 49 However, classic NHEJ is normal in murine parp1 -/- cells, 50 and depletion of PARP1 or PARP2 by siRNA has little impact on DSB resolution, at least as judged by decay of H2AX phosphorylation. 42 This argues against a role for PARP1 and/or PARP2 in classic NHEJ. Indeed, avian DT40 cells have a single PARP1 gene that has been proposed to promote HR through inhibition of the NHEJ pathway. 51 However, more recent data suggest PARP1 functions as a synapsis factor in A-NHEJ. 41, 52 – 54 Given that this pathway occurs in the absence of NHEJ actors such as Ku, 40, 41, 53, 55 the role of PARP1 in A-NHEJ may account for the embryonic lethality of the parp1 -/- ku80 -/- double-null mice, 56 as both end joining pathways are eliminated. As regards HR, ARTi or ablation of PARP1 has minimal impact on repair via this pathway at a site-specific DSB. 50, 57 However, disruption of PARP1 does result in sensitivity to agents that induce replication fork stalling and S-phase associated DSBs. 50, 58 PARP1 is required to slow replication fork progression following DNA damage, and this correlates with a proficiency to perform HR-mediated repair. 50, 58, 59 Taken together, these data suggest that PARP1 functions at replication forks to promote HR at stalled and/or collapsed replication forks as opposed to resolving DSBs per se by HR or classic NHEJ. Conservation of DNA Repair and ARTs in Dictyostelium Dictyostelium is a soil-dwelling amoeba that exists as a unicellular haploid organism during vegetative cell growth. However, under sub-optimal conditions, such as starvation, Dictyostelium cells aggregate to form a multicellular organism and initiate a simple developmental program that produces a fruiting body in which a head of spores is supported by a stalk of vacuolated cells. These findings have led to Dictyostelium being a much used model to study a variety of cellular processes, including cell fate and differentiation, chemotaxis, cell motility and signal transduction. 60 Dictyostelium offers a number of advantages as a model organism. Large numbers of cells can be grown in the laboratory for cell biology or biochemical analysis. Furthermore, Dictyostelium is a haploid organism in which forward and reverse genetics is possible. Genes can be disrupted relatively easily by targeted HR and the impact on various molecular and cellular processes assessed. Libraries of Dictyostelium mutants can be generated easily and used in genetic screens, 61 and this technology has led to the identification of proteins subsequently shown to be important in humans. 62 Chemical genetics is also possible and screens have isolated mutants that exhibit differential responses to chemical agents. 63 – 66 The publication of the complete genome sequence 67 and associated resources has further strengthened Dictyostelium as a model. Vegetative Dictyostelium exhibit a striking tolerance to DNA damage. For example, up to 10% of cells can survive 300 kilorads of ionizing radiation. 68 These observations led to the proposal that Dictyostelium may prove a useful model to study DNA damage tolerance and to identify pathways that confer resistance to genotoxic agents. Similar to other organisms, early studies of DNA repair in Dictyostelium focused on generating mutants and separating them into complementation groups that exhibit sensitivity to different types of DNA damaging agents. 69 – 71 Surprisingly, this genetic resource has not been exploited further, and despite our increased understanding of DNA repair at the molecular level in addition to the resources made available from the recent sequencing the Dictyostelium genome, the genes and pathways defective in these complementation groups remains unclear. Although several components of the BER and nucleotide excision repair pathways have been identified in Dictyostelium, 72 – 75 this organism has generally been an underexploited model in which to study DNA repair. However, the sequencing of the Dictyostelium genome stimulated a resurgence of interest in using this organism for this purpose. It had been known for some time that Dictyostelium shares certain molecular pathways with humans that are absent in other genetically tractable lower eukaryotes. This idea was strengthened when a detailed phylogenetic analysis of the Dictyostelium genome revealed that, while it split from the animal lineage relatively early, it has diverged less from humans than other commonly used invertebrate genetic models. 67 The similarity between Dictyostelium and vertebrates is particularly striking with regards to DNA repair. For example, we and others identified components of the human NHEJ pathway previously thought to be confined to vertebrates. 76 – 79 Consistent with a role for these genes in DSBR, disruption of either dnapkcs or dclre1 results in defective NHEJ. 80 Dictyostelium also contain HR factors such as BRCA2 that show limited conservation in genetically tractable lower eukaryotes. 81 Similar to other organisms, both NHEJ and HR are active during Dictyostelium vegetative cell growth, and disruption of one pathway impacts on the efficiency of the other. 80 These data suggest that Dictyostelium will prove a useful model to assess factors that influence the decision to repair DSBs by NHEJ or HR. More recently, other DNA repair pathway components absent in invertebrates have been identified in Dictyostelium. For example, the recent identification of the Fanconi anemia pathway in this organism revealed a role for the NER factor XPF in interstrand cross-link repair. 81 Taken together, these observations suggest Dictyostelium will prove an important model to study DNA repair. The similarity between vertebrates and Dictyostelium extends to SSBR, with all core components of this pathway being conserved in this organism. Importantly, orthologs of XRCC1 and ligase III, two genes that are absent from single-celled lower eukaryotes such as S. cerevisiae, are apparent in the Dictyostelium genome. This suggests that similar to other DNA repair pathways, the molecular requirements for Dictyostelium SSBR are more similar to humans than other lower eukaryotes. In this regard, 15 genes with putative ART catalytic domains are apparent in Dictyostelium, with four of these bearing a striking similarity to the human DDR PARPs, both in terms of ART catalytic site conservation and protein domain architecture. 82, 83 Figure 1 Domain organization of Dictyostelium ART orthologs. Dictyostelium open reading frames that contain a putative ART catalytic domain are illustrated. Putative protein domains were identified by IntroPro on dictyBase.org and are indicated by the colored... Table 1 Conservation of putative base-excision and single-strand break repair factors in Dictyostelium Consistent with the presence of ARTs in Dictyostelium, PARylation of proteins occurs in this organism following DNA damage. 84, 85 Indeed, a purified Dictyostelium ART catalyzes ADP-ribosylation in vitro in response to nicked DNA, implicating these enzymes in the DDR. 86 In a recent report, we established that similar to other organisms, nuclear ADP-ribosylation is stimulated in Dictyostelium cells treated with agents that induce SSBs, and that this event is blocked by ARTi. 87 Disruption of genes that bear the most similarity to PARP1 reveal that two ARTs are required for tolerance to this variety of DNA damage. 87 These data highlight a further similarity to vertebrates, where disruption of either the parp1 or parp2 genes results in chromosome instability and sensitivity to DNA damage. 16 – 20, 22, 23 However, it should be noted that depletion of PARP2 using siRNA does not result in a robust phenotype, consistent with a defect in SSBR, and does not further sensitize PARP1-depleted cells to DNA damage. 14 Whether these observations reflect different phenotypes generated by gene disruption and siRNA depletion strategies or a more complex role of different ARTs in SSBR sub-pathways remains to be established. The inability to disrupt PARP1 and PARP2 in combination in vertebrates has hampered a more thorough analysis of the relationship between these two ARTs. Although we have similarly had difficulty in generating an adprt1b - adprt2 - strain, the ability to conditionally disrupt genes in Dictyostelium may help shed light on these matters. Identification of a Novel Art that Promotes NHEJ Although the role of ADP-ribosylation in SSBR is well-established, how ARTs function in DSBR remains a matter of debate. PARP1 and PARP2 have been implicated in promoting HR at stalled/collapsed replication forks and end joining through the A-NHEJ pathway. 41, 50, 52 – 54, 58, 59 However, disruption of PARP1 has little impact on classic NHEJ. 50 Therefore, whether DSB-induced ADP-ribosylation impacts on NHEJ remains unclear. Several recent reports have gone some way toward answering this question. In an extension of the studies to establish the role of ARTs in Dictyostelium SSBR, Couto et al. assessed which ARTs are required for NHEJ. 87 While adprt1b and adprt2 are required for tolerance of cells to SSBs, loss of a third ART, Adprt1a, results in a severe defect in DSB-induced PARylation and NHEJ. Importantly, loss of Adprt1a has little impact on the ability of cells to tolerate SSBs. Taken together, these data identify a novel ART that functions in the DDR and illustrate that different ARTs respond to different types of genotoxic stress. In support of this hypothesis, two additional studies identified a novel ART, PARP3, that is critical for DSB resolution in human and mouse cells. 42, 88, 89 PARP3 had previously been implicated in repair of DSBs by virtue of the observation that it interacts with components of the NHEJ pathway. 90 What these new reports illustrate, however, is that PARP3 is recruited to sites of laser-induced DNA damage 89 and that depletion of this protein results in defective DSBR, either by assessing decay of H2AX phosphorylation following DNA damage 42, 89 or resolution of DSBs by comet assays. 89 Although these studies illustrate that a third ART functions in the DDR by accelerating resolution of DSBs, whether other ARTs contribute to these events remains an open question. Depletion of PARP1 and PARP2 using siRNA does not impact on resolution of DSBs, and broad specificity ARTi do not further delay the decay of H2AX phosphorylation in PARP3-depleted cells. 42 Although these data might suggest PARP3 is the sole ART required to accelerate DSBR, it should be noted that sensitivity of PARP3-depleted cells to X-irradiation is exacerbated by the addition of ARTi. 89 In addition, parp1 -/- parp 3-/- double-null mice exhibit decreased survival following irradiation compared with either of the single mutants. 89 In further support of multiple ARTs being required for NHEJ, although Dictyostelium Adprt1a has been proposed to be the major ART required for NHEJ, disruption of Adprt2 in this organism results in a modest reduction in the ability of cells to perform NHEJ and further abrogates DSB-induced ADP-ribosylation in an adprt1a - background. 87 One interpretation of these data are that functional redundancy exists between PARP3/PARP1 in humans or Adprt1a/Adprt2 in Dictyostelium as regards DSBR. Given that PARP3 has been proposed to interact with and activate PARP1 in vitro, 91 an interesting possibility is that these proteins act in concert to accelerate NHEJ. Clearly more experiments are required in both systems to resolve this matter. So how does ADP-ribosylation regulate NHEJ at the molecular level? A number of proteins are ADP-ribosylated following genotoxic stress. For example, it has long been known that all core histones, in addition to the linker histone H1 are targets for ADP-ribosylation following DNA damage. 2, 92 – 97 Although the molecular functions of histone ADP-ribosylation are unclear, it has been proposed to modulate higher-order chromatin structure to facilitate access of factors required for repair. 2 More recently, however, it has become apparent that ADP-ribosylation acts to recruit factors to sites of DNA damage through ADP-ribose interaction domains. 98 For example, the PBZ domain is present in a number of Dictyostelium proteins implicated in the DDR, including Ku70. 87, 99 Indeed, abrogation of ADP-ribosylation by disrupting the adprt1a gene or deletion of the PBZ domain of Ku70 results in defective recruitment of Ku to DSBs and a reduced ability to perform NHEJ. 87 The mechanics of how ADP-ribosylation impacts on NHEJ would appear to be similar in humans. Although human Ku70 and Ku80 do not contain a PBZ domain, the PBZ domain present in APLF is required for retention of this factor at sites of DSBs and recruitment of XRCC44/XLF/LigIV to sites of DNA damage in order to facilitate DNA ligation. 42 Therefore, the emerging theme is that one function of ADP-ribosylation is to promote end joining by facilitating the interaction of repair factors with the break site. Future Perspectives The identification of a novel ART that is required for C-NHEJ in both vertebrates and Dictyostelium has gone some way to clarifying the role of ADP-ribosylation in DSBR. However, many questions remain unanswered regarding the molecular basis of ART function in NHEJ. For example, studies in mice and Dictyostelium suggest that although PARP3/Adprt1a is required for DSBR via NHEJ, it may do so in concert with other ARTs. 87, 89 What is the nature of this relationship? One hypothesis is that functional redundancy exists between these proteins, either by PARP1 compensating for loss of PARP3 at DSBs, or abortive/unprogrammed repair events as a consequence of PARP3 loss resulting in DNA damage architectures, such as SSBs, that activate PARP1. However, another possibility is that PARP3 and PARP1 act in concert to signal DSBs and facilitate NHEJ. For example, PARP3 catalyzes mono-ADP ribose and short PAR modifications and is required for PARP1 activation in vitro. 42, 91 Although these results need to be verified in vivo, it is interesting to speculate that PARP1 and PARP2 might act in concert to facilitate SSBR, while PARP1 and PARP3 do so to facilitate NHEJ. This possibility raises the question of how other less well-characterized ARTs may regulate each other and function in the DDR. For example, the SIRT6 deacetylase catalyzes mono-ADP ribosylation that activates PARP1 and promotes DSB repair. 100, 101 To date, 22 genes that contain a predicted ART catalytic domain have been identified in humans. 1 Whether these enzymes function in the DDR other than repair of strand breaks and whether they do so in concert with previously characterized ARTs remains largely unexplored. Assessing these possibilities at a genetic level has been hampered by the embryonic lethality of mice disrupted in multiple ARTs. The ability to conditionally disrupt multiple genes in Dictyostelium, in addition to this organism containing only 15 proteins with putative ART catalytic domains, make this an attractive model to assess these possibilities. A further question is what proteins do ARTs ribosylate at sites of DNA damage? A large number of proteins have been proposed to be targets for ARTs following DNA damage, 102 including components of the NHEJ machinery such as Ku 46, 47 and DNA-PKcs. 48, 49 However, the functional significance of these events is unclear. The heterogeneity of the poly-ADP-ribose chains, both in terms of length and branch structure, has made it difficult to map ADP-ribosylation sites by conventional mass spectrometry methods and to assess the impact of mutating these sites on various aspects of the DDR. Nevertheless, it is well-established that histones are acceptors of ADP-ribose moieties following DNA damage, 2, 92 – 97 and recent advances have mapped the sites on these proteins that are targeted by ARTs in vitro. 97 Unfortunately, organisms in which ARTs are conserved generally contain multiple copies of histone genes, making it difficult to assess the functional significance of histone modifications in a given response by mutating specific amino acids on a histone in vivo. In contrast, Dictyostelium contain single copies of histone genes, including histone H1, and gene replacement technology to perform site-specific mutagenesis in vivo is possible in this organism. 103 Given the apparent similarity between ART function in Dictyostelium and humans, it will be possible to assess the impact of histone ADP-ribosylation on the DDR in this organism. Finally, how does ADP-ribosylation function at the molecular level to influence DNA repair? Experiments in Dictyostelium and humans illustrate that ADP-ribosylation at DSBs promotes recruitment and/or retention of NHEJ factors that consequently accelerate end joining. 42, 87 This is reminiscent of the situation in SSBR, where PARP1 promotes recruitment and/or retention of the XRCC1 and APLF to sites of damage, either directly 9, 24 – 26 or through a PBZ domain located in APLF. 27 – 30 It would appear, therefore, that one function of ADP-ribosylation is to facilitate recognition of DNA damage by repair proteins through ADP-ribose interaction domains. In this regard, it will be interesting to assess this phenomenon in repair processes other than strand breakage and to investigate the contribution of ADP-ribose interaction motifs other than the PBZ domain in these events. It should be noted, however, that this concept is not restricted to factors that are involved directly in the repair reaction. For example, several recent reports illustrate that DNA damage induced ADP-ribosylation recruits the histone variant macroH2A1.1 to sites if DNA damage 104 in addition to factors such as ALC1 that can remodel chromatin. 105, 106 Therefore, ADP-ribosylation acts as a signal to recruit a variety of factors to the break that can influence various aspects of DNA metabolism. A challenge in the future will be to establish how this ADP-ribose code is read and the functional significance of these events in the DDR and other processes. 