 For biophysical understanding of cell motility, the relationship between mechanical force and cell migration must be uncovered, but it remains elusive. Since cells migrate at small scale in dissipative circumstances, the inertia force is negligible and all forces should cancel out. This implies that one must quantify the spatial pattern of the force instead of just the summation to elucidate the force-motion relation. Here, we introduced multipole analysis to quantify the traction stress dynamics of migrating cells. We measured the traction stress of Dictyostelium discoideum cells and investigated the lowest two moments, the force dipole and quadrupole moments, which reflect rotational and front-rear asymmetries of the stress field. We derived a simple force-motion relation in which cells migrate along the force dipole axis with a direction determined by the force quadrupole. Furthermore, as a complementary approach, we also investigated fine structures in the stress field that show front-rear asymmetric kinetics consistent with the multipole analysis. The tight force-motion relation enables us to predict cell migration only from the traction stress patterns. Introduction Cell motility has long been a subject of interest in cellular biophysics. However, despite the extensive knowledge about its molecular details, we still lack a physical understanding of this essential biological phenomenon. Physical understanding should be simple and intuitive and should allow theoretical treatment. This understanding requires phenomenological descriptions of several aspects of cell motility, such as the relationships between cellular shape and motion, cytoskeleton dynamics and shape and cellular force, and between shape and force. Since cell motility obviously involves mechanics, the relationship between force and motion must be added to these phenomenological descriptions. Cells migrate with net zero active force. We discuss this point in detail. There are four forces acting on small parts of a cell that is changing its velocity on a substrate: internal force, f i n t i, inertial force, m i v ˙ i, force from the fluid, f f l u i d i, and force from the substrate f s u b i. The dynamic equation for the center of mass of the cell is ∑ i m i d v i d t − = 0. The sum of all internal forces cancels out due to Newton’s third law; thus, ∑ i f i n t i = 0. The first term of the inertial force scales with volume, whereas others scale with area. Therefore, at a small spatial scale of the cell, the inertial force is negligibly small compared to other forces. This is fairly well understood for swimming cells, which interact only with surrounding viscous fluid. Hydrodynamic measurements of swimming bacteria show that the force from viscous fluid is on the order of 0.1 pN, whereas the inertial force is estimated to be as small as 10 −23 N. For the adherent cells considered in this study, such hydrodynamic properties are not well understood. However, a simple estimation with f f l u i d ∼ η Δ v /Δ z S indicates that the hydrodynamic force of adherent cells is on the order of piconewtons. The inertial force of these cells is again negligible. f s u b is a reaction of the traction stress and has been reported to be as large as tens and neutrophils ) to hundreds and mammalian cells ) of nanonewtons. Therefore, the summation of the dominant active force of the traction stress, which is − ∑ i f s u b i in Eq. 1, is equivalently zero. This mechanical consideration indicates that the relationship between active force and motion of migrating cells is fundamentally different from that of passive objects whose motion is directed by net external force. To elucidate the force-motion relation, we thus must characterize the spatial properties, not simply the summation, of the traction stress field. Figure 1 Zero-force principle for migrating cells. The inertial force and the forces from fluid, neighboring part, and substrate are balanced for each small part of the cell body.... The motility of adherent eukaryotic cells on a two-dimensional substrate is composed of cycles of attachment and detachment. It has been proposed that traction stress plays a major role in the detachment process, and recent experiments have given some support to this scenario. For example, the traction stress of most motile cells is inward and contractile except in the case of collectively migrating cells. Both the traction stress and the cellular length show in-phase quasiperiodic behavior on a timescale of several minutes, which suggests that large traction stress induces cell shrinking. Strong traction stress tends to locate at the tips of pseudopodia and uropods. Although these former studies investigated the traction stress pattern on the cell scale, such as the absolute force or net forces at the cell front and rear, it is reported that there is an adhesion pattern on the subcellular scale. This gap in spatial resolution has left the nature of the adherent process unclear. In particular, there are two incompatible treatments of cell-substrate interactions, as continuous viscous friction and as discrete elastic anchoring. High-resolution measurements of the traction stress focusing on the subcellular scale have been done for slowly migrating cells, but since the local adherent event and the global cell translocation are not simply coupled in these cells, roles of locally concentrated hot spots of high traction stress in cell motility are still unclear. High-resolution traction stress measurement of fast, relatively simple organisms like Dictyostelium cells would elucidate the roles by relating the local traction stress dynamics to the whole-cell translocation. The force-motion relation is also indispensable for theoretical studies. An increasing number of efforts are being made to model cell migration, but to date they are restrictive and not unified. Understanding the force-motion relation would be a great help in constructing and testing the theoretical models. To this end, we must capture the spatiotemporal dynamics of the traction stress by simple quantities that are suited for theory. To elucidate the force-motion relation, we here introduced multipole analysis to help define traction stress dynamics. This analysis allows decomposition of a complicated stress pattern into a few simple quantities and facilitates the investigation of its spatiotemporal properties. We measured the traction stress of migrating Dictyostelium cells and calculated the force dipole and quadrupole moments, which correspond to rotational and front-rear asymmetries of the stress field. We found a simple force-motion relation: the major axis of the dipole matrix determines the migrating axis, and the component of the quadrupole tensor determines the migrating direction along the axis. We then characterized detailed structures in the traction stress field by improving the spatial resolution of the measurement. The statistics of force hot-spot dynamics and its correlation with cell morphology reveal a front-rear asymmetric anchoring nature of the cell-substrate interaction and are consistent with the results of the multipole analysis. Materials and Methods Cell culture and microscopy Axenically grown wild-type Dictyostelium cells were cultured as described previously. Low cell density was used to avoid cell-cell interactions. A confocal microscope ) equipped with a 63× NA 1.4 Plan objective lens was used to visualize both the cell contour and the fluorescence beads. The laser power was adjusted to minimize photodamage. The image sequences were captured with a time interval of 6 s for up to 1 h. Fourier-transformed traction cytometry Flexible polyacrylamide substrates embedded with fluorescence beads were prepared and calibrated with a standard protocol. The two-dimensional substrate deformation was measured using particle image velocimetry on the fluorescence image of the beads. The size of the PIV grid was set to 1.28 μ m and was shifted with an overlapping zone of 50%. Using Fourier-transformed Boussinesq Green function G ˜ i j, G ˜ i j = 3 2 E k 3, the linear relationship between the Fourier-transformed substrate deformation, u ˜ j, and traction stress, T ˜ i, can be expressed as T ˜ i = G ˜ i j − 1 u ˜ j. k → is the wave vector and E is Young’s modulus. The subscripts denote a component of x or y, and A ˜ indicates two-dimensional Fourier transformation of a function A. The ill-posed nature of the stress-recovery problem requires some filtering schemes, and we introduced a simple low-pass filtering. There are two main reasons for this choice. 1), The background noise can be directly measured using the control data thus we can determine the cut-off frequency by comparing the power spectra of data and the control. 2), Since the N th moment of the traction stress is the N th derivative in the Fourier space around k → = 0, lower moments are independent on higher Fourier components. For this reason the low-pass filtering scheme guarantees that the results of multipole analysis are neither influenced by the filtering process nor dependent on detailed forms of the filter. We adopted a Gaussian filter with a cut-off frequency | k | = 0.18 μ m −1. We also tested different filters and confirmed that the results hold qualitatively. Data analysis All statistics, except as specified, were obtained with N = 10 cells. The cross-correlation function between the major and minor dipoles was defined as C C F = < M l ¯ M s ¯ > t < M l ¯ M s ¯ > t. The angled brackets with subscript t, < > t, denote time averaging, and A ¯ denotes A − < A >. The migrating velocity, v →, was defined as the moving average of the cell centroid with a time interval of 1 min. To define force spots, we first detected the local maximum of the spatial gradient of the traction stress amplitude using the Sobel method. This analysis gives closed paths around small areas of the concentrated stress. Then the region whose maximum value exceeds a threshold was defined as a force spot. The threshold was set to 104 Pa of stress amplitude ). The results hold qualitatively even when we change the threshold value. Figure 4 Force spot tracking. Force spot tracking in lab frame. Long-term integration of the traction stress. The traction stress of a single cell was integrated in time for 1 h with a threshold of 50 Pa. The cellular outlines. Results Force dipole and migrating axis To address the spatiotemporal dynamics of the traction stress, we performed multipole analysis. This would be the simplest way to characterize the spatial pattern of the traction stress field based on the expansion scheme from the lowest order. Moreover, since the lower moments are determined only by the lower Fourier components, this analysis is robust against the ill-posed nature of the stress-recovery problem. The lowest component of the moment series is the zeroth, the net force, which must vanish. Thus, we start from the first-order moment, the force dipole. The force dipole, M i j, is defined as M i j = ∫ S x i T j d S, where x i and T j are the i th and j th components of the position and the traction stress, respectively, on the substrate surface. The coordinate origin is the cell centroid and S is the area of interest ). The dipole matrix was diagonalized and its two eigenvalues and eigenvectors were obtained. Since the moment of inertia is also negligible, the total torque has to vanish and thus, the dipole matrix is symmetric and diagonalizable. We call the eigenvector with the larger absolute eigenvalue the major dipole and call the axis of the major dipole the dipole axis. Figure 2 Force dipole and migrating axis. A snapshot of the traction stress field and corresponding force dipole. The traction stress vector and its amplitude are represented by the small white arrows and color. The two eigenvectors of the dipole matrix and... Both the major and minor dipoles were negative ), showing the contracting nature of the traction stress in all directions, and exhibited an almost periodic behavior. We generated a scatter plot to examine the relationship between the two dipoles. The majority of increasing and decreasing paths collapsed into a single line whose slope was ∼2/3. Since the difference between the major and minor dipoles corresponds to the degree of rotational symmetry breaking, this plot shows that the stress field is polarized most of the time and has a well-defined axis. The linear relationship between the two dipoles also indicates that the two paths are almost similar and the two dipoles act without a phase delay. This in-phase dynamics was confirmed by calculating the cross-correlation function between the two dipoles. The CCF had a sharp peak around δ t = 0, showing that the two dipoles act in-phase. We then focused on the orientation of the dipole axis. In contrast to the velocity orientation, which had some fluctuations that reflected short-timescale dynamics of pseudopodia, the dipole orientation was rather stable and changed slowly in time. This slower timescale of minutes is comparable to the reported persistent motion of these cells. The velocity orientation fluctuated around the dipole axis. To quantify, we calculated the probability distribution function of the angle formed by the dipole and velocity axes. Despite the velocity fluctuations, the PDF was almost symmetric and had a sharp peak around δ θ = 0. This result shows that the cellular velocity axis aligns with the force dipole axis. Force quadrupole and migrating direction We have seen that the cells migrate along the force dipole axis. However, being a dyad-symmetric variable, the force dipole can determine the axis but not the direction of migration. The lowest anti-dyad-symmetric variable in the moment series of the traction stress is the second-order moment, the force quadrupole, M i j k = ∫ S x i x j T k d S. The force quadrupole tensor has six independent components, x 2 T x, x 2 T y, x y T x, x y T y, y 2 T x, and y 2 T y. We investigated this tensor in the dipole coordinate, where the origin is the cellular centroid and the x axis is the dipole axis. The average amplitudes of the force quadrupole components were ∼50 μ m 2 ⋅ nN except for x 2 T x, whose average amplitude exceeded 100 μ m 2 ⋅ nN. This is because the x axis used for the quadrupole calculation is the dipole axis, along which xT x takes the largest amplitude. Figure 3 Force quadrupole and migrating direction. Schematic of force quadrupole. The notation in parentheses,, corresponds to x i x j T k where i, j, and k can be either x ≡ 1 or y ≡ 2 coordinates. This schematic shows how stress vectors in each four quadrant... To investigate the relationship between the force quadrupole and the migrating direction, we introduced a measure of the correlation as follows. First, we measured the two probabilities where the two signs of the quadrupole and the velocity components are equal or opposite for 12 quadrupole-velocity pairs. Then, we took the ratio P of the larger to the smaller probabilities. P can take the value 1 ≤ P ≤ ∞, where P = 1 indicates no correlation, and larger P indicates stronger correlation. This correlation analysis shows that the force quadrupole was tightly coupled to cell migration direction. We found one strongly correlated pair, x 2 T x and V x, where ≡, 1 ≡ x ≡ x 1, and 2 ≡ y ≡ x 2 ; Fig. 3 B, red bar ). P e q u a l was larger than P o p p o s i t e for this pair; this shows that the cells migrate in the positive x direction in the coordinate where x 2 T x is positive. There are two other correlated pairs, and. also corresponds to the correlation between the motion and the parallel stress. Interestingly, is the correlation between the motion and the orthogonal stress. This correlation indicates that the orthogonal inward stress also has front-rear asymmetry, and that the rear is more squeezed than the front. In contrast to the case between the two dipoles, there is a phase delay between the force dipole and quadrupole. We generated a scatter plot of the quadrupole versus the major dipole. At the early stage of one force cycle, only the force dipole increased, whereas the quadrupole stayed at a small value. Then, the force quadrupole began to rise rapidly with the force dipole maintaining its increase. The deformation field induced by the force dipole decays as r −2 and that induced by the force quadrupole decays as r −3. Thus the effects of the force dipole and quadrupole at this maximal point are in the same order at the cell length scale of 10 μ m. Beyond the maximal point, both the force dipole and quadrupole started to decrease and returned to their initial state. The force dipole is a measure of the contraction strength, and the force quadrupole a measure of its front-rear asymmetry. This result thus indicates that the symmetric contraction occurs before the evolution of the asymmetry during one force cycle, and that both the contracting strength and front-rear asymmetry become maximal simultaneously. Force spot tracking Next, to elucidate the link between mechanisms of cell motility and the force-motion relation, we investigated fine structures in the traction stress field. In Fig. 2 A, there were two concentrated traction stresses, one at the front and one at the back. We integrated the traction stress in lab frame for 1 h to examine whether such concentrated stress is frequently observed. There are many localized signals in the resultant plot. Since large stress, which appears in only one or two frames is not visible in this intensity scale, these signals correspond to the concentrated stress that persists for more than several frames. The highly concentrated nature of the traction stress is also characterized with the PDF of their amplitude. The PDF decayed significantly more slowly than a Gaussian in the high-stress region; it displayed an exponential tail on more than three orders of magnitude with a slope of 2.2 × 10 −2 Pa −1. This non-Gaussian property of the traction stress is consistent with results obtained in epithelial cells using a different approach. In what follows, we define the concentrated high traction stress whose maximum stress exceeds the threshold value of 104 Pa as a force spot. The evolution of the force spot was asymmetric in time. Fig. 4 C depicts a time evolution of a cross section of a single force spot along its center. The spot began to grow at 0.5 min and the amplitude kept on increasing until ∼1.6 min. The amplitude then suddenly dropped into the basal level within 20 s. The maximum amplitude of the spot stress was 141 ± 32 Pa, which corresponds to the net force of 1.3 ± 0.18 nN. The lab-frame integration suggests that the force spots are almost standing still. To confirm these observations, we calculated the PDF of spot displacements parallel and perpendicular to the net spot force vector. Most of the displacements were very small. In addition, the shapes of both PDFs were almost identical and symmetric with respect to the y axis, which indicates that there is no preferential translocation along the net force vector. Therefore, we conclude that the force spot does not move with respect to the substrate. We then investigated the dynamics of the force spots in the cell frame. The cell frame is defined by setting the origin at the cellular centroid and the positive direction of the x axis as the velocity vector orientation. A one-dimensional kymograph of the traction stress amplitude along the x axis showed that the force spots both at the front and the back were in retrograde in this frame, as we can easily imagine from the result of the lab-frame analysis. The two-dimensional trajectories of the force spots in the cell frame are given in Fig. 4 G. The circle and the cross indicate the birth and death events, respectively. The spots tended to be born either at the front or the middle of the cell. The spots retrograded for about a half of the cellular length and then disappeared. Thus, the spots born at the cell front die at the middle, and those born at the middle die at the rear edge. Preferential positioning of the force spots in the rear half, especially on the rear edge, is evident in the plot. There are four states of the spot’s presence: =,, and, where 0 and 1 denote the absence and presence, respectively, of force spots. We calculated the transition probabilities between these four states. Focusing on the timescale of the entire force cycle, we neglected the short-term transitions in the calculation of the transition probabilities. We restricted the transition so that the spot number only increased when the time derivative of the absolute stress was positive. The transition probabilities showed a clear directional cycle, → → → →. This clockwise cycle indicates that the birth of a force spot at the rear is followed by a birth at the front. Beyond the maximal stress point, disappearance of the rear spot occurs before that of the front spot and the state then goes back to. To see the force-morphology relationship during the transition of →, we plotted both the traction stress and the cell edge on a one-dimensional kymograph. Note that this is again in lab frame. There were two force spots, one at the front and the other at the rear. A rapid membrane contraction occurred at the rear around 3 min, which was coincident with the sudden disappearance of the rear force spot. It is important to note that the rear spot disappeared as the contraction began, whereas the succeeding inward membrane movement was not accompanied by strong traction stress. This result indicates the anchoring, rather than the viscous frictional nature of the cell-substrate interaction. Discussion The results of the previous subsection can be summarized as follows. 1), The force spot does not move with respect to the substrate. 2), The transition probabilities between the spot presence states show a front-rear asymmetric kinetics. 3), The disappearance of the rear spot is followed by a rapid inward membrane movement at the contracting position. These results suggest that the disappearances of the rear force spots correspond to the detaching steps in an inchwormlike mechanism. The adhesion strength of Dictyostelium cells has been measured as a peeling force of ∼1.1 nN. Assuming this peeling force acts on a single force spot, the peeling stress would be ∼160 Pa, which is comparable to the maximum amplitude of the force spot. The spot stress could thus be strong enough to promote detachment. The rapid contracting process is depicted in the dynamics of the force dipole. In Fig. 2 B, the instants of rapid contraction are shown by black circles. Here, the rapid contraction is defined as the instant when the force spot disappears and the membrane moves rapidly inward simultaneously. This plot shows that sharp drops of the force dipole correspond to the rapid contracting processes. Given the dipole-quadrupole relation, the inchwormlike step occurs when both the force dipole and quadrupole become maximal. Consistency of the results of multipole analysis and force-spot tracking can be understood as follows. The strongest correlation between the quadrupole and the velocity orientation,, indicates that cells migrate along the dipole axis, with their direction determined by the sign of x 2 T x. Let us consider one dimension along the dipole axis. The traction stress being directed inward, T x is positive in the left and negative in the right, and the integration of the stress, ∫ T x d x, must be zero; thus, the two areas are equal. For symmetric stress distribution, together with ∫ T x d x, the force quadrupole, ∫ x 2 T x d x, is also zero. However, if the distribution becomes asymmetric and concentrates at the left edge, ∫ x 2 T x d x becomes positive, whereas ∫ T x d x is still zero. The result from multipole analysis shows that with this asymmetric stress distribution the cells migrate toward the positive x direction, which is consistent with the preferential location of the force spots at the rear edge. This is also consistent with former observations of asymmetric traction stress in other cell types. Figure 5 Schematic of the force-motion relation. Force multipole and cell migration. The cellular shape and the traction stress vector for a period of 15 min are superimposed on the centroid trajectory. The dipole axis whose direction... In addition to, there are two correlated quadrupole-velocity pairs. First, indicates that the distribution of T x along the y axis is narrower at the rear than at the front. Thus, combined with, this result indicates that the traction stress parallel to the migrating direction concentrates at the rear in both x and y directions. We name this correlation reminding two-dimensional breaststroke as crawling mode. Since concentrated traction stress would be responsible for detachments, this mode shows how adhesion-based crawling motion is achieved with net-zero traction stress. The third correlation between the motion and the orthogonal stress shows that together with the parallel stress, the orthogonal stress is also front-rear asymmetric. The cell rear is orthogonally squeezed whereas the front is stretched, and we refer to this correlation as squeeze-stretch mode. Though we have mainly focused on detachment processes, this mode implies that the traction stress may also contribute to cell body translocation. It is suggested that contracting force induces cell protrusion through changing intracellular hydrodynamic pressure, and recent theoretical studies support a view in which cell motility could be driven by purely orthogonal forces. The squeeze-stretch mode may encompass these kinds of mechanisms for cell body translocation. Cellular force dipole has been used in several former theories of cell reorientation and one-dimensional cell migration. Our results demonstrate that this one-dimensional treatment along the dipole axis is valid even for frequently turning cells, and also demonstrate that front-rear asymmetries can be represented by the force quadrupole. These results would serve as an experimental basis for further theoretical studies in this direction. Multipole analysis can be a general framework to study motility of various cell types. Motile cells show a rich variety of migratory behaviors. For example, keratocytes migrate with the orthogonally polarized shape and force. This cell type would be an interesting example of a motion along the minor dipole axis. Another category of motile cells is large, slow cells like fibroblasts. Although global force distribution in these cells was regarded as an important aspect of their motility in an early study, most current studies are focusing on fine-grained investigations of the force acting on single focal adhesions. Coarse-grained study with multipole expansion can give a quantitative picture of the global force distribution, such as growth of front-rear asymmetry, and may dissect the roles of posterior and anterior forces, which are suggested to differ among organisms. Studies of different organisms within the same framework would clarify differences and similarities between various cell motilities. Finally, we discuss the application of this analysis in a multicellular context. A number of multicellular phenomena involve spatially coordinated cell migration and division, and recent studies have attributed this coordination to physical forces. For example, it is proposed that forces produced by surrounding cells determine the cellular velocity axis during collective cell migration and the cellular division axis in tissues. The cellular force is transmitted as the deformations of the elastic surroundings in these cases. Multipole analysis could give an intuitive view of such mechanical cell-cell interactions. First, the deformation field created by the force dipole and quadrupole can be simply expressed as u i = G i j ; k M k j + 1 2 G i j ; k l M k l j. G i j = G i j is the Boussinesq Green function in real space and G i j ; k is the derivative of G i j with respective to x k ′. We showed examples of the deformation field calculated from the experimental data using Eq. 7. Second, the interaction between the deformation field and cells could be regarded as the interaction between the deformation and force multipoles. We have shown elsewhere that dividing cells can be treated as the force dipole, and here we show that migrating cells can be treated as a summation of the force dipole and quadrupole. Multipole analysis thus may give a simple picture of the orchestrated cell migration/division in multicellular systems. In conclusion, we have analyzed the traction stress of migrating cells with multipole expansion and revealed the relationship between the moments and cellular motion, to our knowledge, for the first time. Multipole analysis is the simplest way to characterize spatial properties of any scalar/vector fields, and the force dipole and quadrupole are the minimal set to break both rotational and front-rear symmetries. Therefore, the derived force-motion relation is in its simplest form. We expect that this minimal description will contribute to unifying our understanding of diverse biological phenomena that involve cell motility. 