 cotC requires the transcription factor CudA for its expression in the posterior, prespore cells of the slug, while the expL7 gene requires CudA for its expression in the anterior, tip-organiser region. In order to identify additional transcription factors that might mediate tip-organiser specific expression, we performed affinity chromatography on slug nuclear extracts. The affinity matrix bore cap-site distal sequences from region A′ of the expL7 promoter; an essential region located upstream of the CudA binding domain. One of the proteins purified was G-box binding factor, a zinc finger transcription factor which binds to G-rich elements, known as G boxes, that are present in the promoters of many developmental genes, including cotC. Previous work identified an essential sequence motif within region A′ and we show that this element is a G box, that binds recombinant GBF. Moreover, a G box from within the cotC promoter can substitute for region A′ of expL7 in directing tip-organiser specific expression of expL7. Thus the same two transcription factors, CudA and GBF, seem to co-operate to direct both tip-organiser and prespore gene expression. How then is specificity achieved? Replacing a CudA binding region in the cotC promoter with the CudA binding domain from expL7 strongly represses cotC promoter activity. Hence we suggest that differences in the topology of the multiple CudA half- sites contained within the two different CudA binding regions, coupled with differences in the signalling environment between tip-organiser cells and prespore cells, ensure correct expL7 expression. Keywords: Dictyostelium, cudA, GBF, tip-organiser, prespore, transcription factor Dictyostelium develops to form a fruiting body comprised of just two terminally differentiated cell types, stalk and spore cells, but, at the preceding slug stage, prespore cells and several sub-types of prestalk cell can be recognised. The cells of one of the prestalk sub-types constitute the tip-organiser, a tissue that behaves rather like an embryonic organiser and that also directs slug behaviour. CudA is the founder member of a class of transcription factors that are present only in the amoebozoa. CudA is expressed and nuclear localised in the tip-organiser cells where it is necessary for the transcription of a direct target gene, expL7, that encodes an expansin-like protein. CudA acts as a secondary transcription factor in a transcriptional cascade; wherein tip-specific accumulation of the ACA adenylyl cyclase mRNA causes localised cAMP synthesis which triggers STATa activation within the tip. STATa then binds to the cudA promoter and directs cudA transcription. CudA is also expressed and nuclear localised in prespore cells, where it acts as a secondary transcription factor necessary for optimal expression of the cotC spore coat protein gene. The expL7 and cotC promoters contain binding sites for CudA, that are essential for optimal expression but that are not sufficient to direct expression when linked to minimal promoter elements. Transcription factors generally function co-operatively, with other transcription factors, by binding to synergising promoter elements to achieve the requisite level of gene expression. Often this involves the co-operation of cell-type specific with non cell-type specific transcription factors, such as SP1. In the case of post-aggregative Dictyostelium development, a similar role is frequently played by GBF. GBF contains two putative zinc fingers and binds to GT- or, in the opposite strand, CA-rich elements that are frequently located upstream of post-aggregation genes. G-boxes are essential for optimal gene transcription within the context of their own promoter but are inactive when linked to basal promoter elements. The cotC promoter contains three G boxes, termed CA-rich elements or CAEs. They synergise with a downstream TA-rich region to help direct efficient cotC expression. Additionally, prespore specificity is endowed by a CudA binding region, termed region B, located between the two cap-site proximal CAEs. For unknown reasons, recombinant forms of CudA fail to bind at specific promoter sites, hence an Entamoeba orthologue with similar apparent specificity, ECudA, is used for mapping promoters. CudA exists as a dimer and region B of cotC contains a complete ECudA binding site, the dyad GAATTTTC, and a more proximal half site, GAA. The expL7 promoter contains an approximately 100nt ECudA binding region, also called region B, that is essential for tip-specific expression. This region contains several dispersed sub-regions that are necessary for maximal binding by ECudA. There are four potential TTC CudA half-sites within region B but, because of their partial mutual redundancy, they were not precisely delineated by mutation. Fig. 1 Affinity purification of nuclear proteins that bind to region A’ and band-shift analysis of proteins interacting with region A’ CudA is, as stated, present in the nuclei of both the tip-organiser and the prespore cells and is essential for expL7 and cotC expression. What then prevents expL7 from being expressed in the prespore cells and cotC being expressed in the tip-organiser cells; is there an additional transcription factor that confers discrimination between the two promoters? Region A 2A ) of the expL7 promoter is a candidate for the binding site of such a factor. Region A does not bind CudA but is required for expL7 expression in tip organiser cells. An essential CA-rich sequence element has been identified in region A by mutational analysis and was proposed to be a site of binding for the DIF-regulated bZIP protein, DimB. However, no direct evidence was presented for this. In order to determine whether region A might contain ancillary regulatory elements that confer specificity on expL7, we undertook an analysis of the proteins that bind to it. Fig. 2 expL7 promoters reporter fusions and their expression patterns Results Two known transcription factors are purified by cudA promoter region A’ Region A of the expL7 promoter contains two relatively GC-rich tracts, separated by a 65nt region comprised entirely of A and T residues. The essential sequences of region A lie in the cap-site distal GC-rich region, region A’. Hence slug nuclear extracts were purified on an affinity resin bearing the 43nt sequence comprising region A’. Multiple proteins were bound but most are either RNA binding proteins, a class of proteins that is often purified in such experiments, or previously unknown proteins. There were just two recognisable transcription factors, GBF and MybE. Both were contained within slice 1, the gel slice bearing the largest proteins analysed. GBF contains two potential zinc fingers and has a predicted molecular weight of 79kDa. MybE is a single Myb domain SHAQKY family protein. It has a predicted molecular weight of 93kDa and is required for DIF-inducible gene expression and correct prestalk cell differentiation. There is a binding site for G-box binding factor within region A’ When region A’ is used as a probe in a band shift assay with heparin purified nuclear extracts, there is a major retarded band and a minor, faster-migrating band. The two retarded complexes apparently contain GBF; because CAE-2, a well-characterised G box located within the cotC promoter, is a more potent competitor for binding to the A’ probe than is A’ itself. MybE was also purified in the affinity chromatography but an oligonucleotide sequence from the ecmA promoter containing the MybE dyad does not compete for binding to region A’. Also there is no obvious fit to the consensus MybE dyad binding site, AACnGTT, within region A’. MybE could be present as a contaminant in the eluate from the affinity resin or it may bind via an interaction with another protein present in the complex. It was not investigated further. The consensus site for the binding of GBF to a CAE is CACACAYYYCACACAAA/T and this region of CAE-2 is indicated in red in Fig. 1A. In region A’ there is a sequence with perfect homology to the distal half of the CAE sequence, CACACA, but there is only limited homology to the proximal CACACA element. However, downstream of the long AT tract there is a CACACA sequence in the complementary strand. GBF functions by binding co-operatively to multiple G box elements, independent of their relative orientation. Hence the downstream sequence could subsume the function of the proximal CACACA element. We mutated the entire distal CACACA element, as indicated in Fig. 1A, and assayed relative competition activity in a band-shift assay using region A’ as the probe. The mutant form, A’ mut, is a significantly poorer competitor than region A’ itself. The above band shift assay supports the notion that GBF binds to the expL7 promoter and maps the binding activity to the CACACA sequence. There are, however, close homologues of GBF in Dictyostelium and one of these could, in principle, be responsible for the observed binding. We therefore expressed GBF in E. coli as a HIS fusion protein, purified the protein on metal affinity resin, and performed band shift assays using CAE-2 as probe. When used as a competitor, region A’ is as effective as CAE-2 itself. Moreover A’ mut, the sequence containing mutations that ablate the CACACA element, is much less effective as a competitor. Thus recombinant GBF binds to region A’ of the expL7 promoter and it does so by binding to the CACACA element. The G box is the active element within region A’ and a G box derived from cotC can subsume the function of A’ The full length expl7 promoter construct, −1117, is expressed throughout the tip-organiser while the fore-shortened, −823 construct is expressed only in the rear part of the tip-organiser. The CACA element located in region A’ has previously been point-mutated in two of its C residues but, because its parent construct is not expressed at the slug stag, an effect of the mutation was only measurable during culmination. We therefore generated construct −823M. It is equivalent to construct −823, which we find to be expressed in the posterior of the tip-organiser region at the slug stage but contains the same 6 nucleotide substitution that eliminates binding of region A’ to GBF. 2A ). While −823 is expressed in the expected pattern, −823M is entirely inactive. Thus the CACACA element is essential for tip-organiser expression at the slug stage. If GBF mediates the essential role that region A’ plays in tip-organiser gene expression, it should be possible to replace region A’ with a generic G box. We tested this using CAE-2 from cotC. In construct CAE-2:823 expression is restored in the rear half of the tip-organiser region. This mirrors the expression pattern observed for construct −823, where region A’ is present. Collectively these data imply that GBF synergises with CudA to activate expL7 but we cannot, of course, completely rule out the possibility that another transcription factor with a similar specificity binds region A’ in vivo. When transplanted into the cotC promoter, the CudA binding domain from expL7 acts as a transcriptional inhibitor The above result shows that region A is required purely because it contains a G-box. Therefore sequences in region A do not dictate that expL7 should be expressed in the tip-organiser cells but not the prespore cells. That information must be encoded downstream of region A. Region B is essential for tip organiser expression but the only known factor that binds there is CudA and CudA is also necessary for cotC expression in prespore cells. There could, however, be a binding site for another transcription factor in region B. Alternatively, differences in the positions and relative orientation of the multiple CudA binding sites between expL7 and cotC might, in some way, determine their different properties. To help distinguish the above possibilities, we replaced the known CudA binding region of cotC, region B in our previous analysis, with region B from expL7. The start point was a new construct, cotCΔB; an internal deletion mutant of the full length cotC promoter, construct CotC, that lacks region B. Expression of this and related constructs, all driving expression of a lacZ reporter, was compared in three separate transformant pools: both by β-galactosidase staining of whole mount slugs and enzymatic assay. The latter analysis allows quantitative comparison between the expression levels of the constructs and the use of multiple pools averages out any effects of copy number. Fig. 3 Insertion of CudA binding region B from expL7 into the cotC promoter Despite the deletion, cotCΔB is still expressed in prespore cells, but at a two-fold lower level than cotC. The residual level of expression presumably indicates that there are additional CudA binding sites, located elsewhere in the promoter, that are redundant with those in region B. Most likely, these are in the region −659 to −483; because deletion of that region produces a major drop in prespore gene expression and, in a construct with a distal end-point at −457, mutation of the three CudA half-sites in region B greatly attenuates expression. When region B from expL7 is inserted into cotCΔB, to generate e7B:cotCΔB, there is almost no expression in the tip-organiser. Hence region B from expL7 does not carry the sequence information necessary to direct tip-organiser expression, at least when within the context of an otherwise prespore-specific promoter. Interestingly however, it exerts a strong inhibitory effect on prespore expression directed by the residual cotC promoter elements within cotCΔB. Construct e7Bmut:cotCΔB contains block mutations; within the three sub-regions known to be essential for optimal CudA binding and that, between them, ablate the four proposed ECudA half-sites. It does not display the same inhibited expression level as e7B:cotCΔB. We are, unfortunately, precluded from performing the symmetrical experiment, to determine whether region B from the cotC gene down-regulates expL7 when it is used to replace region B of expl7. In the case of the expL7 promoter, deletion of region B totally prevents tip-specific expression. Therefore, there is no residual expression to be inhibited by adding in regionB from cotC. Discussion The tip-organiser cells are a small sub-set of the prestalk cells that control slug integrity and behaviour. The prespore cells are destined to become spores and differ from the tip-organiser cells in many important ways. Nonetheless, there is a striking similarity in the way two of the markers for these tissues, cotC and expL7, are regulated; both lie at the end of transcriptional cascades involving CudA and both seem to involve a synergy of CudA with GBF. This congruity is most clearly demonstrated by the fact that a G box from cotC can functionally substitute for the G box of expL7. Such interchangeability of promoter elements has been demonstrated previously; using a G box from the DIF regulated ecmB promoter to replace a G box located in a cAMP regulated promoter. The present observations, again using two genes with radically different expression patterns, re-inforce the notion of GBF as a general transcription factor which co-operates with regulatory transcription factors to facilitate the expression of most, if not all, classes of post-aggregation genes. A “synthetic” reporter construct, containing multimerised CudA dyad binding sites, fused downstream of CAE-2 to basal promoter elements from the Actin 15 gene, was not expressed in a cell type specific manner. Hence we cannot rule out the involvement of other transcription factors in either pathway and, indeed, a cap-site proximal AT-rich region, is known to be important for cotC expression. A negative result from a promoter shuffling experiment is, of course, intrinsically difficult to interpret; the spacing and configuration of the elements may be incorrect or they may require specific basal promoter sequences. We did obtain interesting information when we attempted the less ambitious experiment of using the CudA binding domain of expL7, domainB, to replace the characterised CudA binding domain of cotC. Rather than the expected stimulation of expression, back up to the level of the undeleted construct, there was a strong inhibition. This observation could explain why expL7 is expressed in the tip-organiser cells but not in the prespore cells. We propose that within the signalling environment of tip-organiser cells CudA bound to region B of expL7 functions, in conjunction with GBF, as an activator of expL7 transcription. Within the signalling environment of prespore cells, either: CudA bound to region B of expL7 acts as a repressor of expL7 transcription or CudA is displaced from the expL7 promoter and replaced by a transcriptional repressor, designated X in Fig. 4C. The nuclear hormone receptor super-family provides precedents where the configuration of half sites determines regulatory polarity. Similar differences in the topology of CudA half sites could explain why cotC shows the opposite beaviour to expL7 in prespore cells. The inhibitory effect of expL7 domainB is dependent upon the presence of the four proposed CudA half sites but this observation has to be interpreted cautiously, because the sites have not been precisely mapped. Transcription factors other than CudA could share part or all of the CudA binding specificity and could replace CudA to act as the repressor. There are five CudA orthologues in Dictyostelium and one of these may fulfil that function. The fact that deletion of region B from expL7 does not lead to ectopic expression within the prespore region perhaps indicates that it also contains sequences important for the activation of expression in prespore cells. Fig. 4 Models to explain the selective expression of expL7 in tip organizer cells Materials and Methods Cell culture and development All experiments were performed with the Gerisch isolate of Ax2. Cells were grown, developed, transformed and assayed for lacZ expression as described previously. Affinity purification of proteins Slug nuclear extracts derived from 4 × 10 11 slug cells were precipitated with 50% ammonium sulfate and subjected to heparin-agarose chromotagraphy and DNA affinity chromatography as described previously. Protein was analysed on 4%-12% Bis-Tris SDS-polyacrylamide gels and selected regions of the gel were analysed by mass spectrommetry. Band shift analysis The entire GBF coding region was cloned as a “6XHIS” fusion construct in pET15b, expressed in E, coli and purified over TALON™ metal affinity resin. Band shift analysis was performed as described previously using oligonucleotides labelled with Cy5-dCTP. Generation of promoter constructs The −823 expL7 promoter construct was described previously. The constructs −823M and CAE-2:−823 were generated by cloning double stranded oligonucleotides respectively containing the sequences A’mut or CAE-2 at their distal ends, coupled to the central 65nt AT sequence and the proximal GC-containing sequence. They were cloned, with GATC cohesive ends into the BamHI site of expL7 construct −723; a deletion construct that lacks region A. The cotC −659 construct was described previously. CotCΔB was generated by inserting cotC promoter fragment −659 to −483 into construct cotC −416 using XbaI and BamHI. This resulted in a 66nt deletion within the promoter. Using cotC ΔB as recipient, expL7 region B in its unmutated or multiply mutated form were inserted into the BamH site with GATC cohesive ends to respectively generate e7B:cotCΔB and e7Bmut:cotCΔB, unmutated domain B: ATTTGTTTTAAT TTC TTTATT TTC AATTACCCAAAAGATTATTATACATC ATAATTA TTC TATATGATTACGTACACGTTTTTTAAACAAT TTC TAA and mutated domain B:ATTTGTTTTA GCGCGCGCGCGCGCGC TTACCCAAAAGATTATTATACATCATAATTA GCGCGCGCG ATTACGTACACGTTTTTTAAACA GCGCGCGC. The positions of the mutations were based on mutation scanning results, where sequential 8 nucleotide blocks of sequence within domain B were replaced with 8 nucleotide alternating GC tracts. Here the GC tracts are underlined. The suggested CudA half-sites in the unmutated sequence are in bold. β-galactosidase staining and enzymatic activity analysis Cells bearing lacZ contructs were developed to the slug stage and either fixed and stained for β-galactosidase or harvested in lysis buffer. The protein concentration was determined and 5 ul of protein was added to 100 ul of lysis buffer containing 1 mM CPRG. OD was measured at 595 nm at several time points. LacZ activity is displayed as OD 595 per ug protein per minute. Acknowledgements We would like to thank the Wellcome Trust for funding this work. Abbreviations used in this paper GBF G-box binding factor Article information Int J Dev Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 Feb 21. Published in final edited form as: Int J Dev Biol. 2010; 54: 1301–1307. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.103141hw PMCID: PMC3042209 EMSID: UKMS34065 PMID: 20711998 HONG YU WANG and JEFFREY G. WILLIAMS * College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, U.K. * Address correspondence to: Jeffrey G. Williams. College of Life Sciences. University of Dundee, Dow St., Dundee DD1 5EH, UK. ku.ca.eednud@smailliw.g.j PMC Copyright notice The publisher's final edited version of this article is available free at Int J Dev Biol 