 During cytokinesis, global and equatorial pathways deform the cell cortex in a stereotypical manner, which leads to daughter cell separation. Equatorial forces are largely generated by myosin-II and the actin crosslinker, cortexillin-I. In contrast, global mechanics are determined by the cortical cytoskeleton, including the actin crosslinker, dynacortin. We used direct morphometric characterization and laser-tracking microrheology to quantify cortical mechanical properties of wild-type and cortexillin - I and dynacortin mutant Dictyostelium cells. Both cortexillin-I and dynacortin influence cytokinesis and interphase cortical viscoelasticity as predicted from genetics and biochemical data using purified dynacortin proteins. Our studies suggest that the regulation of cytokinesis ultimately requires modulation of proteins that control the cortical mechanical properties that establish the force-balance that specifies the shapes of cytokinesis. The combination of genetic, biochemical, and biophysical observations suggests that the cell's cortical mechanical properties control how the cortex is remodeled during cytokinesis. Keywords: cell morphology, cortical mechanics, cytokinesis, Dictyostelium, rheology Introduction Cytokinesis is the mechanical process that cleaves a mother cell into two daughter cells and is essential for the propagation of cells across all phylogeny. After more than 100 years of study, the fundamental mechanical bases for metazoan cytokinesis are still not understood, let alone the molecular bases for these mechanical elements. Two predominant models have been debated in recent decades: equatorial stimulation and polar relaxation. The equatorial stimulation model assigns active force production to the contractile ring, which is considered a myosin-II-driven process. In contrast, the polar relaxation model assigns the polar cortex as the major source of active force production. As the volume of the mother cell is conserved during division, expansion of the polar cortex leads to cleavage furrow ingression. The role of myosin-II in the polar relaxation model is to serve as a dynamic actin crosslinker, increasing the equatorial stiffness so that the cleavage furrow ingresses. Still, recent studies have been unable to clarify the mechanical mechanisms of cytokinesis. Myosin-II is required for cytokinesis in suspension culture, while adherent mitotic ameboid myosin - II mutant cells divide nearly normally. Pharmacological inhibition of the polar cortex with actin filament destabilizers inhibits furrow ingression, whereas introduction of the inhibitors in the furrow region accelerated ingression of the cleavage furrow. By atomic force microscopy, which measures the bending modulus perpendicular to the cell's surface, the mammalian cell equator was more stiff than the basal global stiffness of the cell, a property that is most likely ubiquitous among metazoan-like cytokineses. These results suggest that the global and equatorial cortices have distinct and important roles in cytokinesis. Force-balance is a principle fundamental to all mechanical shape changes. We have proposed a force-balance hypothesis in which the amount of contractile force generated by the contractile ring is specified by the mechanical resistance provided by the global cortex. A significant component of our hypothesis is that different mechanical elements are generated by specific proteins and that genetic interactions between these proteins reveal how they modulate different mechanical elements. In the force-balance hypothesis, at least three idealized mechanical elements are involved in cell shape changes. These elements include an active equatorial constricting force, cortical stretch modulus, and cytoplasmic viscosity. The active constricting forces for cytokinesis are proposed to be produced largely by equatorially localized myosin-II. The cortical stretch modulus is the energy cost for deforming the cell. The stretch modulus is generated by cortical actin filaments and crosslinkers, and has been shown to be a strong predictor of how much myosin-II is recruited to the cleavage furrow cortex. As actin crosslinkers are dynamic, the cell's cortex is neither purely viscous nor elastic but has both viscous and elastic characteristics. Cytoplasmic viscosity is the energy cost for bulk flow and the ratio of the stretch modulus to the cytoplasmic viscosity is predicted to set the rate of furrow ingression. Genetic studies using Dictyostelium discoideum have identified proteins that are predicted to influence cortical viscoelasticity during cytokinesis. Efficient cytokinesis requires different actin filament crosslinking proteins with different cellular distributions. Dynacortin is an actin filament bundling protein that was originally identified in a genetic selection for suppressors of mutants devoid of cortexillin-I, an actin crosslinking protein. The suppression experiment was performed with a cDNA expression library and only the carboxyl-half of dynacortin suppressed cortexillin - I. In contrast, overexpression of the full-length dynacortin not only failed to rescue cortexillin - I but it also induced a dominant cytokinesis defect. Dynacortin is distributed around the cell cortex, while cortexillin-I is concentrated in the equatorial cortex. The cellular distributions and the genetic interactions of cortexillin-I and dynacortin suggest that they cooperate with each other to modulate the cortical mechanics that drive the complex shape changes of cytokinesis. In this paper, we combine biochemistry, genetics, direct observation of cytokinesis, and cellular biophysics to dissect the function of dynacortin and the basis for its genetic interactions with cortexillin-I. A significant new technical development is our ability to quantify the mechanical impact that dynacortin and cortexillin-I have on cell cortices, using a new noninvasive technology, laser-tracking microrheology. Several observations emerge from this study. First, we report the first loss-of-function phenotype for dynacortin, assigning a role for dynacortin, like cortexillin-I, in modulating the cortical viscoelasticity of interphase cells and specifying the shapes of cytokinesis. Second, dynacortin has two independent actin crosslinking domains, amino-half and C181, that crosslink with different relative activities. Third, our data suggest that the activities of proteins that are predicted to have different kinetics of actin crosslinking may be distinguished in vivo using LTM. Finally and most significantly, this study provides essential groundwork for determining how global and equatorial actin crosslinking specifies the shapes and ultimately the dynamics of cytokinesis. Results Dynacortin and cortexillin-I have quantitative effects on cell growth To initiate this study, we characterized the growth effects of a dynacortin hairpin construct that silenced dynacortin expression. The expression of dynhp led to a complete loss of detectable dynacortin and resulted in mild changes in the rate of increase of cell number as compared to wild type and cortexillin - I controls. We examined the cell size and relative growth rates of cells expressing each of the dynacortin domains for direct comparison to dynhp. By microscopy, full-length dynacortin induced a ‘big-cell' phenotype in wild type and cortexillin - I, as observed previously. Interestingly, N173 also induced a similar phenotype. C181 cells were uniform in size and rescued the growth rate as shown previously. Figure 1 The cartoon represents the dynacortin proteins studied. Micrographs of wild-type cells carrying the control plasmid pLD1A15SN or an expression plasmid for dynacortin hairpin, full-length dynacortin, N173, or C181; scale... Table 1 Quantification of cellular growth rates and cellular concentrations of dynacortin and its domains To compare directly the in vivo morphological, growth, and mechanical effects with the affinities and activities measured in vitro, we quantified the expression levels of each dynacortin domain in wild-type and cortexillin - I mutant strains. The cellular concentrations are presented. Although some of the protein concentrations appear unusually high, in fact the cellular concentrations of each domain are consistent with the biochemical activities of each protein. Table 2 Summary of actin-binding parameters for dynacortin, N173, and C181 Dynacortin, N173, and C181 crosslink actin but with different activities To elucidate dynacortin's molecular mechanisms, we analyzed dynacortin, C181, and N173 for their hydrodynamic properties and interactions with actin filaments. Hydrodynamically, dynacortin is a rod-shaped dimer and the core of dimerization resides in the C181 domain. Both N173 and C181 bind and crosslink actin in vitro with similar apparent thermodynamics, but with different overall activities as determined by falling ball viscometry and quantitative fluorescence microscopy. Using actin cosedimentation, falling ball viscometry, and the fluorescence microscopy assay, we determined an activity order for actin crosslinking as: Dynacortin>C181>N173. The half-maximal concentrations for bundle formation determined from the fluorescence assay and falling ball viscometry are in good agreement with the actual amounts of each protein expressed in cells. II ). As N173 and C181 had similar thermodynamics but C181 appeared to be a more effective crosslinker than N173, we hypothesize that N173 may have faster on and off rates to achieve the same actin crosslinking equilibrium. Dynacortin and cortexillin-I have complementary distributions during cytokinesis; C181 and N173 are distributed between the cytoplasm and cortex We examined the subcellular localization of dynacortin, N173, and C181 in interphase and dividing cells. Each protein was detected in two ways: GFP-fusions were imaged in live interphase cells, and untagged proteins were imaged by immunocytochemistry in fixed dividing cells. Both types of detection gave similar results for the localization of each protein. Only GFP-dynacortin and overexpressed untagged dynacortin showed clear enrichment in the cortex. Cells expressing dynacortin -hairpin, which had >99% reduction in the dynacortin level, had only a low level of background fluorescence when examined by immunocytochemistry. Endogenous dynacortin is distributed between the cytoplasm and cortex in dividing cells. Overexpressed full-length dynacortin showed a clear cortical enrichment in dividing cells. N173 showed some cortical localization by both methods, while C181 appeared to be distributed evenly between the cortex and cytoplasm. To compare the localization of dynacortin to cortexillin-I, we examined the distribution of a GFP-tagged cortexillin-I expressed in a cortexillin - I mutant cell line. Cortexillin-I localized to the contractile ring in agreement with previously published observations. Figure 2 Dynacortin, N173, and C181 are globally distributed during cytokinesis. GFP-dynacortin, GFP-N173, and C181-GFP were examined in live wild-type interphase cells; scale bar, 10 μm. Total dynacortin was imaged by immunocytochemistry of dividing... Dynacortin and cortexillin-I control the morphology of cytokinesis To ascertain dynacortin's and cortexillin-I's role in cytokinesis, we examined the morphology of dividing cells. We monitored the velocity of furrow ingression, whether the cleavage furrow ingressed evenly from both sides and whether the daughter cells were equal in size. To monitor the kinetics of furrow ingression, we measured the time-dependent change of the furrow diameter and the length of the furrow, which ultimately formed a bridge before being severed. Wild-type cells always formed a discrete bridge relatively early in the process, and the bridge length always started smaller than the furrow diameter. As the furrow continued to constrict, at some point the cylindrical bridge length and diameter were equal to each other. The distance when the furrow length and diameter were equal is defined as the crossover distance. Subsequently, the bridge became longer than the diameter as the furrow diameter continued to decrease before being severed. Figure 3 Analysis of the morphology of cytokinesis of wt:pLD1, wt:dynhp, cortI 1151 :pLD1 and cortI 1151 :C181 cells. Diagram depicts the furrow diameter and the furrow length, which were measured to determine the crossover distance, D x. D x is defined... Table 3 Average velocity of furrow ingression and crossover distance for each strain Deletion of cortexillin - I or silencing of dynacortin altered the morphology of cytokinesis. Silencing of dynacortin caused the cells to appear more rounded during division and led to a large decrease in the crossover distance. Deletion of cortexillin - I reduced the efficiency of cytokinesis, leading to a higher rate of failures, unequal cleavage events, and asymmetric ingression of the furrow. We focused on successful divisions so that the morphology and velocities of furrow ingression could be fully assessed. Therefore, our data likely under-represent the unequal cleavage rate and cytokinesis failure rate as compared to other studies of cortexillin - I mutants. The crossover distance and symmetry of the cleavage furrows of cortexillin - I mutants were rescued by cortexillin-I and dynacortin C181. Thus, even though dynacortin C181 and cortexillin-I have different cellular distributions during cytokinesis, both proteins quantitatively rescue the morphology of dividing cortexillin - I mutant cells. Laser-tracking microrheology allows quantitative analysis of cortical mechanics To quantify the effects of dynacortin and cortexillin-I on cortical mechanics, we used laser-tracking microrheology to measure cortical viscoelasticity of wild-type and mutant cell lines. With LTM, the viscoelasticity of materials may be measured across a frequency spectrum by monitoring the motions of a spherical bead immersed in the material. Typically, viscoelastic moduli are measured when all dimensions of the material are nearly infinite relative to the bead. As cell cortices are sheet-like and often much thinner than the particles, we chose to measure the frequency-dependent viscoelasticity, ∣μ * ∣, which is a phenomenological spring constant with viscous damping. Figure 4 Laser-tracking microrheology system for measuring cortical mechanics. The LTM system utilizes a low-power laser that is focused by the objective on a 0.7 μm polystyrene bead resting on the surface of the cell. As thermal energy drives... To determine cortical viscoelasticity, the thermal motions of a bead on a cell were monitored for eleven 1-s intervals and then the viscoelasticity was calculated as the average of these 11 sequential measurements. For windows of time greater than 1 s, the bead's motions were often obscured by the cell's motion. Therefore, we restricted our observations to timescales shorter than 1 s. For physiological relevance, we focused on the longer timescales from 500-ms timescale to 5-ms timescale. To verify that LTM of beads placed on the cell's extracellular surface would report on the underlying cytoskeleton, we compared wild-type cells to wild-type cells treated with latrunculin B, a potent F-actin depolymerizing agent. In all, 85% of the viscoelasticity of wild-type cells was lost upon treatment with latrunculin B. As latrunculin B treatment results in depolymerization of filamentous actin, the 15% of viscoelasticity that remains presumably is due to the lipid bilayer and underlying cytosol. Figure 5 Dynacortin and its domains alter cortical viscoelasticity. Frequency spectra of wild-type cells and wt:pLD1 treated with latrunculin B show that actin filaments are necessary for 85% of cortical viscoelasticity. Histograms of... LTM also permits measurement of the phase angle, a property that reflects the solid-like or liquid-like nature of a material. As the material becomes more solid-like, the phase angle tends towards 0 and as the material becomes more liquid-like, the phase angle tends towards 90°. Pure actin networks and Cos7 lamellae have a characteristic phase angle of 22°. We extracted the phase angle data for each strain to determine how liquid- or solid-like the respective strains are. The average phase angles for all Dictyostelium strains ranged between 15 and 22°, which is similar to the phase angle of pure actin. In fact, none of the strains showed a difference greater than 2° across the full frequency range. In contrast, latrunculin B generally increased the phase angle particularly at higher frequencies, indicating that the cell cortex was partially liquefied by the depolymerization of the actin filaments. Therefore, even though the beads are on the extracellular surface of the plasma membrane, the bead reports on a mechanical environment that is largely dependent on the cortical actin cytoskeleton and that has material properties similar to pure actin. Loss of dynacortin or cortexillin-I reduces cortical viscoelasticity By LTM analysis, removal of dynacortin and/or cortexillin-I had quantitative effects on cortical viscoelasticity. Deletion of cortexillin - I reduced the cortical viscoelasticity by approximately 30% across the full frequency spectrum as compared to the wild-type strain. The distribution of viscoelastic values of dynacortin silenced cells was much more heterogeneous with many more high-end outliers than wild-type parental cells were; therefore, we present histograms of viscoelastic measurements at two frequencies for wild-type and cortexillin - I mutant cells with and without dynacortin. Silencing of dynacortin in wild-type cells resulted in a 50% reduction in the median cortical viscoelasticity. Interestingly, the cortexillin - I background seemed to be more resistant to the loss of dynacortin than the wild-type cells were. For example, silencing of dynacortin in wild-type cells reduced viscoelasticity from 0.28 to 0.14 nN/μm, while in the cortexillin - I background, the numbers remained similar. This resistance might reflect the antagonistic role proposed for these two proteins in promoting cytokinesis. Alternatively, the cortexillin - I mutant cells may have adapted to the absence of cortexillin-I and the same safeguards protect the cell from the loss of dynacortin. Nevertheless, dynacortin and cortexillin-I modulate cortical mechanics and both may help keep the cortex relatively uniform in its mechanical properties. Figure 6 Dynacortin is required for normal cortical viscoelasticity. Silencing of dynacortin reduced the median cortical viscoelasticity and led to greater skewing of the frequency distribution, which is indicative of greater heterogeneity of the viscoelasticity... Overexpressing dynacortin, C181 and N173 reveal additional important cortical mechanical properties We used LTM to examine the effects of C181 and cortexillin-I on the cortexillin - I mutant's cortical viscoelasticity. We found that C181 rescued cortical viscoelasticity to wild-type levels across all frequencies examined, while cortexillin-I actually restored the viscoelasticity to slightly above wild-type levels. The rescue of cortexillin - I mutant's cortical mechanics by cortexillin-I and C181 correlates well with their rescue of cortexillin - I mutant cells' cytokinesis morphology and ability to grow in suspension culture. We also analyzed the cortical mechanics of dynacortin and N173 overexpressing cells. Previously, we showed that dynacortin overexpressers are variable in size, probably due to a defect in the efficiency of cytokinesis rather than a complete loss of cytokinesis. To avoid possible mechanical changes due to size differences rather than differences in dynacortin-mediated actin crosslinking, we restricted our LTM measurements to the sub-population of cells that were similar in size to wild-type cells. Overexpression of dynacortin increased cortical viscoelasticity to levels higher than wild type across the full range of frequencies examined, regardless of the genetic background, wild type or cortexillin - I. By contrast, N173 rescued the cortical viscoelasticity of the cortexillin - I mutant cells only at high frequencies ; at lower frequencies, cortexillin - I cells expressing N173 showed only a small increase in cortical viscoelasticity. N173's behavior of increasing cortical viscoelasticity at higher frequencies is consistent with a crosslinking protein that has faster kinetics. Indeed, our biochemical analysis of N173 has suggested that it crosslinks actin with faster kinetics than either full-length dynacortin or C181 do. Thus, our current data suggest that LTM can discriminate between different crosslinking kinetic properties in vivo. It is notable that N173, C181, and dynacortin have larger relative effects in a cortexillin - I background than they do in a wild-type background. In fact, the cortexillin - I background is necessary for observing the frequency-dependent behavior of N173. However, the actual ∣μ * ∣ values achieved by each respective overexpressed dynacortin protein are similar in both genetic backgrounds. As the expression levels in each background are similar, the biochemical components that generate cellular mechanical properties may be saturable. Discussion In this paper, we present the first characterization of the loss-of-function phenotype of dynacortin, including its role in cytokinesis, characterize dynacortin's actin crosslinking mechanisms, and demonstrate that dynacortin and cortexillin-I control the viscoelastic properties of the cell cortex. We examine several aspects of the morphology of cytokinesis of mutant strains with altered dynacortin and/or cortexillin-I function and introduce a novel metric, D x. This analysis reveals that dynacortin and cortexillin-I specify the dimensions and morphology of the cleavage furrow. Furthermore, from our biochemical analyses of dynacortin and actin interactions in vitro, we demonstrate that the specific molecular interactions quantitatively specify both morphology and mechanics. LTM, a powerful technique for measuring cortical mechanics We used LTM to measure the cortical viscoelasticity of wild-type and cortexillin - I mutant cells expressing dynacortin, N173, C181, or cortexillin-I. Quantitatively, our measurements by LTM agree with measurements from other techniques. Our LTM measurement of wild-type cortical viscoelasticity was 0.3 nN/μm, which is in reasonable agreement with the cortical stretch modulus measured by microcapillary aspiration. Considering that the scale of the deformations from each technique differs by an order of magnitude, the agreement between values from the two techniques is remarkable. In principle, the cortical viscoelasticity measured by LTM and the cortical stretch modulus measured by microcapillary aspiration are similar parameters. However, LTM has the important advantage of generating time-dependent information that reflects the kinetics of actin crosslinking. Across greater than two decades of mechanical frequency, silencing of dynacortin caused a severe reduction in cortical viscoelasticity, while deletion of cortexillin - I caused a significant reduction in cortical viscoelasticity. For cortexillin - I, the reduction we measured with LTM matches the reduction previously reported using nontime-resolved methods. Genetically rescuing cortexillin - I with either cortexillin-I or C181 restored cortical viscoelasticity to wild-type levels. In contrast, overexpressing dynacortin elevated the viscoelasticity of both wild-type and cortexillin - I mutant cells across all frequencies, possibly explaining the dominant cytokinesis defect induced by this construct. From our in vitro studies, we predicted that N173 would have differential effects, depending on the mechanical frequencies, because of its predicted faster binding kinetics. Indeed, N173 increased the viscoelasticity of wild-type and cortexillin - I mutant cells only slightly at a low mechanical frequency but restored the cortical viscoelasticity of cortexillin - I mutant cells to wild-type levels at higher frequencies. Thus, cortical mechanics are controlled biochemically, can be dissected genetically, and can be measured using LTM. Crossover distance as a critical cytokinesis metric The shapes of cytokinesis are very stereotypical and include a final bridge stage in which the bridge, connecting the two daughter cells, is cylindrical in shape. This regularity allows the bridge to be analyzed using means typical of highly quantitative studies of fluid breakup of viscoelastic fluids. The regularity is nicely reflected in the crossover distance, D x, which appears to be a fingerprint for each genetic strain. Previously, we hypothesized that the amount of force required of the contractile ring may be related to the stretch modulus of the cortex; indeed, this relationship accurately predicts the myosin-II amounts sent to the contractile ring. In this working hypothesis, the size of the vectors reflects this balance. In our working model, we propose that D x might reflect the magnitude of the restoring vector that counteracts the pulling force that the contractile ring exerts on the cell's cortex. We speculate that D x is a balancing point where the forces of the contractile ring balance the largely elastic properties of the rest of the cortex. Higher values of viscoelasticity mean that the cortex deforms less in response to a force. Hence, the contractile ring does not constrict as much by the time D x is reached. In contrast, if cells are softer, then the contractile ring advances further yielding a smaller D x. After the balancing point defined by D x, cells appear to enter a new phase where furrow thinning follows a different kinetic behavior. Figure 7 A hypothesis for how cortical mechanics might specify the shapes of cytokinesis. The morphology is schematized, and the arrows represent the restoring vectors that are hypothesized to counteract the contractile force. To summarize the data presented in... To summarize the data from this paper into a framework, we present a plot of the measured D x and ∣μ * ∣ values, which were correlated. Each of the ‘wild-type-like' strains has a larger D x and ∣μ * ∣ than the loss-of-function cortexillin - I or dynacortin hairpin mutants. Cells overexpressing dynacortin have greater viscoelasticity. The viscoelasticity increase might be responsible for the dominant cytokinesis defect observed in these cells by making it more difficult for the contractile ring to contract. Due to the low frequency of division events in the dynacortin overexpressing strains, D x has not yet been quantified. Interestingly, the cortI 1151 :cort cells' ∣μ * ∣ versus D x point falls somewhat off of the line, possibly as cortexillin-I enriches in the cleavage furrow cortex but is not excluded from the global cortex. Further, expression of cortexillin-I in a cortexillin - I mutant elevates cortical viscoelasticity to above wild-type levels probably because expression from an episomal plasmid is not as well controlled as the endogenous locus. Thus, if cortexillin-I specifically increases the viscoelasticity of the cleavage furrow cortex to above wild-type levels, the furrow cortex may stretch less as it constricts, resulting in a slightly smaller D x. The interpretation of the correlation in Figure 7 currently remains a hypothesis, as viscoelastic measurements used interphase, rather than mitotic, cells. Currently, technical issues prevent us from measuring viscoelasticity of mitotic cells using LTM. Specifically, to get the beads to adhere to the cell surface, the cells must be plated in starvation buffer. This condition significantly reduces the frequency of cytokinesis events. In other work, we have quantified the dynamics of cleavage furrow ingression of wild-type, myosin - II, RacE, dynacortin, and cortexillin - I mutant strains. By comparing the kinetics of furrow thinning to fluid mechanical models, we determined the function of each protein during cytokinesis. Further, from the cytokinesis dynamics analysis, we calculated cortical stretch modulus values that closely match the viscoelasticity values measured by LTM. Ultimately, the mitotic values for viscoelasticity may prove to be related to interphase values as the global cortex of dividing mammalian cells became uniformly four-fold more stiff than interphase levels. In the AFM study, the equatorial region continued to rise in stiffness beyond this four-fold increase, perhaps due to the activity of proteins providing a similar function as cortexillin-I does in Dictyostelium. If Dictyostelium cells are similar to mammalian cells, the correlation in Figure 7 may simply shift up to account for the different cell cycle stage. C181 compensation for cortexillin-I Previously, we showed that dynacortin C181 rescued the growth rate and gross cytokinesis defect of cortexillin - I. Here, we demonstrate that C181 rescues the cleavage furrow morphology, including shape and dimensions, and the interphase cortical viscoelasticity of cortexillin - I mutant cells. With the mechanical and biochemical data in hand, three mechanisms might explain how C181 compensates for cortexillin-I. As cortexillin-I and myosin-II are not exclusively concentrated in the contractile ring, both proteins may contribute to global mechanical properties as well as equatorial contractility. Dynacortin C181 might rescue cortexillin-I's role in global viscoelasticity, indicating a level of functional redundancy. Second, C181 may have an indirect effect on the contractile ring by stiffening the global cortex, thereby refocusing the equatorial contractility of cortexillin - I mutant cells. As C181 is reduced in the furrow region, the cleavage furrow cortex and cytoplasm may have lower viscoelasticity so that this region is more deformable, allowing the cortexillin - I mutant contractile ring to constrict through a softer region of the cell. A similar phenomenon has been observed in mammalian cells when disruption of the equatorial cytoskeleton by pharmacological inhibition accelerated the rate of cleavage furrow ingression. In addition, a third mechanism is suggested from the combination of our LTM, biochemical, and dynamics data. In this hypothesis, global actin crosslinking mediated by dynacortin and equatorial actin crosslinking mediated by cortexillin-I have distinct roles in governing the fluid dynamics of furrow ingression. Cortical mechanics and dynamics of furrow ingression Our mechanical measurements may also help explain the kinetics of shape changes. Quantitatively, the stretch modulus and cytoplasmic viscosity should combine to regulate the speed of cleavage furrow shape changes for a given force. As an initial model, the ratio of cortical stretch modulus to viscosity should determine the velocity of shape changes. Using 0.3 nN/μm or 1.5 nN/μm for S c and the largest measured cytoplasmic viscosity, velocities in the 1–2 μm/s range are predicted. For furrow ingression, these velocities are 50-fold faster than observed for wild-type cells. However, bridge retraction velocities are on the 1–2 μm/s range and agree with these predictions. Thus, the dynamics of bridge retraction can be described in terms of fluid mechanical properties. In contrast, we have identified Dictyostelium mutants where cleavage furrow ingression achieves velocities predicted from the pure fluid mechanical considerations. As it is the energy cost for deforming the cell, the cortical stretch modulus has two opposing roles that are separated temporally during cytokinesis. As the mother cell and two daughter cells are nearly spherical, these shapes may be thought of as equilibrium states. As the mother cell begins to elongate and form the furrow, it reaches a transition state that is an energy barrier between two equilibrium states. Therefore, the larger the stretch modulus, the larger the energy barrier. In contrast, once the cell overcomes the energy barrier, a larger stretch modulus will help drive the daughter cells to complete division to minimize their surface area. Increasing the cortical stretch modulus by overexpressing dynacortin should make the initial deformation more difficult, perhaps generating a cytokinesis defect. Softer cells such as the dynacortin mutants would still progress through cytokinesis. However, dynacortin mutants do have altered cytokinesis morphology. Cortexillin-I mutants complete cytokinesis relatively efficiently but also suffer from morphological defects. As the stretch modulus plays a dual role in cell shape changes, it is possible that there may be a window of acceptable viscoelasticity. The cell requires large enough viscoelasticity to maintain normal kinetic and shape control, but not so much that the contractile apparatus cannot overcome the energy barrier. Historical perspective Researchers have been interested in cytokinesis since the 19th century. Certainly, it has been long appreciated that cytokinesis is a mechanical process that involves force generation and mechanical changes of the equatorial and global cortices. Biophysical studies of large echinoderm eggs revealed that the cleavage furrow cortex became more stiff than the global cortex and that the cleavage furrow cortex generated nN-scale forces. These previous studies are consistent with our observations in Dictyostelium that global and equatorial actin crosslinking specify the dimensions of the cleavage furrow. Thus, this paper provides essential groundwork for developing a quantitative molecular and mechanical understanding of cytokinesis. Ultimately, by combining highly quantitative approaches with biochemistry and interaction genetics in a single cell type, we will dissect the complexity and robustness of cytokinesis, a process that serves as an elegant model cell shape change. Materials and methods Constructs and strains Dynacortin, N173 and C181 were expressed using pLD1A15SN. We used the full-length dynacortin and C181 constructs, which were described previously. pLD1A15SN:N173 was constructed using PCR with the addition of Sal I and Not I sites at the ends flanking the initiator ATG and a stop codon, respectively. CortI 2A19 was described previously. GFP-N173, C181-GFP, and GFP-cortexillin-I were constructed using our GFP-tagging cassette construct and the cortexillin - I cDNA was derived from cortI 2A19 cDNA, as previously described. pLD1A15SN:dynhp was engineered by first subcloning into pLD1A15SN a PCR product of the full-length dynacortin cDNA in which a Sal I site had been introduced at the 3′ end and a Not I site had been introduced at the 5′ end. Then, a PCR product that included the C181 region with 5′ Not I and 3′ Mlu I sites was subcloned. The dynacortin hairpin construct reduced the expression of dynacortin to undetectable levels in wild-type and cortI 1151 strains. Wild-type and cortI 1151 cells have been described previously. For quantification of growth rates, each strain was grown in suspension culture, and cell number was measured using a hemacytometer as described. For quantification of the protein amounts in each strain, a dilution series of lysates and purified protein were prepared and analyzed by Western immunoblot analysis using antidynacortin antibodies as described previously. Each protein was compared to known amounts of the matching purified recombinant protein. Signal from the immunoblot was generated using Amersham's ECL reagent and collected and quantified using a BioRad Versadoc imaging system. Immunocytochemistry To assess the localization of endogenous dynacortin, overexpressed dynacortin, N173, and C181, mid-log phase cells were fixed and stained as described previously, except that the fixation buffer used was 4% paraformaldehyde, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100. Indirect detection was achieved using fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibodies. Cells were imaged using a Zeiss Axiovert 135 microscope with a 40X oil immersion objective and a 1.6X optivar. Images were collected using IPLab software package and processed using Adobe Photoshop. Live cell imaging To image the GFP fusion proteins, log phase cells were plated in imaging chambers. After attachment, the media were replaced with MES starvation buffer. Cells were imaged using a 40X oil objective and a 1.6X optivar on a Zeiss Axiovert microscope. Images were collected using IPLab software. To image cells undergoing cytokinesis, log phase cells were plated in imaging chambers in enriched HL-5 media. Imaging was performed with the same objective and optivar setting as for GFP-fusion proteins. Rather than the suggested phase ring, the phase 2 ring was used to give higher contrast while avoiding the ‘phase halo' that comes from the unmatched refractive index of the media. The phase halo subsequently obscures some of the fine details of the furrow and bridge as it proceeds. Images were collected every 2 s. Green, UV, and IR filters were added to eliminate phototoxicity and heating from the Köhler illumination. Laser-tracking microrheology To determine the viscoelasticity of cell cortices, we used laser-tracking microrheology. The LTM system has been described in detail elsewhere. Briefly, the mechanical properties of a material are inferred from the Brownian motions of embedded probe particles. Motions of probe particles are detected using a low-powered laser focused on the particle and a quadrant photodiode detector to detect off-axis motions of the forward-scattered light. To develop LTM for the study of cortical mechanics of D. discoideum cells, we monitored the motion of beads attached to the extracellular surface of the cell cortex. D. discoideum mutant strains were removed from the incubator during log-phase growth when 40–80% confluent, washed twice with 1 ml of 1 × PB, and resuspended at a final concentration of 1 × 10 6 cells/ml. About 20 μl of washed cells were transferred to double-stick tape-glass slide flow cell, and 0.70-μm-diameter carboxylated polystyrene beads were then added. For latrunculin B-treated cells, 7.5-μM latrunculin B was added to the cells along with the polystyrene beads. As particles are not fully embedded in a large cytoskeletal network, the original equations for extracting moduli from particle motions are no longer appropriate. Although models exist for extracting moduli of motions of spheres half-embedded in sheet-like materials, key parameters cannot be measured in our system. Rather than making ad hoc geometric assumptions, we chose to measure the viscoelasticity, μ *, as a combination of a phenomenological spring =μ′) and dashpot =μ″), with both elements having frequency-dependent values. Hence, μ * = ω=1/τ, which is equivalent to μ * =6π aG * where a is the particle radius, thus removing any geometry-dependent assumptions. The phase angle, δ), relates the liquid- to solid-like properties of the material. In all LTM statistics, each tracking event represents one bead on a unique cell. Supplementary Material Supplementary Material Click here to view. 