 The molecular mechanisms by which receptors regulate the Ras Binding Domains of the PIP 3 -generating, class I PI3Ks remain poorly understood, despite their importance in a range of biological settings, including tumorigenesis, activation of neutrophils by pro-inflammatory mediators, chemotaxis of Dictyostelium and cell growth in Drosophila. We provide evidence that G protein-coupled receptors can stimulate PLCβ2/β3 and diacylglycerol-dependent activation of the RasGEF, RasGRP4 in neutrophils. The genetic loss of RasGRP4 phenocopies knock-in of a Ras-insensitive version of PI3Kγ in its effects on PI3Kγ-dependent PIP 3 accumulation, PKB activation, chemokinesis and reactive oxygen species formation. These results establish a new mechanism by which GPCRs can stimulate Ras, and the broadly important principle that PLCs can control activation of class I PI3Ks. Keywords: neutrophil, PI3K, PLCβ, Ras, RasGRP4 Introduction G protein-coupled receptors control a variety of neutrophil responses, including chemotaxis and reactive oxygen species formation, which are important in health and disease. The intracellular signals coordinating these responses are complex, operate over time scales spanning seconds to hours, are GPCR and context dependent and far from understood. There are, however, a relatively limited number of primary intracellular signals that encode the spatiotemporal characteristics of GPCR and G-protein activation that are of known physiological importance. These include class I PI3Ks, PLCβs and small GTPases such as Rac1 and 2, cdc42, RhoA and Rap1 and 2. In this work, we have focused on mechanisms controlling activation of PI3Kγ. PI3Kγ is a key effector in a number of myeloid-derived cells that can be activated directly by Gβγ subunits. PI3Kγ synthesizes the signalling lipid PIP 3 and hence can drive activation of PIP 3 -binding proteins, such as PKB and several specific regulators of small GTPases. It comprising a regulatory and a catalytic subunits. Full activation by Gβγs depends on p101. The p110γ subunit contains a Ras Binding Domain capable of binding and conveying activation by Ras-family GTPases. The RBD is clearly essential for activation of PI3Kγ by GPCRs. It is unclear, however, whether Ras proteins regulate the RBD of PI3Kγ in vivo in the context of studies indicating that other small GTPases can control class I PI3Ks. Current thinking about small GTPases, such as Ras, suggests that they are molecular switches that exist in either a GTP-bound, signalling-competent state or a GDP-bound, basal state. GTP-, but not GDP-, bound GTPases can activate specific proteins with domains, for example, CRIB or RBD, evolved to bind them. Guanine nucleotide Exchange Factors act to stimulate GTP loading. GTPase Activating Proteins act to return the GTPases to their GDP-bound state. Hence, Ras can in principle be activated by activation or inhibition of relevant GEFs and/or GAPs. Ras-family GTPases, in neutrophils K- and N-Ras, are activated rapidly and substantially following engagement of GPCRs. This signal is important for activation of the protein kinase, Raf, and hence the canonical p42/p44-MAPK pathway and also has the potential to activate PI3Kγ and hence a range of PIP 3 -regulated responses. Despite the central role of Ras proteins in neutrophils the mechanism by which they are activated is entirely unknown. Further, there is no clear picture of how Ras can be activated by GPCRs in other cell types that could be assumed to apply in neutrophils. PLCβ2 and PLCβ3 are expressed in neutrophils and can be activated by a range of GPCRs, via both Gβγ and Gαq subunits, to hydrolyse PIP 2 and drive accumulation of its products, diacylglycerol and InsP 3. DAG can activate DAG/phorbol ester-binding, C1 domain-containing effectors, such as the conventional or novel PKCs, and InsP 3 activates intracellular Ca 2+ mobilization, both of which are important regulators of ROS formation and cell migration. Although PI3Kγ and PLCβ2/β3 use a common substrate lipid it is thought they represent independent, master regulators of ‘parallel’, GPCR-sensitive, signalling cassettes in neutrophils. In summary, it is clear that the RBD of PI3Kγ is crucial for GPCR-stimulated accumulation of PIP 3, despite this and the demonstrated importance of the RBDs of other class I PI3Ks in many other broadly important biological settings such as chemotaxis in Dictyostelium, control of cell size in Drosophila and tumorigenesis, the signalling networks controlling these domains and whether Ras-, or another family of, GTPases, regulate the RBDs in vivo are unclear. Furthermore, the molecular mechanisms by which GPCRs activate Ras, in both neutrophils and more broadly, are poorly defined. We have addressed these issues by attempting to define how GPCRs control Ras and the RBD of PI3Kγ in neutrophils. Results A targeted shRNAi screen to identify a RasGEF in a human neutrophil-like cell line required for fMLP-stimulated activation of Ras We addressed the nature of the GPCR-sensitive mechanism driving activation of Ras in neutrophils. On the basis of the rapid response, the very low basal levels of Ras-GTP and precedent, we hypothesized that a relevant RasGEF would be receptor sensitive. We screened human neutrophils for expression of all of the potential RasGEFs in the human genome. Nine candidates could be detected by reverse transcriptase PCR in mRNA from either differentiated PLB-985 cells or human peripheral blood-derived neutrophils. We positively selected PLB-985 cells stably expressing a single shRNAi directed against candidate RasGEFs or a control target. fMLP-stimulated activation of Ras was then assessed by a Raf-RBD ‘pull-down assay’ in differentiated cells. This revealed that shRNAi suppression of RasGRP4 but not any of the other candidate RasGEFs reduced activation of Ras by fMLP. Further experiments showed that suppression of RasGRP4 also reduced fMLP-stimulated PIP 3 accumulation, indicating that the GTP-Ras which we were assaying was relevant to activation of PI3Kγ. Figure 1 An shRNAi screen for suppressors of fMLP-stimulated Ras activation in PLB-985 cells. Nine potential RasGEFs were detected in human neutrophils or differentiated PLB-985 cells. A panel of PLB-985 cell lines was established expressing, shRNAi directed against... RasGRP4 message has a restricted distribution within the myeloid compartment and although expressed strongly in mast cell lineages, it is also detectable in monocytes and granulocytes. RasGRP4 has RasGEF activity, can regulate the MAPK pathway and transcriptional targets in mast cells. Aberrant expression of RasGRP4 may be associated with disease. Recent reports have suggested that FcεRI receptor-dependent, and PMA-induced, responses in mouse mast cells and inflammatory reactions in, some but not all, mouse models of inflammation are reduced in the genetic absence of RasGRP4. However, the position of RasGRP4 in the fabric of intracellular signalling and its physiological roles in neutrophils are unclear. Disruption of the mouse RasGRP4 gene To validate the results of the screen and address the physiological role of RasGRP4 and Ras activation in mouse neutrophils, we disrupted the mouse RasGRP4 gene using standard homologous targeting strategies. Two independent, correctly targetted ES clones were used to derive mouse strains carrying the targeted RasGRP4 allele in their germline. RasGRP4 +/+ and RasGRP4 kof/kof mice were derived from each strain and were used in the experiments described below. We observed no significant differences between the two independent RasGRP4 kof/kof strains. RasGRP4 kof/kof mice were; born at expected Mendelian ratios, of normal weight and appearance, fertile and had normal blood cell counts. These results suggested that haematopoiesis was unperturbed by loss of RasGRP4 expression. Isolated, bone marrow-derived neutrophils from RasGRP4 kof/kof mice appeared to be fully responsive in a number of assays, suggesting that they were fully differentiated and broadly functional. We crossed RasGRP4 kof/kof mice with FlpE- and Cre-expressing strains sequentially to derive a strain, RasGRP4 −/−, containing minimal heterologous DNA and lacking the cDNA for exons 5 and 6, encoding the catalytic domain, of RasGRP4. RasGRP4 −/− mice were viable and fertile and their neutrophils responded indistinguishably to those from RasGRP4 kof/kof mice in specific experiments. RasGRP4 is required for fMLP-stimulated activation of Ras and PI3K γ pathways fMLP failed to stimulate significant activation of Ras in neutrophils from RasGRP4 kof/kof mice. The simplest explanation of this result is that RasGRP4 has a unique role as an fMLP-sensitive RasGEF in both mouse and human neutrophils. Figure 2 fMLP-stimulated activation of Ras, p42/p44 MAPKs, PKB and PIP 3 accumulation is reduced in RasGRP4 kof/kof mouse neutrophils. Neutrophils were prepared from either RasGRP4 kof/kof or RasGRP4 +/+ mice and their responses to fMLP in... Next, we addressed whether the reduction in Ras activation in RasGRP4 kof/kof neutrophils also reduced activation of predicted Ras effector pathways. We found fMLP-stimulated phosphorylation of p42/p44 MAPKs, PIP 3 accumulation and phosphorylation of PKB were severely reduced in RasGRP4 kof/kof neutrophils. This indicates that the reduction in fMLP-stimulated Ras activation in neutrophils lacking RasGRP4 is sufficient to suppress stimulation of the p42/p44-MAPK and PI3Kγ/PKB pathways. Role of RasGRP4 in regulation of Rac and Rap GTPases in neutrophils Rac GTPases are central regulators of neutrophil responsiveness and can be rapidly activated by GPCRs via the RacGEFs DOCK2 and PRex-1. PIP 3 is thought to regulate the intracellular distribution of both RacGEFs but the activity of only PRex-1. We measured activation of Rac1 and 2 by fMLP using a PAK-CRIB pull-down assay and found that in RasGRP4 kof/kof neutrophils fMLP-induced activation of Rac1 and 2 was not significantly changed after brief stimulation, but slightly reduced after longer times of stimulation. The timescale over which the absence of RasGRP4 has an effect on Rac activation is in-keeping with the relatively slow appearance of a phenotype in the activation of another PIP 3 effector, PKB and the multifactorial regulation of Rac activity in these cells. This suggests that rapid activation of Rac by fMLP is largely unchanged by the absence of RasGRP4 and hence that this phenotype is not a result of a broad reduction in G-protein signalling and that the weak reduction in Rac activation at later times probably results from reduced PIP 3 -dependent activation of RacGEFs. Figure 3 fMLP-stimulated activation of Rap1 and Rac1 and 2 in RasGRP4 kof/kof mouse neutrophils. Bone marrow-derived neutrophils were prepared from either RasGRP kof/kof or RasGRP +/+ mice and assayed for their ability to support fMLP-stimulated activation of Rap1... In the context of the similarities between Ras and Rap GTPases and the observation that RasGRP2 is a physiological RapGEF, we assayed fMLP-stimulated activation of Rap1 using RalGDS-RBD and found it to be reduced in RasGRP4 kof/kof compared with RasGRP4 +/+ neutrophils. This result was unexpected in the context of work that indicated RasGRP4 is a RasGEF but not a RapGEF when transfected into cells and genetic evidence that suggested RasGRP2 is required for GPCR-stimulated Rap1 activation in mouse neutrophils. The simplest explanation of this result is that RasGRP4 can be both a Ras and Rap1GEF although it remains possible that the reduction in GTP-bound Rap1 is an indirect result of inhibition of Ras activation. The role of RasGRP4 in regulation of ROS formation and neutrophil migration We sought to establish the consequences of loss of RasGRP4 on the functional responses of neutrophils. We measured ROS formation in response to the GPCR ligands C5a, LTB4, fMLP and the phorbol ester, PMA, that bypasses cell surface receptors and activates a subset of C1 domain-containing proteins, such as PKCs and RasGRPs, directly. The amount of ROS produced in response to all three GPCR ligands was reduced substantially in neutrophils from both RasGRP4 kof/kof and RasGRP4 −/−, compared with RasGRP4 +/+, mice, across all times of stimulation and doses of agonist. In contrast, PMA-stimulated ROS formation was increased slightly in RasGRP4 kof/kof and RasGRP4 −/− compared with RasGRP4 +/+ mouse neutrophils. Figure 4 ROS responses displayed by neutrophils from RasGRP4 kof/kof and RasGRP4 −/− mice. Neutrophils were prepared from either RasGRP4 kof/kok or RasGRP4 +/+ mice and stimulated with different concentrations of fMLP,... These results are entirely consistent with past work showing that either loss of PI3Kγ or knock-in of a Ras-insensitive mutant PI3Kγ substantially reduced fMLP-stimulated ROS formation and hence that RasGRP4 and Ras regulate ROS formation via the RBD of PI3Kγ. These results also suggest that PMA-stimulated ROS formation is not dependent on activation of Ras and its downstream targets and is presumably mediated entirely by conventional and/or novel PKC species. In addition, the results suggest that the reduction in GPCR-mediated ROS formation in both the RasGRP4 kof/kof and RasGRP4 −/− neutrophils is extremely likely a result of loss of RasGRP4 specifically. We also assayed chemotaxis of isolated mouse neutrophils in gradients of fMLP in an EZTaxiscan chamber. These experiments revealed that RasGRP4 kof/kof neutrophils moved in the fMLP gradients with the same migratory index, mean velocity when moving and mean total accumulated distance on both glass and fibrinogen-coated glass as RasGRP4 +/+ neutrophils. However, the proportion of RasGRP4 kof/kof neutrophils that moved in response to fMLP on both glass and fibrinogen-coated glass was lower than for RasGRP4 +/+ neutrophils, which is remarkably similar to the phenotype of PI3Kγ-deficient cells. Surprisingly, however, when we tested the ability of neutrophils to migrate into an aseptically inflamed peritoneum, there was no difference between RasGRP4 kof/kof and RasGRP4 +/+ mice, despite the fact that a number of mouse models with loss of PI3Kγ function show reduced responses in these assays. We consider this is in part a result of the fact that PI3Kγ has roles in endothelial cells, which do not express RasGRP4, that support extravasation of neutrophils and in part due to an undefined, additional, inhibitory, PI3Kγ-independent role for RasGRP4 in migration of neutrophils into the peritoneum. Figure 5 Neutrophil migration in vitro and in vivo. RasGRP4 kof/kof and RasGRP4 +/+ mice were injected intraperitoneally with thioglycollate. After 3.5 h, the neutrophils that had migrated into the peritoneum were quantified. The data are presented as... The molecular mechanism regulating activation of RasGRP4 We sought to define the molecular mechanism by which fMLP activates RasGRP4. Other members of the RasGRP4 family are either argued to be activated by increased free cytosolic Ca 2+ acting via the tandem EF-hand domain in the case of RasGRP2 or via coincident PKC-mediated phosphorylation of T133/T184 and binding of DAG to the C1 domain in the case of RasGRP1/3. RasGRP4 possesses a similar overall topology to its other family members but is very unlikely to be regulated by Ca 2+ as its tandem EF hand-like domain lacks key residues known to be required for binding of Ca 2+. Furthermore, RasGRP4 lacks the PKC sites equivalent to those required for activation of RasGRP1/3. Interestingly, the mouse genome-sequencing project has predicted the existence of two splice variants of RasGRP4, differing on the basis of a 5aa insert into a loop forming part of the lipid-binding pocket of the C1 domain. The sequence of the shorter variant and human RasGRP4 fits well with a subfamily of C1 domains known to bind phorbol esters and DAGs, β2-chimaerin, RasGRP1 and 3) and have been demonstrated to bind these molecules both in vitro and in transfected cells ; the longer variant disrupts the binding motif and has been shown unable to bind lipid species. We investigated public mRNA-seq data sets from mouse neutrophils for raw sequence information spanning the key region of the potential 15 bp insert and found three independent sequence reads that spanned the splice boundary in a manner consistent with the shorter, and not the longer, variant. We concluded that the shorter, DAG-binding, variant of RasGRP4 is expressed in mouse neutrophils and that DAG could be a signal controlling RasGRP4. DAG metabolism is complex, with a number of potential routes of synthesis and degradation spread across several membrane compartments. Both PLD activity, via hydrolysis of PtdCho and production and dephosphorylation of PtdOH, and PLC activity, via hydrolysis of PIP 2, can mediate receptor-stimulated increases in DAG. It is possible to preferentially monitor the pool of DAG produced by PLCs and thought to regulate signalling effectors like PKCs, by specifically measuring the levels of the molecular species of DAG that are enriched in PIP 2, particularly stearoyl/arachidonoyl--DAG. Previously, this has been achieved by derivatization and HPLC or by lipidomic/mass spectrometry-based methods, but in both cases demands significant input material. We have developed a method to quantify stearoyl/arachidonoyl-DAG in small numbers of neutrophils based on use of an internal spike of deuterated, D6-stearoyl/arachidonoyl-DAG to trace recovery of the endogenous lipid through a neutral lipid extraction, in-line chromatography on a C4 column and analysis by electrospray mass spectrometry using Multiple Reaction Monitoring. This assay revealed that fMLP stimulated a two-fold increase in stearoyl/arachidonoyl-DAG in mouse neutrophils. Figure 6 Genetic blockade of PLCβ2/β3 signalling inhibits fMLP activation of Ras, p42/p44 MAPK, PKB and PIP 3 accumulation. Neutrophils were prepared from either PLCβ2 −/− × PLCβ3 −/− or PLCβ2... GPCR-stimulated increases in InsP 3, cytosolic-free Ca 2+ and PKC activation are abolished in PLCβ2 −/− × PLCβ3 −/− mouse neutrophils. We found fMLP-stimulated accumulation of stearoyl/arachidonoyl-DAG was also abolished in PLCβ2 −/− × PLCβ3 −/− neutrophils. This result indicates that PLCβ2/β3 are responsible for fMLP-stimulated DAG formation in mouse neutrophils. To test the hypothesis that RasGRP4 is activated by DAG generated by PLCβ2/β3, we measured fMLP-elicited activation of Ras in PLCβ2 −/− × PLCβ3 −/− neutrophils and found it much reduced compared with PLCβ2 +/+ × PLCβ3 +/+ neutrophils. Furthermore, acute treatment with the partially selective PLC inhibitor U73122, but not the inactive analogue } U73343, completely inhibited fMLP-stimulated activation of Ras in wild-type mouse neutrophils. A PLD1/2-selective inhibitor, VU0155056, only inhibited the response weakly. Together, these results indicate that PLCβ2/β3-generated DAG can activate RasGRP4. We tested that idea that PLCβ2/β3 are required for full activation of MAPK and PIP 3 signalling in fMLP-stimulated neutrophils. We found that PIP 3 accumulation and phosphorylation of both PKB and p42/p44 MAPKs were substantially reduced in fMLP-stimulated PLCβ2 −/− × PLCβ3 −/− mouse neutrophils compared with their wild-type controls. Furthermore, PIP 3 and PKB phosphorylation were also inhibited by U73122. These results suggest that PLCβ2/β3 powerfully regulate fMLP-stimulated PI3Kγ and Raf/p42/p44 MAPK signalling. We tested whether loss of RasGRP4 had an unexpected impact on other DAG effectors such as PKCs. We measured fMLP-stimulated, PKCδ-dependent phosphorylation of T154 in p40 PHOX. It was not significantly reduced in RasGRP4 kof/kof compared with RasGRP4 +/+ mouse neutrophils and hence concluded activation of other DAG effectors was normal in the absence of RasGRP4. The simplest explanation for this body of results is that following GPCR activation of neutrophils PLCβ2/β3-generated DAG regulates RasGRP4 and hence activation of Ras and the PI3Kγ and Raf/MAPK pathways. There are some details in our results that suggest this is not the complete story. The extent of the inhibition of PI3Kγ by blockade of PLCβ appears greater than that inflicted by removing RasGRP4, or knocking-in a Ras-insensitive version of PI3Kγ, suggesting that although the major route by which PLCβs control this cassette is through RasGRP4 and Ras there may be an additional route by which PLCs modulate this pathway. Discussion The above results indicate that RasGRP4 is the major fMLP-sensitive RasGEF in mouse and human neutrophils and that it is regulated by PLCβ2/β3-derived DAG. They also indicate that Ras is the direct, dynamic regulator of the RBD domain of PI3Kγ in vivo and, therefore, that PLCβ signals shape class I PI3K responses in these cells. Many receptors are capable of simultaneously activating PLCs and class I PI3Ks and in some cells activation of PLCγs can depend on class I PI3K signalling. This is the first clear demonstration, however, that PLCs can regulate PI3Ks. Figure 7 A schematic mapping RasGRP4 as an effector of PLCβ-derived DAG and a regulator of PI3Kγ upstream of ROS formation. There is strong biochemical and genetic evidence indicating that these connections are important in neutrophil function,... Previous work has suggested that the RBDs of PI3Ks are an important regulatory input but that they are likely to work in synergy with other signals, for example, with Gβγ subunits in the case of PI3Kγ. This is consistent with the inability of phorbol esters to directly stimulate PIP 3 accumulation or PKB activation in neutrophils or neutrophil-like cells, although they can drive p42/p44-MAPK activation, which is presumably a function of the fact that Ras activation is sufficient for Raf, but not PI3Kγ, activation in vivo. Given the restricted distribution of RasGRP4 message it is unlikely that RasGRP4 is a universal link between GPCRs and Ras activation, however, given the history of molecules that had been declared not to be expressed in tissues in which they were subsequently found to have important roles by genetic deletion, this is not yet completely clear. Superficially, it would seem that both RasGRP1 and 3 could be activated by GPCR receptors via PLC-generated DAG and associated PKC activity. However, it seems that although they are expressed in mouse neutrophils they do not fulfill this role. This apparent segregation in function could be a consequence of either the relatively weak expression of RasGRP3 in these cells or an unappreciated need for the enzymes to be associated with a phosphotyrosine-based signalling complex to organize efficient PKC-mediated phosphorylation. Similarly, there is strong evidence that RasGRPs can be activated by Ca 2+ signals in brain; however, it is not clear whether they can respond to a pure GPCR stimulus. Our data also suggest that RasGRP4 can act as a GPCR-sensitive, DAG-regulated Rap1GEF. As RasGRP2 is a GPCR-sensitive, Ca 2+ -regulated Rap1GEF, this indicates that Rap1 activity is independently controlled via different signals, with contrasting spatiotemporal properties, that both emerge from activation of PLCβs. Perhaps, this is related to the range of GPCR-driven cell responses, spanning from sub-second to many minutes, with which Rap GTPases are associated in myeloid cells. Given the above results, and the phenotypes of both p110γ −/− and Ras-insensitive p110γ-knock-in mice, we had expected that migration of neutrophils into an inflamed peritoneum would be reduced in RasGRP4 kof/kof compared with RasGRP4 +/+ mice. Hence, we were surprised to find migration was unchanged. We note, however, that in the absence of PLCβ2/β3 neutrophil migration to sites of inflammation in vivo is, for unexplained reasons, increased. We would argue that this presumably inhibitory role for endogenous PLCβ2/β3 in part involves RasGRP4 and this, combined with the fact neutrophil migration into the peritoneum depends on p110γ in endothelial cells that do not express RasGRP4, may underlie the unexpected contrast in the phenotypic consequences of loss of PI3Kγ versus RasGRP4 in this regard. A recent study suggested, in contrast to this manuscript, that PLCβ2/β3 and PI3Kγ operate on ‘parallel’ and not ‘serial’ signalling pathways downstream of GPCRs in mouse neutrophils. The only result in that study which appears inconsistent with our work is that fMLP-stimulated activation of PKB was not reduced in the absence of PLCβ2/β3, where we find a 60% reduction. We have no explanation for this difference as we imported both the PLCβ2 −/− × PLCβ3 −/− mice and their controls from the animal facility that supported the study, to Babraham for these experiments. Previous work has shown that GPCR-mediated activation of Ras in neutrophils is conveyed by pertussis toxin-sensitive G proteins. This result is in-keeping with the idea that PLCβ2/β3, like PI3Kγ, are activated by relatively large amounts of Gβγ subunits released from these abundant G-protein species. PLCβ2/β3 can also be regulated directly by Rac GTPases and GTP-bound Gαq-family subunits. It is unclear to what extent these different mechanisms contribute to how, where and when PLCβ2/β3, Ca 2+ and DAG signals are delivered in vivo and may read-through to downstream targets such as PI3Kγ. Previous work has indicated that the RBD of PI3Kγ, but not Gβγs/p101, are required for GPCR regulation of ROS formation and yet other PI3Kγ-dependent neutrophil responses were similarly dependent on both routes of activation. It was concluded that this was likely based upon the principle that Ras regulation directed the synthesis of a spatially discrete pool of PIP 3 capable of controlling specific responses, for example, ROS formation. This work is consistent with that and supports the idea that the PLCβ/DAG/RasGRP4/Ras pathway provides an input to PI3Kγ that determines both the intensity and location, perhaps at Ras-centric nano-clusters, of its signals. In conclusion, our results suggest that RasGRP4 is a central hub in GPCR-triggered pro-inflammatory pathways in both human and mouse neutrophils. They also reveal an unappreciated role for PLCs and Ras in the regulation of class I PI3Ks that could have wide spread implications, given that other RasGEFs in the RasGRP family can be activated by receptor tyrosine kinases and PLCγ in parallel with PI3Ks α, β and δ. Materials and methods Cell lines, antibodies and reagents All materials used were of the lowest endotoxin level available and were purchased from Sigma unless stated otherwise. The polyclonal antibody against hRasGRP4 was raised in rabbit against 14-mer peptide found in the N-terminal end of the protein and affinity purified. The other antibodies used for western blots were commercially available: anti-pan-Ras ; anti-P-PKB-S473 ; anti-Rap1 ; anti-βactin ; anti-P-p42/44 MAPK, anti-Rac1, anti-Rac-2, anti-phospho-p40phox and anti-βcop. The PLD1/2 inhibitor VU0155056 was synthesized at BI by JC and tested extensively in our laboratory. Deuterated and un-deuterated 18:0/20:4-DAG were made by JC/IN by modification of a published procedure. fMLP, PMA and C5a were from Sigma. Leukotriene B4 was from Enzo Life Sciences. PLB-985 cells were cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C in 5% CO 2 in a humidified chamber. Prior to any cell assay, the PLB-985 were differentiated during 6–8 days in medium containing 0.5% N, N -dimethylfomamide without antibiotics. HEK 293FT were cultured in DMEM, complemented with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C in 5% CO 2 in a humidified chamber. Reverse transcriptase PCR analysis mRNA was extracted from PLB-985 cells using a QIAamp RNA Blood kit according to manufacturer's instructions. The reverse transcription was performed with Omniscript Reverse Transcription and the amplification of the cDNA was performed with HotstartTaq DNA polymerase using the following primers in order to check the expression of known RasGEFs in PLB-985 cells. The sequences of the relevant primers are shown in Supplementary data. Production of lentivirus RasGRP4 shRNA Using Dharmacon siDESIGN Center, we designed oligonucleotides of 19 mers of sense and antisense strands separated by a loop for the following RasGEFs: RasGef1c, RapGef2, RasGrf1, Sos1, Sos2, RasGRP3, sh2d3c and Bcar3, RasGRP4. Once annealed, the respective double-stranded oligonucleotides were introduced into the bis-cistronic pCMS3-H1p-EGFP plasmid and then cloned into a lentivirus expression vector plasmid pLVTH via Eco RI/ Cla I sites. Recombinant lentivirus were produced by co-transfecting 293FT cells with the above, pMD4-VSVG and pCMV-DR8.91 using standard procedures. Independent, stable, mixed, populations of cells expressing a single shRNAi were then selected by fluorescence activated cell sorting of GFP-expressing cells. Generation of RasGRP4 knockout mice We targeted mouse RasGRP4 using a vector created by the High Throughput Gene Targeting group at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Wtsi, we abbreviate this to a ‘knockout-first’ allele); see Supplementary Figure 2. The vector was linearized with AsiSI and transfected into C57/Bl6-derived ES cells and appropriately targeted clones were identified by Southern blotting. Two correctly targeted, independent clones of ES cells were injected into C57/Bl6Tyr −/− -derived blastocysts by the Gene Targeting Facility at Babraham and male chimeras were mated with C57/Bl6Tyr −/− females. Southern blotting and PCR-based approaches were used to confirm germline transmission RasGRP4 tm2aWtsi/tm2aWtsi and RasGRP4 +/+ mice were derived from each ES cell line. Genotyping of the mice was routinely performed by PCR amplification of the area containing intron 6 and the adjacent lox-P site, generating a 315-bp fragment for Wt and 390-bp fragment from RasGRP4 targeted alleles. The results presented in this manuscript are derived from mice from both of the strains. We crossed RasGRP4 kof/kof × FlpE expressing strain then progeny of this cross was mated with a Cre-deleter strain to remove the drug selection and reporter cassettes and derive a RasGRP4 −/− strain with minimal heterologous DNA in the RasGRP4 locus. We obtained PLCβ2 −/− × PLCβ3 −/− mice and their colony-related wild-type controls in a C57/bl-6 background from Yale University. We included both imported PLCβ2 +/+ × PLCβ3 +/+ mice and wild-type C57/bl-6 mice from the Babraham Institute animal facility in experiments alongside imported PLCβ2 −/− × PLCβ3 −/− mice. We found neutrophils from these two types of ‘control’ mice responded indistinguishably in terms of fMLP-stimulated PIP 3 accumulation and phosphorylation of S473-PKB and hence pooled results from these strains to give rise to the data set described as ‘PLCβ2 +/+ × PLCβ3 +/+ ’ in those assays in Figure 6. All of the mice used in experiments were kept under specific pathogen-free conditions in Transgenics at the Babraham Institute. This work was performed under Home Office Project license PPL 80/2335. Purification of mouse neutrophils Murine neutrophils were isolated at room temperature from bone marrow using Percoll. For Rac activation and chemotaxis assays, the neutrophils were purified at 4°C. ‘Pull-down’ assays In experiments to measure Ras, Rac1 or 2 or Rap1 activation, neutrophils were stimulated while in suspension rapidly diluted with ice-cold PBS, sedimented by brief centrifugation, aspirated and solubilized into ice-cold lysis buffer containing 1% Triton X-100, 0.12 M NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, 20 mM HEPES/NaOH pH 7.4 at 4°C. The lysates were sheared through a 25-gauge needle and centrifuged. Aliquots of the supernatants mixed with 4 × SDS–PAGE sample buffer and Ras, Rap1 and Rac 1/2 pull-down assays were performed using GST-Raf-RBD, GST-RalGDS and GST-PAK-CRIB proteins, respectively, freshly pre-bound to glutathione-sepharose beads. Western blot After incubation with relevant primary and secondary, HRP-labelled, antibodies, membranes were incubated with ECL reagents and exposed onto light-sensitive film. Protein levels were quantified by 2D densitometry using Aida Image Analyzer software v.3.27. Phosphorylation of T154-p40 PHOX was measured by immunoblotting with a phospho-specific antibody as described. In-vivo migration The migration of murine neutrophils into the peritoneum was assessed after 3.5 h after intra-peritoneal injection of thioglycollate by flushing the peritoneal cavity with 2 × 8 ml PBS/5 mM EDTA. After lysis of the red blood cells, leucocytes were double stained for Gr-1 and Mac-1 and analysed by FACS. Neutrophils were counted. Parallel, cytospins were prepared and stained with May-Grumwald-Giemsa stain. ROS assay fMLP, C5a, LTB4 and PMA-stimulated ROS formation was measured with an HRP/luminol-based assay and a multiplate luminometer at 37°C. EZ-Taxiscan chamber assay This assay was used to quantify migration of mouse bone marrow-derived neutrophils in gradients of fMLP as described. The cells were imaged every 20 s, with an exposure time of 50 ms, for 33.33 min using a × 10 objective on an Olympus IX 81 microscope with a Hamamatsu Orca camera, Marzhauser SCAN-IM motorized stage and Till phototonics Polychrome V illuminator. The system light path was configured in a reflection mode using incident light at 488/10 nm and reflected light acquired through a 483/32 emission filter. The glass coverslips were washed with concentrated H 2 SO 4 and, after rinsing with H 2 O, with 0.25 M NaOH before being washed with H 2 O and stored under ethanol. Cleaned coverslips were used either directly or coated with 2.5 mg/ml fibrinogen in HBSS at 37°C for 1 h then washed with the buffer used in the chemotaxis experiments. Analysis of migration movies Movies taken of the EZ-Taxiscan chambers were converted into stacks of TIF files and analysed within the ImageJ plug-in ‘manual tracking’. Only cells that remained within both the field of view and the bridge were tracked. The tabbed text files that were created were analysed within the ImageJ plug-in ‘chemotaxis tool’. The proportion of cells that moved more than a total accumulated distance of 25 μm was determined and was corrected for the purity of neutrophils in the cell preparation in each experiment. The population of motile cells was then used to calculate the velocity of the cells, the migratory index and mean total accumulated distance. The data in Figure 5B and C are based on the following numbers of observations: on glass surfaces the number of cells that were tracked and moved >25 μm were 141 for RasGRP4 +/+ and 120 cells for RasGRP4 kof/kof, in 3 experiments; on fibrinogen-coated glass the numbers were 10 and 21 cells, respectively, in 2 experiments. Quantification of phosphoinositides and DAG Phosphoinositides in PLB-985 cells were quantified by -Pi labelling of the cells followed by extraction, deacylation and anion-exchange HPLC. PIP 2 and PIP 3 in mouse neutrophils were quantified by mass spectrometry, but with adaptions to the procedure to allow both DAG and phosphoinositides to be measured in the same aliquots of cells. Aliquots of neutrophil suspensions were stimulated with fMLP or vehicle alone. After an appropriate time, incubations were quenched with 750 μl of a solvent mixture containing MeOH/CHCl 3 that created a single homogenous phase. Two internal standards were then added to correct recoveries; D6-1-stearoyl-2-arachidonyl-DAG and C16:0/C17:0-PIP 3. In all, 725 μl CHCl 3 and 193 μl H 2 O were added, the samples mixed, and the resultant two phases separated by centrifugation. Approximately 1 ml of the lower phase containing the neutral lipids, and none of the PIP 2 or PIP 3, was removed, dried under N 2, and resuspended in 100 μl of methanol: water. These samples were further processed to quantify stearoyl/arachidonoyl-DAG as described below. The upper phase was acidified and resolved into two clear phases by the addition of 500 μl MeOH/CHCl 3, 500 μl CHCl 3 and 170 μl 2 M HCl, thorough mixing and centrifugation. The lower phase, now containing the PIP 2 and PIP 3, was derivatized using TMS-diazomethane, resolved by in-line HPLC and analysed by mass spectrometry, as described previously ; values for endogenous C18/C20:4 PIP 2 and PIP 3 were corrected for recovery of the C16:0/C17:0-PIP 3 internal standard. To measure 1-stearoyl-2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycerol by mass spectroscopy, the samples in methanol/water were injected onto a Waters Acquity UPLC BEH300 C4 1.0 × 100 mm column at 294 K and eluted with a 45–100% acetonitrile in water gradient with 0.1% formic acid added at a flow rate of 100 μl/min over 20 min. The eluent was then passed into an AB Sciex 4000 QTrap mass spectrometer and the MRM transitions 645.6>341.4 for the 18:0/20:4-DAG and 651.6>347.4 for the deuterated internal standard were monitored, corresponding to loss of an arachidonate group. Both the labelled and unlabelled 18:0–20:4-DAG eluted at 10.94 min. Values for endogenous 18:0/20:4-DAG were corrected for the recovery of the internal standard. AB Sciex Instruments 4000 QTrap Mass spectrometer parameters are Scan Type: MRM; Polarity: Positive; Ion Source: Turbo Spray; Resolution Q1: Unit; Resolution Q2: Low; Dwell: 50 ms; CUR: 20; IS: 4500; TEM: 300; GS1: 18; GS2: 20; Ihe: ON; CAD: Medium; DP: 100; EP: 10; CE: 35; CXP: 10. Statistics Professional statistical support and advice was provided by the Bio-Informatics Facility at the Babraham Institute. Statistics tests are defined where applied. Supplementary Material Supplementary Information: Click here to view. Source Data for Fig 1A: Click here to view. Source Data for Fig 2A: Click here to view. Source Data for Fig 3A: Click here to view. Source Data for Fig 6A: Click here to view. Source Data for Suppl Fig 1A: Click here to view. Source Data for Suppl Fig 2B,C: Click here to view. Source Data for Suppl Fig 3: Click here to view. Review Process File: Click here to view. 