 Differentiation-inducing factor-3, found in the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum, and its derivatives such as butoxy-DIF-3 are potent anti-tumor agents. However, the precise mechanisms underlying the actions of DIF-3 remain to be elucidated. In this study, we synthesized a green fluorescent derivative of DIF-3, BODIPY-DIF-3, and a control fluorescent compound, Bu-BODIPY, and investigated how DIF-like molecules behave in human cervical cancer HeLa cells by using both fluorescence and electron microscopy. BODIPY-DIF-3 at 5–20 µ M suppressed cell growth in a dose-dependent manner, whereas Bu-BODIPY had minimal effect on cell growth. When cells were incubated with BODIPY-DIF-3 at 20 µM, it penetrated cell membranes within 0.5 h and localized mainly in mitochondria, while Bu-BODIPY did not stain the cells. Exposure of cells for 1–3 days to DIF-3, Bu-DIF-3, BODIPY-DIF-3, or CCCP induced substantial mitochondrial swelling, suppressing cell growth. When added to isolated mitochondria, DIF-3, Bu-DIF-3, and BOIDPY-DIF-3, like CCCP, dose-dependently promoted the rate of oxygen consumption, but Bu-BODIPY did not. Our results suggest that these bioactive DIF-like molecules suppress cell growth, at least in part, by disturbing mitochondrial activity. This is the first report showing the cellular localization and behavior of DIF-like molecules in mammalian tumor cells. Introduction The cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum is a soil micro-organism that forms a fruiting body consisting of spores and a multicellular stalk at the end of its life cycle. Differentiation-inducing factor-1 is a putative morphogen that induces stalk cell differentiation in D. discoideum. DIF-3 is the first metabolite produced during the degradation of DIF-1 and has virtually no activity in the induction of stalk cell differentiation,. Recently, it was shown that DIF-1 functions not only as a differentiation-inducing factor but also as a modulator of chemotactic movement in D. discoideum cells. However, the precise mechanisms underlying the actions of DIF-1 remain to be elucidated, and there have been no receptor identified for DIF-1. Figure 1 Chemical structures of DIF-like molecules, synthesis of BODIPY-conjugated compounds, and cellular localization of BODIPY-conjugated compounds in HeLa cells. In addition to their physiological activity in D. discoideum, DIF-1 and DIF-3 possess anti-tumor activity by suppressing cell growth and, in some cases, by inducing or promoting the differentiation of de-differentiated tumor cells in vitro –. Interestingly, DIF-3 is more active than DIF-1 in suppressing cell growth and inducing erythroid differentiation in human K562 leukemia cells,. In a previous study, we showed that several chemically synthesized derivatives of DIF-3 with a modification at the methoxy group, such as butoxy-DIF-3, have a potent anti-proliferative effect in K562 cells. These findings suggest that derivatives of DIF-3 are potential candidates for development as novel anti-cancer drugs. The mechanisms underlying the actions of DIF-like molecules have been investigated by using several approaches –, but remain to be elucidated. In the present study, we synthesized a green fluorescent derivative of DIF-3, BODIPY-DIF-3, and a control fluorescent compound, Bu-BODIPY, to investigate the cellular localization, function, and target proteins of DIF-like molecules in mammalian cells using mainly HeLa cells as a model system. We show here that BODIPY-DIF-3 localized mainly to the mitochondria and that BODIPY-DIF-3, as well as DIF-3 and Bu-DIF-3, suppressed cell growth, whereas Bu-BODIPY had no effect. We also show that DIF-3, Bu-DIF-3, and BODIPY-DIF-3 have potential as potent mitochondrial uncouplers to induce morphological change and dysfunction of mitochondria. In summary, our results suggest that DIF-like molecules suppress cell growth, at least in part, by disturbing mitochondrial activity. Results Cellular Localization of BODIPY-DIF-3 To elucidate the cellular localization and function of DIF-like molecules in mammalian cells, we first designed and synthesized a fluorescent derivative of DIF-3, BODIPY-DIF-3, in accordance with our structure–activity relationship assay; it was expected that modification of the methoxy region of DIF-3 with BODIPY would not reduce its biological activity. We also synthesized a control fluorescent compound, Bu-BODIPY. Cellular localizations of the two fluorescent compounds were then investigated in HeLa cells. BODIPY-DIF-3 at 20 µM was rapidly incorporated into the cells within several minutes of exposure and a fluorescence signal was detected within 30 min. Moreover, BODIPY-DIF-3 was found to accumulate slightly in the plasma membrane but mainly in the intracellular membranes of some organelles. Cells treated with Bu-BODIPY at the same concentration did not show any notable staining. Essentially the same cellular BODIPY-DIF-3 localization was observed in mouse LM8 osteosarcoma and mouse 3T3-L1 fibroblast cells. Figure 2 Membrane permeability and localization of BODIPY-DIF-3 and Bu-BODIPY in living, formalin-fixed, and detergent-treated HeLa cells. It is noteworthy that, as well as living HeLa cells, formalin-treated and formalin/Triton X-treated cells stained with BODIPY-DIF-3, but none of them showed any notable staining with Bu-BODIPY. Since the DIF-3-region of BODIPY-DIF-3 appears to be responsible for the cellular localization of this molecule, it is probable that imaging analysis with BODIPY-DIF-3 would reflect the true cellular localization of DIF-3-like molecules such as DIF-3 and Bu-DIF-3. Effect of DIF-3 Derivatives on Cell Growth and Expression of Cyclin D We then examined and compared the effects of DIF-like molecules and the fluorescent compounds on cell growth in HeLa cells. As expected, cell growth was significantly suppressed by the positive control drugs DIF-1, DIF-3, and Bu-DIF-3 at 20 µM. Cell growth was hardly affected by Bu-BODIPY at up to 20 µM but was suppressed in a dose-dependent manner with BODIPY-DIF-3 at 5–20 µM. By comparison, cells were alive and appeared unaffected even after 3 days of incubation with the BODIPY-conjugated compounds. However, distinct staining of intracellular structures was apparent after incubation of cells for 3 days with 20 µM BODIPY-DIF-3. BODIPY-DIF-3 dose-dependently suppressed cell growth in LM8 and 3T3-L1 cells and also disturbed their intracellular structures at Day 3. Figure 3 Effects of DIF-like molecules and mitochondrial poisons on cell growth and morphology in HeLa cells. Since DIF-1 and DIF-3 has been shown to decrease the expression of cyclin D, thereby suppressing cell growth in HeLa and other cell lines –,, we compared the effects of DIF-like molecules on cyclin D expression in HeLa cells. Western blot analysis revealed that BODIPY-DIF-3, as well as DIF-3 and Bu-DIF-3, significantly decreased the expression of cyclin D1 and cyclin D3 after 20 h incubation with the compounds. Thus, BODIPY-DIF-3 is not the most potent anti-proliferative compound among the DIF-like molecules, but it does possess the same biological activities as DIF-3 and Bu-DIF-3, thus confirming that BODIPY-DIF-3 would be a suitable probe to investigate the behavior and cellular localization of DIF-like molecules in mammalian cells. Effects of BODIPY-DIF-3 on Mitochondrial Morphology We then performed a detailed analysis of the intracellular localization of BODIPY-DIF-3 by using a high-magnification fluorescence microscope and several fluorescent probes specific for organelles and found that BODIPY-DIF-3 localized mainly in mitochondria. At the start of incubation with the drugs, BODIPY-DIF-3 and MitoTracker co-localized to the mitochondria in HeLa cells. Exposure of the cells to 20 µM BODIPY-DIF-3 caused many mitochondria to swell in most cells within 1 day; these mitochondria stained with BODIPY-DIF-3 and MitoTracker. By Day 3, further mitochondrial enlargement was observed in almost all of the cells exposed to BODIPY-DIF-3. Similar results were obtained with LM8 and 3T3-L1 cells. Note that LM8 and HeLa cells were more sensitive to all the DIF-3 derivatives than 3T3-L1 cells. Figure 4 Cellular localization of BODIPY-DIF-3 in HeLa cells. Table 1 Comparison of the effects of DIF-like molecules and CCCP. When HeLa cells were incubated for 3 days with DIF-3 and Bu-DIF-3, the mitochondria in all cells swelled greatly and stained with BODIPY-DIF-3 and MitoTracker. Taken together, these results suggest that DIF-3 and Bu-DIF-3, as well as BODIPY-DIF-3, target the mitochondria and induce swelling and dysfunction. Withdrawal of BOIDPY-DIF-3 at Day 3 induced recovery of cell growth rate and mitochondrial morphology in HeLa cells, indicating that the action of the drug is reversible. Figure 5 Cellular localization of BODIPY-DIF-3 in HeLa cells treated with DIF-3 or Bu-DIF-3. Figure 6 Recovery of HeLa cells treated with BODIPY-DIF-3. Analysis of Mitochondrial Morphology by using Electron Microscopy We next investigated the effects of Bu-DIF-3 and BODIPY-DIF-3 on the morphology of organelles by using electron microscopy. As expected, the morphology of mitochondria was greatly altered when cells were incubated for 3 days with Bu-DIF-3 or BODIPY-DIF-3; cells treated with the compounds showed an increase in the number of swollen mitochondria. In addition, Bu-DIF-3 and BODIPY-DIF-3 tended to cause a decrease in the total number of mitochondria, possibly by inducing mitochondrial fusion and/or inhibiting their fission. It should be noted that many lipid bodies were observed in cells treated with Bu-DIF-3- and BODIPY-DIF-3, suggesting that DIF-like molecules might affect lipid metabolism in some way. These results support the idea that DIF-like molecules are targeted to the mitochondria and could therefore affect the respiratory function of mitochondria. Figure 7 Electron microscopic analysis of HeLa cells treated with Bu-DIF-3 or BODIPY-DIF-3. Effects of DIF-derivatives on O 2 Consumption in Mitochondria Based on the localization of DIF-3 derivatives to the mitochondria, we examined the effect of DIF-3 derivatives on mitochondrial O 2 consumption in mouse liver mitochondria. In the presence of DMSO, the O 2 concentration in the culture medium deceased gradually at a constant rate, and the addition of ADP transiently accelerated the rate of O 2 consumption under these conditions. By comparison, DIF-3, Bu-DIF-3, or BODIPY-DIF-3 at 1–100 µM dose-dependently promoted the basal rate of O 2 consumption, whereas the same concentrations of the non-bioactive reagent, Bu-BODIPY, had no effect on the rate of O 2 consumption. These results suggest that DIF-like molecules function as mitochondrial uncouplers and as such might suppress cell growth, at least in part, by disturbing mitochondrial activity. Figure 8 Effects of DIFs, BODIPY-conjugated compounds, or CCCP on oxygen consumption in mouse liver mitochondria. Effects of CCCP on Cell Growth and Mitochondrial Morphology Since the DIF-3 derivatives appear to function by disturbing the respiratory function and morphology of mitochondria, we investigated the effects of CCCP, a mitochondrial uncoupler, for comparison. Cell growth and expression of cyclin D1 and D3 were significantly suppressed by CCCP at 10 µM in HeLa cells, whereas azide, an inhibitor of the transfer of electrons from cytochrome c to Complex IV, suppressed cell growth and the expression of cyclin D1 but not of cyclin D3; the mechanisms of the actions of azide and DIF-like molecules seem to be different at least in part. By comparison, CCCP at 0.1–1 µM promoted mitochondrial O 2 consumption in a dose-dependent manner. Mitochondrial swelling was induced in most HeLa cells after incubation for 3 days with CCCP at 10 µM; these mitochondria stained with BODIPY-DIF-3 and MitoTracker, which were similar to those in the cells incubated for 3 days with BODIPY-DIF-3, DIF-3, or Bu-DIF-3. It should be noted that both CCCP and BODIPY-DIF-3 dose-dependently suppressed cell growth in LM8 and 3T3-L1 cells. Therefore, it is likely that DIF-like molecules function by disturbing mitochondrial activity, at least in part. Figure 9 Cellular localization of BODIPY-DIF-3 in HeLa cells treated with CCCP. Discussion DIFs as the Lead Compounds for Anti-tumor Drugs D. discoideum, a cellular slime mold, is a well-studied model organism in the fields of cell and developmental biology. Cellular slime molds are soil microorganisms belonging to a kingdom different from fungi that produce many pharmacologically active compounds including polyketides. Thus, these organisms are expected to be a novel resource for lead compounds in the field of pharmacology and medicine –. Among the compounds reported so far, DIF-1 and DIF-3, members of the polyketide family, are the most promising and well-studied leads for the development of anti-tumor drugs –,. In mammals, DIFs affect the activity of protein kinases such as ERK and GSK-3β in some tumor cells – and arrest the cell cycle at the G0/1 phase by inhibiting the expression of cyclin D and the phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein,. We have also found that DIFs are direct inhibitors of calmodulin-dependent cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase, suggesting that DIFs suppress cell growth, at least in part, by inhibiting PDE1. However, the inhibition of PDE1 may not fully explain the anti-tumor activities of DIFs as there appears to be multiple DIF target molecules that may be affected indirectly rather than by direct interaction with the DIF. Thus, the precise mechanisms underlying the actions of DIF-like molecules in mammalian cells remain to be elucidated. Cellular Localization of DIF-like Molecules Based on the chemical structures of DIFs and their solubility in both hexane and water, DIFs are thought to be membrane-permeable, but it is unknown whether they can penetrate the cell membrane and how they behave in mammalian cells. In the present study, we used the fluorescent DIF-3 derivative, BODIPY-DIF-3, to show for the first time that BODIPY-DIF-3 can penetrate the cell membrane and localize mainly to the mitochondria in HeLa, LM8, and 3T3-L1 cells. Careful observation suggested the presence of relatively BODIPY-DIF-3–dominant and MitoTracker–dominant mitochondria, possibly because the uptake of MitoTracker by mitochondria depends to some extent upon the mitochondrial membrane potential, which would be disturbed by BODIPY-DIF-3. Therefore, when cells were stained first with MitoTracker, fixed with formalin, and then stained with BODIPY-DIF-3, MitoTracker and BODIPY-DIF-3 co-localized to the mitochondria more specifically. Since no organelles could be stained with Bu-BODIPY in living cells, formalin-fixed cells, or formalin/TritonX-100 treated cells, it is likely that the presence of DIF-3 in BODIPY-DIF-3 is responsible for its membrane-permeability and specific localization to the mitochondria. Taken together with the findings that DIF-3 and Bu-DIF-3 as well as BODIPY-DIF-3 induced mitochondrial swelling in HeLa cells, 5 ), the results strongly suggest that DIF-3 and its derivatives can penetrate the cell membrane and localize to the mitochondria. Function of DIF-like Molecules in Mitochondria DIF-1 is known to inhibit mitochondrial respiration with an IC 50 value of 540 nM in D. discoideum, possibly because DIF-1 is a member of the phenol family and is a weak acid that behaves as an uncoupler. However, since physiological concentrations of DIF-1 are thought to be in the range of 0.1–100 nM, the mitochondrial uncoupling activity of DIF-1 is unlikely to play a role in the development of D. discoideum. Here, we showed with mammalian mitochondria that like CCCP, DIF-3, Bu-DIF-3, and BODIPY-DIF-3 promoted mitochondrial O 2 consumption in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, the PC 100 values of the DIF-3 derivatives for mitochondrial O 2 consumption roughly correlated with their IC 50 values in the mammalian cells. These results suggest that DIF-like molecules suppress cell growth, at least in part, by functioning as mitochondrial uncouplers, and also imply the presence of as-yet-unidentified target for DIF-like molecules in mitochondria. In this regard, it was recently shown that DIF-1 binds to mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase and inhibits its activity. However, because DIF-3 neither binds nor inhibits mMDH, it is likely that DIF-like molecules disturb mitochondrial function via target other than mMDH. Note that Bu-DIF-3 and BODIPY-DIF-3 promoted lipid-body formation in cells treated with the compounds, suggesting that DIF-like molecules affect lipid metabolism possibly via mitochondrial dysfunction; the phenomenon will be elucidated in our next project. As shown in Table 1, CCCP, DIF-3, Bu-DIF-3, and BODIPY-DIF-3 strongly suppress cell growth in HeLa cells and disturb mitochondrial O 2 consumption with the indicated IC 50 and PC 100 values. The hydrophobic indexes of the compounds are also shown in Table 1, from which the membrane permeability of the compounds can be deduced to some extent. Since the chemical structure of CCCP is considerably different from that of DIF-3-related molecules, it may not be appropriate to simply deduce and compare their behavior and functions according to their ClogP values. However, it is notable that the PC 100 value for CCCP is much lower than its IC 50 value, whereas the PC 100 and IC 50 values for DIF-3 are similar. Nevertheless, the ClogP value of CCCP is comparable to that of DIF-3. Taken together, it is likely that the uncoupling of mitochondrial activity by CCCP is insufficient for growth inhibition by CCCP and/or that DIF-like molecules are more than mitochondrial uncouplers; e.g., DIF-1 and DIF-3 have been shown to be direct inhibitors of PDE1. Since mitochondria are the main energy producers in eukaryotic cells, mitochondrial poisons such as CCCP and azide are potent anti-proliferative and/or death-inducing agents in both cancer and non-cancer cells –. Furthermore, since mitochondria play a key role in cell death when mitochondrial membranes become permeabilized –, mitochondria-directed chemotherapy is an emerging tool against cancer; in addition to known anticancer drugs, mitochondrial damaging agents such as CCCP are expected to be adjuvant drugs in chemotherapy to combat cancer,. Accordingly, DIF-like molecules, as well as CCCP, may have potential as adjuvant drugs in cancer chemotherapy. Conclusions We used a chemically synthesized fluorescent derivative of DIF-3 to show here, for the first time, that DIF-like molecules can penetrate the cell membrane, localize to the mitochondria, and promote mitochondrial oxygen consumption in mammalian cells. Our findings suggest that DIF-like molecules have the potential to suppress cell growth, at least in part, functioning as mitochondrial uncouplers to disturb mitochondrial activity. Although investigations into the role of DIF-like molecules in mitochondria have just begun, our findings provide significant insight into the function of DIF-like molecules in mammalian cells and set the foundation for further research. This is the first report showing the cellular localization and behavior of DIF-like molecules. Methods Reagents MitoTracker® Red CMXRos and BODIPY®FL, SE were purchased from Invitrogen. Hoechst 33342 solution and carbonyl cyanide m -chlorophenylhydrazone were obtained from Wako Pure Chemical Industries. Rabbit anti-cyclin D1, mouse anti-cyclin D2, and mouse anti-cyclin D3 antibodies were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, BD Biosciences, and Transduction Laboratories, respectively. Rabbit anti-GAPDH antibody was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. Alkaline phosphatase–conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG and anti-rabbit IgG antibodies, nitroblue tetrazolium, and 5-bromo-4-chloro-3′-indolylphosphate were purchased from Promega. DIF-1, DIF-3, and Bu-DIF-3 were synthesized as described previously and stored as solutions in dimethyl sulfoxide at –20°C. Cell Culture Human cervical cancer HeLa cells and mouse 3T3-L1 fibroblasts were grown and maintained at 37°C with 5% CO 2 and 95% air in DMEM-FBS. Likewise, mouse osteosarcoma LM8 cells were grown and maintained in MEM-α-FBS. All the media also contained 75 µg/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin. Synthesis of BODIPY-DIF-3 The synthesis of BODIPY-DIF-3 was a six-step process as described below. Step 1: Synthesis of 5-resorcinol Potassium carbonate and 1,4-dibromobutane were added to a solution of phloroglucinol in N, N -dimethylformamide at room temperature. The reaction mixture was stirred for 2 h at 50°C, diluted with 1 M hydrochloric acid, and then extracted three times with ethyl acetate. The combined organic layer was washed with water followed by saturated sodium chloride solution, dried over sodium sulfate, and evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was chromatographed over a silica gel column with a hexane-ethyl acetate solvent system to give 5-resorcinol. Step 2: Synthesis of 1--2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)hexan-1-one Hexanoyl chloride and aluminium chloride were added to a solution of 5-resorcinol in dichloromethane. The reaction mixture was stirred for 3 h at room temperature, diluted with water, and then extracted with ethyl acetate three times. The combined organic layer was washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate solution followed by saturated sodium chloride solution, dried over sodium sulfate, and evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was chromatographed over a silica gel column with a hexane-ethyl acetate solvent system to give 1--2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)hexan-1-one. Step 3: Synthesis of 1--3-chloro-2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)hexan-1-one Sulfuryl chloride was added to a solution of 1--2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)hexan-1-one in chloroform-ethanol. The reaction mixture was stirred for 1 h at room temperature, and then evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was chromatographed over a silica gel column with a hexane-ethyl acetate solvent system to give 1--3-chloro-2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)hexan-1-one. Step 4: Synthesis of 1--3-chloro-2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)hexan-1-one Sodium azide was added to a solution of 1--3-chloro-2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)hexan-1-one in N, N -dimethylformamide at room temperature. The reaction mix was stirred for 3 h, and then diluted with water and extracted with ethyl acetate three times. The combined organic layer was washed with water followed by saturated sodium chloride solution, dried over sodium sulfate, and evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was chromatographed over a silica gel column with a hexane-ethyl acetate solvent system to give 1--3-chloro-2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)hexan-1-one. Step 5: Synthesis of 1--3-chloro-2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)hexan-1-one hydrochloride Palladium on carbon was added to a solution of 1--3-chloro-2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)hexan-1-one in 3% hydrochloride methanol solution at room temperature. The reaction mixture was stirred for 1 h under an atmosphere of hydrogen, and then filtered through a pad made of Celite. The Celite pad was washed with methanol, and the filtrate was evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was chromatographed over a silica gel column with a chloroform-methanol solvent system to give 1--3-chloro-2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)hexan-1-one hydrochloride. Step 6: Synthesis of BODIPY-DIF-3 1--3-chloro-2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)hexan-1-one hydrochloride and triethylamine were added to a solution of BODIPY® FL, SE in tetrahydrofurane at room temperature in the dark. The reaction mixture was stirred for 5 h, diluted with 0.2 M hydrochloric acid and then extracted three times with ethyl acetate. The residue was subjected to recycling preparative HPLC with a JAIGEL-GS-310 column using ethyl acetate as the solvent to give BODIPY-DIF-3. Analytical data for BODIPY-DIF-3 was as follows: 1 H NMR δ 7.07, 6.83, 6.25, 6.13, 6.07, 5.93, 3.99, 3.32, 3.27, 3.09, 2.69, 2.57, 2.24, 1.68, 1.54–1.63, 1.30–1.39, 0.92 ; HRFABMS m/z 584.2517 +. Synthesis of Bu-BODIPY As described briefly in Figure 1B, 1 -butylamine and triethylamine were added to a solution of BODIPY® FL, SE in N, N -dimethylformamide at room temperature in the dark. The reaction mixture was stirred for 10 h, diluted with 0.2 M hydrochloric acid, and then extracted three times with ethyl acetate. The residue was chromatographed over a silica gel column with a chloroform-methanol solvent system to give Bu-BODIPY. Analytical data for Bu-BODIPY was as follows: 1 H NMR δ 7.09, 6.89, 6.30, 6.13, 5.67, 3.27, 3.20, 2.62, 2.57, 2.26, 1.40, 1.23–1.29, 0.87 ; HRFABMS m/z 322.0605 +. BODIPY-conjugated compounds were stored as solutions in DMSO at –20°C. Cell Growth Assay HeLa, LM8, and 3T3-L1 cells were cultured for 3 days at 2.5–5×10 3 cells/well in 12-well plates with each well filled with 1 ml of DMEM-FBS or MEM-α-FBS together with drugs at various concentrations. Then, the incubation media were discarded and the cells were washed with 1 ml of PBS and incubated with 1 ml of fresh DMEM-FBS or MEM-α-FBS containing 5% of Alamar blue until the color changed. The relative cell number was assessed by measuring absorbance at 570 nm as described previously, ; DIF-related compounds and BODIPY-conjugated compounds hardly disturbed the cell number assessment with Alamar blue, probably because the additive compounds were washed out when cell number was assessed. For determination of the 50% inhibitory concentration of each drug, the cells were cultured for 3 days in the presence of each drug at various concentrations. Relative cell numbers were determined for each concentration for each drug and the IC 50 was determined from the dose-response curves. In the assay of the effect of withdrawal of BODIPY-DIF-3 on cell growth, HeLa cells were incubated for 3 days with 2 ml of DMEM-FBS containing 20 µM BODIPY-DIF-3 in 35-mm tissue culture dishes, washed 2 times with 2 ml of PBS, and further incubated for 2 days with 2 ml of DMEM-FBS containing 0.2% DMSO or 20 µM BODIPY-DIF-3; meanwhile, control cells were incubated for 5 days with 2 ml of DMEM-FBS containing 0.2% DMSO. Relative cell number was assessed as described above, and all experiments were performed in triplicate. Western Blotting HeLa cells were incubated for 20 h with 1 ml of DMEM-FBS containing the indicated additives in 12-well plates, washed twice with PBS, harvested by adding 100–200 µl of an SDS-sample buffer solution, sonicated, and used for SDS-PAGE. Western blot transfer and immunoblotting were performed as described previously, by using a primary antibody for cyclin D1, cyclin D2, cyclin D3, or GAPDH, and a second antibody, an alkaline phosphatase-conjugated anti-mouse or anti-rabbit IgG antibody. Color development was performed in an alkaline buffer containing NBT and BCIP. Visualized protein bands were then digitized and quantified by using Adobe Photoshop CS4 and ImageJ Software. Formalin Fixation and Triton X-100 Treatment HeLa cells were cultured for 1–2 days with 2 ml DMEM-FBS in 35-mm tissue culture dishes, washed twice with PBS, and then fixed for 15–20 min at room temperature with 2 ml of 3.7% formaldehyde in PBS. The cells were then washed twice with PBS and used for staining with the fluorescent probes. Alternatively, the fixed cells were treated for 15–20 min with 2 ml of 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS, washed twice with PBS, and used for staining with the fluorescent probes. Phase-contrast and Fluorescence Microscopy For low magnification observations, living cells, formalin-fixed cells, or Triton X-treated cells were incubated with 2 ml of DMEM-FBS or MEM-α-FBS containing 20 µM Bu-BODIPY, or BODIPY-DIF-3, and in some cases, Hoechst and MitoTracker in 35-mm tissue culture dishes. The cells were washed twice with PBS and submerged in 2 ml of PBS or a Hepes buffer. The cells were observed at room temperature with a Leica DM IRB fluorescent microscope, and digitized images were treated with the Leica Application Suite. For time-course observation of the behavior of BODIPY-DIF-3, cells were incubated in the presence of 20 µM BODIPY-DIF-3 in Hepes buffer and observed at the indicated time points. At 30 min of incubation, the cells were washed twice with PBS, submerged in 2 ml of Hepes buffer, and observed microscopically. For high magnification multi-color imaging, cells were incubated for the appropriate times with 2 ml of DMEM-FBS or MEM-α-FBS containing various compounds in 35-mm plastic dishes. The cells were washed twice with 2 ml of PBS, submerged in 2 ml of Hepes buffer, and observed at room temperature with a Keyence BZ-9000 fluorescence microscope equipped with an oil immersion 100× lens and multi-filters that can distinguish four fluorescent probes simultaneously. Original digitized images of z-stack sections were taken at 0.4- µm intervals, which were then treated with the Keyence BZ analyzer software, and compiled into 3D images; when 3D images were constructed, nonlinear adjustment was performed to obtain clear images without haze. All color images are presented in pseudo colors. Electron Microscopy HeLa cells were incubated for 3 days with 2 ml DMEM-FBS containing 0.2% DMSO and 5 µM Bu-DIF-3 or 20 µM BODIPY-DIF-3 in 35-mm plastic dishes at 2×10 4 cells/dish. The cells were fixed at 4°C for 30 min with PB containing 2% paraformaldehyde and 2% glutaraldehyde and then with PB containing 2% glutaraldehyde at 4°C overnight. The cell samples were rinsed 3 times with PB for 30 min each, followed by post fixation with 2% OsO 4 in PB at 4°C for 1 h. The samples were dehydrated through a graded ethanol series starting with 50% and 70% EtOH for 5 min each at 4°C, then 90% EtOH for 5 min at room temperature, followed by three changes of 100% EtOH for 5 min each at room temperature. The samples were then transferred to a resin and polymerized at 60°C for 48 h. Ultra-thin sections were cut with an ultramicrotome, collected onto copper grids, stained with 2% uranyl acetate at room temperature for 15 min, and then rinsed with distilled water. The sections were then stained with Lead stain solution at room temperature for 3 min. The sections were observed under a transmission electron microscope at an acceleration voltage of 80 kV. Digital images were taken with a charge-coupled device camera. Preparation of Mitochondria-enriched Fraction Mitochondria were isolated from mouse liver by differential centrifugation as described previously. Cells were homogenized in a Potter glass homogenizer with H-Buffer, and centrifuged at 800 g for 1 min at 4°C. The supernatant was centrifuged at 6,000 g for 5 min, and the resulting pellet, the crude mitochondrial fraction, was suspended in H-Buffer. The suspension was layered over a discontinuous sucrose gradient consisting of 1.1 M and 1.6 M sucrose in a Tris buffer, and centrifuged for 3 h at 90,000 g at 4°C. The interface was collected in Tris buffer and centrifuged at 6,000 g for 5 min. The resulting pellets were suspended in Tris buffer and used for experiments after confirming the presence of the mitochondrial marker cytochrome c. Oxygen Consumption Analysis Mitochondrial oxygen consumption was determined using a Clark-type oxygen electrode as described,. The mitochondria-enriched fraction was incubated at 30°C in oxygen measurement buffer in the presence or absence of various concentrations of the DIF-like molecules or CCCP. After recording ‘State 4’ of the respiration reaction, an aliquot of ADP was added to a final concentration of 200 µM to induce ‘State 3’. The PC 100 of each additive was defined as the drug concentration that doubled the basal rate of oxygen consumption during State 3, which was calculated from the dose-response plot for the rate of oxygen consumption. Supporting Information Figure S1 Effects of BODIPY-DIF-3 and CCCP on cell growth, and cellular localization of BODIPY-DIF-3 in LM8 cells. Cells were incubated for 4 days with 5–20 µM of BODIPY-DIF-3 or 2–10 µM of CCCP, and relative cell number was assessed by the use of Alamar blue. Data are the mean values and SD of three independent experiments. Cells were incubated for 0.5 h or 3 days with 20 µM of BODIPY-DIF-3, washed free of the additive, and observed microscopically. Cells were incubated for 0.5 h with BODIPY-DIF-3, Hoechst, and MitoTracker, washed free of the additives, and observed by using a high-magnification fluorescence microscope. Cells were incubated for 3 days with BODIPY-DIF-3 and then for 0.5 h with Hoechst and MitoTracker. Cells were washed free of the additives and observed by using a high-magnification fluorescence microscope. Click here for additional data file. Figure S2 Effects of BODIPY-DIF-3 and CCCP on cell growth, and cellular localization of BODIPY-DIF-3 in 3T3-L1 cells. Cells were incubated for 4 days with 5–20 µM of BODIPY-DIF-3 or 2–10 µM of CCCP, and relative cell number was assessed by the use of Alamar blue. Data are the mean values and SD of three independent experiments. Cells were incubated for 0.5 h or 3 days with 20 µM of BODIPY-DIF-3, washed free of the additive, and observed microscopically. Cells were incubated for 0.5 h with BODIPY-DIF-3, Hoechst, and MitoTracker, washed free of the additives, and observed by using a high-magnification fluorescence microscope. Cells were incubated for 3 days with BODIPY-DIF-3 and then for 0.5 h with Hoechst and MitoTracker. Cells were washed free of the additives and observed by using a high-magnification fluorescence microscope. Click here for additional data file. 