 Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 is a multifunctional kinase involved in diverse cellular activities such as metabolism, differentiation, and morphogenesis. Recent studies showed that GSK3 in Dictyostelium affects chemotaxis via TorC2 pathway and Daydreamer. Now we report that GSK3 affects PI3K membrane localization, of which mechanism has remained to be fully understood in Dictyostelium. The membrane localization domain of Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase 1 is phosphorylated on serine residues in a GSK3 dependent mechanism and PI3K1-LD exhibited biased membrane localization in gsk3 − cells compared to the wild type cells. Furthermore, multiple GSK3-phosphorylation consensus sites exist in PI3K1-LD, of which phosphomimetic substitutions restored cAMP induced transient membrane localization of PI3K1-LD in gsk3 − cells. Serine to alanine substitution mutants of PI3K1-LD, in contrast, displayed constitutive membrane localization in wild type cells. Biochemical analysis revealed that GSK3 dependent serine phosphorylation of PI3K1-LD is constitutive during the course of cAMP stimulation. Together, these data suggest that GSK3 dependent serine phosphorylation is a prerequisite for chemoattractant cAMP induced PI3K membrane localization. Introduction Understanding how eukaryotic cells manage their locomotive behaviors has been one of the major goals of current cell biology. Years of investigation uncovered that chemotaxis is synergistically controlled through multiple pathways that include PI3K, TORC2, soluble Guanylyl Cyclase, and PLA2 in Dictyostelium. Recent studies using Dictyostelium cells demonstrated that GSK3 affects phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate metabolism, TORC2 signaling, and F-Actin remodeling via Daydreamer. It remains, however, to be determined how GSK3 affects these pathways at the molecular level. Furthermore, there exist contrasting phenotypes manifested by cells lacking GSK3: Teo and others reported lack of increase in PIP3 level in response to cAMP, no TorC2 activation, and decreased Adenylyl Cyclase expression in gsk3 − cells, whereas Kolsch and others showed different results. The results reported here were obtained from gsk3 − cells with JH10 background, which are largely consistent with those of Teo and others. Dictyostelium GSK3 affected prestimulus control of PIP3 level through regulating PI3K membrane localization. Previous studies showed Dictyostelium PI3K is regulated at the following two levels: one is its localization control between the cytosol and the plasma membrane, and the other is regulating lipid kinase activity. Activation of PI3K is mediated through Ras, but the mechanism of PI3K membrane recruitment is not well understood. We noticed that the membrane localization domains of PI3K1 and PI3K2, the two main PI3Ks responsible for the majority of PIP3 generation in Dictyostelium cells, contain the consensus sequence for GSK3 phosphorylation and that the PI3K1 membrane localization domain is phosphorylated on serine residues in wild type cells but significantly underphosphorylated in gsk3 − cells. This serine phosphorylation of PI3K1-LD seems to be a requirement for optimal transient membrane localization of PI3K in response to cAMP stimulation. Biochemical as well as imaging analyses of the effects of GSK3 on the PI3K are described below. Results gsk3 − cells display aberrant membrane localization of GFP-PH crac and GFP-PI3K1-LD proteins Vegetative wild type Dictyostelium cells expressing GFP-PH proteins as a PIP3 marker display largely cytoplasmic localization of GFP-PHcrac. In contrast, vegetative gsk3 − cells expressing GFP-PHcrac proteins displayed significantly elevated level of plasma membrane localization of GFP-PHcrac proteins compared to wild type cells. Similarly, wild type cells pulsed with cAMP for 4 hours exhibited low basal level of GFP-PHcrac proteins at the plasma membrane. In contrast, cAMP pulsed gsk3 − cells displayed relatively high basal level of GFP-PHcrac proteins at the plasma membrane. In response to cAMP stimulation, GFP-PHcrac proteins translocalized to the plasma membrane in a transient manner in wild type cells, but not in gsk3 − cells. Our results using gsk3 − cells with JH10 background is consistent with the results of Teo and others using gsk3 − cells of Ax2 background. Figure 1 gsk3 − cells display high basal membrane localization of GFP-PH crac.. Vegetative gsk3 − cells displayed undoubtedly visible GFP signals from the plasma membrane, whereas no such phenotype was observed from wild type cells.. The same... One of the causes that gsk3 − cells were unable to further recruit GFP-PHcrac proteins to the plasma membrane in response to chemoattractant could be that PI3K proteins are not properly regulated in gsk3 − cells. PI3K1 and PI3K2, two of the major proteins responsible for cAMP induced PIP3 generation, are regulated at the level of lipid kinase activation by small G protein Ras as well as at the plasma membrane recruitment step through their membrane localization domain. A previous study showed that constitutive localization of PI3K to the plasma membrane by myristoylation tagging led to higher prestimulus level of PIP3, underscoring the importance of proper prestimulus membrane localization of PI3K. Given that both elevated production of PIP3 through PI3K misregulation and sustained maintenance of PIP3 via downregulation of PTEN, a PIP3 phosphatse, could result in high basal PIP3 level, cAMP mediated regulation of both PI3K and PTEN were analyzed. Wild type cells expressing either GFP-PI3K1-LD or GFP-PTEN exhibited transient subcellular relocalization of each protein in response to cAMP as expected. gsk3 − cells, however, displayed aberrantly high prestimulus level of GFP-PI3K1-LD at the plasma membrane at both vegetative and pulsed stages. No clear difference of prestimulus localization of GFPPTEN was observed from wild type and gsk3 − cells. gsk3 − cells were unable to further mobilize PI3K1-LD to the plasma membrane in response to cAMP, yet displayed a transient membrane dislocalization of GFP-PTEN proteins upon cAMP stimulation similarly to wild type cells,. The levels of GFP-PI3K1-LD proteins were comparable in both wild type and gsk3 − cells. These data showed that aberrant prestimulus PI3K membrane localization was observed in gsk3 − cells, which is insensitive to cAMP stimulation. Figure 2 gsk3 − cells displayed high basal membrane localization of PI3K1-LD-GFP. Cells were pretreated with 4 hours of cAMP pulsing before the experiments.. Fluorescent images of GFP-PI3K1-LD and PTEN-GFP proteins at the plasma membranes of vegetative... To determine the possibility that whether an upstream activator of PI3K, Ras, is misregulated in gsk3 − cells or not, the basal and cAMP induced Ras activities were measured using two different active Ras binding domains from Raf1 and Byr2 proteins. Raf1-RBD preferentially binds to active RasB, RasD, and RasG and Byr2-RBD strongly to RasC but weakly to RasG. gsk3 − cells displayed normal prestimulus Ras activities, but Ras activity persisted longer in gsk3 − cells than in wild type cells when assayed by Raf1-RBD. In addition, cAMP induced Byr2-RBD binding Ras activities were exaggerated in gsk3 − cells, but clearly responsive to cAMP stimulation. These data suggest that the lack of detectible change of cAMP induced PIP3 level in gsk3 − cells when assayed using GFP-PHcrac protein as a PIP3 marker is not likely due to the misregulation of Ras activation. We prefer the view that the defect of cAMP induced PIP3 level change in gsk3 − cells are likely due to the limited level of PIP2 subpopulation accessible to PI3K, which was previously proposed by Teo and others. Figure 3 gsk3 − cells displayed normal pre-stimulus Ras regulation, but aberrant post-stimulus regulation of a subset of Ras proteins.. Levels of active Ras proteins in wild type and gsk3 − cells were analyzed by GST-RBD binding assay. Wild type... GSK3 dependent Serine phosphorylation of PI3K1-LD is critical for its cAMP induced membrane shuttling Given that PI3K1-LD proteins are not properly regulated in cells lacking GSK3, GSK3 may phosphorylate PI3K1-LD and thus regulate its membrane localization. Furthermore, the membrane localization domains of PI3K1 and 2 contain multiple GSK3 phosphorylation consensus sequence. Systematic serine to aspartic acid as well as alanine sextuple substitution mutants of PI3K1-LD-GFP were generated and expressed in wild type and gsk3 − cells and biochemically analyzed. Wild type PI3K1-LDGFP proteins displayed contrasting subcellular localization in wild type and gsk3 − cells; PI3K1-LD displayed ~50 % enrichment in the pellet fraction of gsk3 − cells compared to the wild type. Substitutions of potential GSK3 phosphorylation sites with aspartic acid ) restored cytosolic enrichment of PI3K in gsk3 − cells, whereas serine to alanine mutant ) proteins were enriched in the pellet fraction of wild type cells. The total amount of PI3K1-LD proteins in Pellet and Supernatant fractions were comparable as shown in figure 4B and the relative distributions of various PI3K1-LD proteins in each fraction were shown in figure 4C. Figure 4 PI3K1-LD contains potential GSK3 phosphorylation sites and of which mutations significantly affects its subcellular localization.. The top panel shows three potential GSK3 phosphorylation sites on PI3K1-LD: amino acids for the substitution mutations... The same sets of PI3K1-LD-GFP proteins were then analyzed microscopically. The SPM-PI3K1-LD-GFP protein displayed transient membrane translocalization in response to cAMP stimulation in both wild type and gsk3 − cells, suggesting that phosphorylation of these sites are a prerequisite for chemoattractant induced regulation of PI3K1 subcellular localization. In other words, dephosphorylation of these sites would not be necessary for PI3K to relocalize back to the cytosol after the peak activation of PI3K. This point is further supported by biochemical analysis of PI3K1-LD phosphorylation described later. In contrast to phosphomimetic mutant, the SAS-PI3K1-LD proteins in wild type cells displayed the high basal level of membrane localization, which was refractory to further activation by cAMP, resembling the situation of PI3K in gsk3 − cells. Relative intensities of GFP signals from each experiment were shown in figure 5C. Figure 5 Effects of substitution mutations of PI3K1-LD assayed by fluorescent microscope.. GFP-SPM-PI3K1-LD displayed normal transient membrane translocation in response to cAMP stimulation in both wild type and gsk3 − cells.. In contrast, GFP-SAS-PI3K1-LD... Figure 6 PI3K1-LD is phosphorylated in a GSK3 dependent manner. Top right panel: GST-PI3K1-LD proteins expressed in wild type cells displayed significantly higher level of serine phosphorylation than those from gsk3 − cells when analyzed by western... PI3K1-LD proteins are constitutively phosphorylated on serine residues in a GSK3 dependent manner To further dissect the role of the phosphorylation of PI3K1-LD, we generated and expressed GST-PI3K1-LD in wild type and gsk3 − cells. Western blot analysis using anti-phospho- serine specific antibody disclosed differential phosphorylation of PI3K1-LD proteins in wild type and gsk3 − cells, which is sensitive to phosphatase treatment. We also noticed a slight, but consistent mobility difference between the GST-PI3K1-LD protein bands purified from wide type and gsk3 − cells, which is sensitive to phosphatase treatment as well. As mentioned previously, the serine phosphorylation of PI3K1-LD protein is likely a prerequisite or permissive signal for chemoattractant induced regulation of PI3K. Consistently, GST-PI3K1-LD proteins displayed no significant change in its serine phosphorylation level in response to cAMP stimulation. We also determined that synthetic and primed peptides encoding the three potential GSK3 phosphorylation sequences were phosphorylated by whole cell extract in a lithium sensitive manner. In contrast, only minimal lelvel of lithium sensitive phosphorylation was observed from gsk3 − cell lysates as expected. The simplest interpretation of these data is that GSK3 directly phosphorylates these sites upon priming by other kinases. Although, it is possible that GSK3 regulates PI3K phosphorylation indirectly through other kinase. Discussion Previous studies on the role of GSK3 in the context of cell motility regulation uncovered that GSK3 affects TorC2 and Daydreamer mediated signaling. This study details that GSK3 is essential for proper membrane targeting of PI3K. Misregulation of PI3K in gsk3 − cells led to an aberrantly high level of prestimulus PIP3, which resembles the situation of cells lacking PTEN, and inefficient polarization in response to cAMP gradient. Furthermore, that gsk3 − cells were refractory to cAMP mediated transient PIP3 production is likely due to a limited pool of PIP2 accessible for PI3K as suggested by Teo and others, given that a set of Ras can still be transiently activated in gsk3 − cells by cAMP. Both GFP imaging experiments and biochemical fractionation supported the view that GSK3 affects serine phosphorylation of PI3K1 membrane localization domain, which is likely a permissive signal for chemoattractant induced plasma membrane localization of PI3K. Considering that Sextuple Phosphomimetic PI3K1-LD mutant was able to display transient membrane localization in response to cAMP and the level of serine phosphorylation of GST-PI3K1- LD did not change during the course of cAMP stimulation, GSK3 dependent phosphorylation of PI3K1-LD is a prerequisite for proper chemotactic responses. It is thus likely that chemoattractant signals control PI3K localization by modulating PI3K binding targets either in the cytosol or on the plasma membrane as diagramed in figure 7. Figure 7 A model for GSK3 mediated PI3K1 membrane localization. In addition to the aberrant PI3K membrane recruitment, it is clear that gsk3 − cells suffer from other defects. As reported by Teo and others TorC2 activation and PKB and PKBR activations were severely compromised. Consistently, alleviating PIP3 level by treating gsk3 − cells with PI3K inhibitor LY294002 did not improve motility properties of gsk3 − cells. Another possibility is that gsk3 − cells either underexpress or overexpress signaling component critical for motility regulation. One such target is SodC, which is significantly underexpressed in gsk3 − cells. sodC − cells display aberrant Ras activation with a concomitant increase in the prestimulus PIP3 level. Overexpression of SodC in gsk3 − cells, however, failed to rescue any of the compromised motility parameters. Wild type cells expressing SodC displayed modest inhibition of the speed of movement, indicating that a fine-tuning of the superoxide level by this enzyme is necessary for optimal motility behavior of cells. Finally, it would be worthy to mention that the proper regulation of Raf1-RBD binding Ras species, likely RasD, may constitute a critical part of executing cell fate decisions mediated by GSK3. Materials and Methods Dictyostelium culture, chemotaxis and motility assays, and Fluorescence microscopy Dictyostelium wild-type strain and gsk3 − cells were grown as described previously. Exponentially growing cells were differentiated with 50 nM pulses of cAMP for 4 hrs and assayed for either random motility or challenged with a cAMP-filled capillary needle at a density of 6×10 4 cells/cm 2. Images were recorded using a CoolSNAP digital camera with OpenLab software. Chemotactic indices and speed of movements were computed as described before. All fluorescent images were obtained using a 100X oil lens on a Leica DM IRB inverted epifluorescence microscope equipped with a CoolSNAP digital camera and relative fluorescence profiles were obtained using Openlab image software. GSK3 Kinase Assay The GSK3 peptide kinase assay was performed as previously reported. The primed peptide substrate sequences are as follows. GSM peptide –RRRPASVPPSPSLSRHSS P HQRR, P1 peptide - RRRMNSIESS 7 SNDS 11 NRR, P2 peptide - RRRNDSNCSS 109 GSSS 113-P GRR, and P3 peptide - RRRGSSSGSS 177 SGGS 181-P DRR. Control samples were assayed in the presence of 50 mM LiCl, a GSK3 inhibitor, and specific activities were calculated by subtracting these values from the total counts. Specific activity is expressed as picomole of phosphate transferred/assay. Each experiment was repeated three times and error bars represent standard deviation. Ras Binding Assay Active Ras proteins were assayed as before. Whole cell lysates prepared after 4 hours of cAMP pulsing were mixed with 5 μg of purified GST-Raf1-RBD or GST-Byr2-RBD on Glutathione-sepharose beads at 4°C for 2 hours, and the pellets were washed three times with cell lysis buffer. The active Ras proteins bound with GST-RBD were visualized by western blotting with the anti-Pan-Ras antibody. Antibodies and λ-phosphatase Anti-GFP antibodies were from Covance for western blot analysis. Anti-GST antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotech and anti-Pan-Ras antibodies were from Calbiochem. Rabbit anti-phosphoserine antibody was purchased from Introgen. For each western, 1:250 dilution was made to achieve a final concentration of 1 mg/ml. λ-phosphatase is purchased from Biolabs, the reaction was conducted as what the provider suggested GST-PI3K1-LD expression vector construction pEXP4-PI3K1LD-GFP was used as a template for generating GST-PI3K1-LD. The full length PI3K1LD cDNA is 1476 bp long and contains a ClaI site at +1457. pEXP4-PI3K1LD was obtained by removing GFP with KpnI digestion. By using a primer set, a cDNA encoding GST, a thrombin site, a BamHI, an EcoRI site was generated by PCR from PGEX-4T-1 vector. The GST gene was inserted into the upstream of region of PI3K1LD in pEXP4-PI3K1LD. All constructs above were confirmed by sequencing. Site-directed mutagenesis Mutations were generated using the QuikChange Site Directed Mutagenesis Kit and confirmed by sequencing, and expressed in pEXP4. The serine to alanine mutations were generated by PCR with mutants primers as indicated: PI3K1-LD – primers SDM11F and SDM11R, PI3K1-LD – primers SDM12F and SDM12R, PI3K1-LD – primers SDM13F and SDM13R, PI3K1-LD – primers SDM14F and SDM14R. The sextuple alanine to serine mutant was generated by PCR from PI3K1-LD using mutant primers SDM12F and SDM12R. The Sextuple Phosphomimetic mutant was generated through following steps: PI3K1-LD was generated by using the mutant primers SDM21F and SDM21R, PI3K1-LD was generated with SDM22F and SDM22R mutant primers using PI3K1-LD as the template, and SPM-PI3K1- LD was generated by substituting the SpeI-SpeI fragment of the PI3K1-LD, which contains the four mutations, into the PI3K1-LD. Primers used in the mutants generation are as follows: SDM11F - gaatagtattgaaagtgcttctaatgatgccaatgagataaataaaaattcaaac, SDM11R - gtttgaatttttatttatctcattggcatcattagaagcactttcaatactattc, SDM12F - gatagtaattgtagtgctggtagtagtgctggaggacatgtaaataatgg, SDM12R - ccattatttacatgtcctccagcactactaccagcactacaattactatc, SDM13F – gtagcagtggtagtgccagtggtggtgctgatgaatctgcttcaaatc, SDM13R – gatttgaagcagattcatcagcaccaccactggcactaccactgctac, SDM14F – caccaaaatcaaataatactGctaaaaagacaGcatccgatacaacacc, SDM14R – ggtgttgtatcggatgctgtctttttagcagtattatttgattttggtg, SDM21F – gaatagtattgaaagtgaatctaatgatgaaaatgagataaataaaaattcaaac, SDM21R – gtttgaatttttatttatctcattttcatcattagattcactttcaatactattc, SDM22F – gatagtaattgtagtgaaggtagtagtgaaggaggacatgtaaataatgg, SDM22R – ccattatttacatgtcctccttcactactaccttcactacaattactatc, SDM23F – gtagcagtggtagtgaaagtggtggtgaagatgaatctgcttcaaatc, and SDM23R - gatttgaagcagattcatcttcaccaccactttcactaccactgctac. Subcellular fractionation of wild type and mutants GFP-PI3K1-LD proteins Cell fractionation assay were performed as described previously with minor modifications. Twenty five million aggregation competent cells were spun down and washed once with ice-cold PBS and the cell pellets were treated with 400 μl of 0.02% TritonX-100 and incubated 10 min at 4°C with agitation. All solutions contained protease inhibitors. Mixtures were centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatants were then mixed with 4 x SDS protein loading dye and the pellet were mixed with 100 μl of 1 x SDS protein loading dye. Forty microliters of soluble fractions and 1 μl of pellet fractions were loaded onto SDS-PAGE and analyzed by western blotting using anti-GFP antibody. Ras proteins were used as a marker enriched at the pellet fraction. Supplementary Material Supp Movie Legends Click here to view. Supp Movie S1 Supplemental movie S1. cAMP induced transient membrane localization of GFP-PHcrac proteins in wild type cells. In response to cAMP stimulation, cAMP pulsed wild type cells exhibited GFP-PHcrac protein translocation to the plasma membrane in a transient manner. Images were collected every 5 seconds for a minute. Click here to view. Supp Movie S2 Supplemental movie S2. cAMP pulsed gsk3 − cells displayed high basal level of GFP-PHcrac proteins at the plasma membrane, in which no further translocation was detected in response to cAMP stimulation. Images were collected every 5 seconds for a minute. Click here to view. Supp Movie S3 Supplemental movie S3. cAMP pulsed wild type cells exhibited transient GFP-PI3K1-LD protein translocation to the plasma membrane in response to cAMP stimulation. Images were collected every 10 seconds for a minute. Images were collected every 10 seconds for a minute. Click here to view. Supp Movie S4 Supplemental movie S4. cAMP pulsed wild type cells exhibited transient GFP-PTEN protein translocation to the plasma membrane in response to cAMP stimulation. Images were collected every 10 seconds for a minute. Click here to view. Supp Movie S5 Supplemental movie S5. cAMP pulsed gsk3 − cells displayed high basal level of GFPPI3K1- LD proteins at the plasma membrane, in which no further translocation was detected in response to cAMP stimulation. Images were collected every 10 seconds for a minute. Click here to view. Supp Movie S6 Supplemental movie S6. cAMP pulsed gsk3 − cells exhibited transient GFP-PTEN protein translocation to the plasma membrane in response to cAMP stimulation. Images were collected every 10 seconds for a minute. Click here to view. Supp Movie S7 Supplemental movie S7. cAMP pulsed wild type cells exhibited transient SPM-PI3K1- LD-GFP protein translocation to the plasma membrane in response to cAMP stimulation. Images were collected every 10 seconds for a minute. Click here to view. Supp Movie S8 Supplemental movie S8. cAMP pulsed gsk3 − cells exhibited transient SPM-PI3K1-LDGFP protein translocation to the plasma membrane in response to cAMP stimulation. Images were collected every 10 seconds for a minute. Click here to view. Supp Movie S9 Supplemental movie S9. cAMP pulsed wild type cells exhibited constitutive plasma membrane localization of SAS-PI3K1-LD-GFP protein irrespective of cAMP stimulation. Images were collected every 10 seconds for a minute. Click here to view. 