 O 2 regulates multicellular development of the social amoeba Dictyostelium, suggesting it may serve as an important cue in its native soil environment. Dictyostelium expresses an HIF〈-type prolyl 4-hydroxylase whose levels affect the O 2 -threshold for culmination implicating it as a direct O 2 -sensor, as in animals. But Dictyostelium lacks HIF〈, a mediator of animal prolyl 4-hydroxylase signaling, and P4H1 can hydroxylate Pro143 of Skp1, a subunit of E3 SCF ubiquitin-ligases. Skp1 hydroxyproline then becomes the target of five sequential glycosyltransferase reactions that modulate the O 2 -signal. Here we show that genetically induced changes in Skp1 levels also affect the O 2 -threshold, in opposite direction to that of the modification enzymes suggesting that the latter reduce Skp1 activity. Consistent with this, overexpressed Skp1 is poorly hydroxylated and Skp1 is the only P4H1 substrate detectable in extracts. Effects of Pro143 mutations, and of combinations of Skp1 and enzyme level perturbations, are consistent with pathway modulation of Skp1 activity. However, some effects were not mirrored by changes in modification of the bulk Skp1 pool, implicating a Skp1 subpopulation and possibly additional unknown factors. Altered Skp1 levels also affected other developmental transitions in modification-dependent fashion. Whereas hydroxylation of animal HIF〈 results in its polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, Dictyostelium Skp1 levels were little affected by its modification status. These data indicate that Skp1 and possibly E3 SCF ubiquitin-ligase activity modulate O 2 -dependent culmination and other developmental processes, and at least partially mediate the action of the hydroxylation/glycosylation pathway in O 2 -sensing. Keywords: Prolyl hydroxylation, glycosylation, hypoxia, oxygen, Skp1, Dictyostelium Introduction When starved, cells of the social amoeba Dictyostelium aggregate and form a migratory slug, which subsequently culminates into a sessile fruiting body composed of tens of thousands of spores supported above a narrow cellular stalk. In the native environment of the soil, this asexual developmental pathway provides a mechanism for normally subterranean, solitary amoebae to synergistically achieve an aerial disposition from which spores may disperse to distant locales to renew proliferation. The slug-to-fruit switch decision critically depends on O 2 -concentration and other environmental factors such as NH 3, light, humidity and warmth, some of which have been shown to signal via protein kinase A. Whereas only 2.5% O 2 is required for proliferation, 10-12% O 2 is required for development of the normal strain Ax3 past the slug stage if cells reside at an air-water interface, and 70% is required for terminal differentiation into stalk and spore cells when cells are submerged. The O 2 -set point for culmination appears to involve signaling via P4H1, the Dictyostelium ortholog of HIF〈 prolyl 4-hydroxylase, a major O 2 -sensor of animals involved in mid-to-long term responses to hypoxia. Disruption of the phyA gene encoding P4H1, or increased P4H1 enzyme activity due to overexpression, causes an increased or decreased O 2 -requirement for culmination, respectively. However, Dictyostelium, and other protists that possess phyA -like genes, lack HIF〈, the transcriptional factor subunit that is destabilized by hydroxylation of Pro-residues in its two O 2 -dependent degradation domains. A known substrate for Dictyostelium P4H1 is Skp1, a subunit of the SCF-class of E3 Ub-ligases. E3 SCF Ub-ligases regulate the cell cycle, nutrient sensing, physiology and development in many organisms, including the latter in Dictyostelium. Dd-Skp1 is modified at Pro143, which is replaced by Glu in chordate Skp1s. Interestingly, E3 SCF Ub-ligases are evolutionarily related to the E3 VHL Ub-ligase which mediates O 2 -dependent degradation of animal HIF〈 in normoxia, suggesting a potentially related signaling mechanism associated with protein stability. Therefore Skp1 is a candidate for mediating the O 2 -signaling role of P4H1 in Dictyostelium. Hydroxylated Skp1 is subject to successive further modification by three gene products, resulting in the assembly of a pentasaccharide on the fully processed protein. Disruption of the dual function glycosyltransferase gene pgtA, which results in accumulation of Skp1 whose Hyp is modified by the single sugar GlcNAc, leads to a near wild-type O 2 -dependence that originally suggested that peripheral glycosylation is not relevant to O 2 -dependent signaling. However, a recent study showed that disruption of agtA, required for addition of the final two sugars, results in dependence on high O 2 approaching that of phyA – cells, revealing a modulatory role for glycosylation. Since Skp1 is the only substrate detected for the PgtA and AgtA glycosyltransferases in biochemical screening studies, Skp1 is implicated as the functional target of P4H1 in O 2 -signaling as well. However, since animal PHDs appear to have multiple substrates in O 2 -signaling, and it is challenging to identify PHD targets, further evidence is required to confirm hypothesized involvement of Skp1 in P4H1 signaling in Dictyostelium. Fig. 1 Specificity of P4H1 and Gnt1. Schematic of the hydroxylation/glycosylation pathway, using Skp1 as a target example. Soluble extracts of phyA – stationary stage cells were desalted,... Wild-type strains of D. discoideum harbor two Skp1 genes, Skp1A and Skp1B, whose amino acid sequences are identical except for a difference at codon 39 in the N-terminal region. The axenic strain Ax2 possesses the wild-type complement, whereas strain Ax3, used in all studies to date, has two Skp1B genes owing to a 100 kb duplication in chromosome 2. The two genes share the same expression pattern in the life cycle based on RT-PCR and protein studies, and are conserved in the genomes of four other social amoebae. Using reverse genetic approaches, we find that decreasing or increasing Skp1 levels modulates the O 2 -dependence of culmination over the same range affected by changes in P4H1 levels, except in an opposite direction suggesting that hydroxylation opposes Skp1 activity. Other developmental steps are also affected by changes in Skp1 levels. Enzymatic assays and the phenotypes of Pro143 point mutations, and combined mutations affecting both Skp1 and modification pathway enzymes, are consistent with a model that Skp1 mediates pathway activity in O 2 -regulation. Analyses of the modification status of the bulk pool of Skp1 suggest, however, that the effects are mediated by a subpopulation of Skp1, and leave open the possibility that other targets of the modification pathway also contribute to signaling. Experimental procedures Cell growth and development Strains were grown axenically in HL-5 medium on orbital shakers. For development, vegetative cells were centrifuged at 1000 g × 1 min, resuspended in ice-cold PDF buffer, centrifuged again, and resuspended in PDF. 0.4 ml cells were spread on 47 mm-diameter Millipore filters in 60 × 15mm Petri dishes and incubated in sealed plastic boxes, under overhead room fluorescent lighting at 22 °C, for up to 46 h in the presence of the indicated concentration of flowing O 2 with the balance made up with N 2. Development was evaluated morphologically and by counting spores in a hemacytometer. Stationary stage cells were collected at 2-3 × 10 7 /ml. For aggregation stage cells, washed vegetative cells were resuspended at 2 × 10 7 /ml in 2 ml of Agg buffer, and shaken in a flask for 8 h. Slug stage cells were scraped from filters 2-3 h after their initial appearance. Shaking cells were incubated with 400 μg/ml cycloheximide from Sigma Chemical Co., diluted from a 50 mg/ml stock solution in DMSO, for the indicated time. Control cultures were incubated in 0.8% DMSO. For metabolic labeling, 5 μCi of 35 S-Met was added 15 min after introduction of cycloheximide and incubated for 2 h. Incorporation into protein was measured by TCA precipitation as before. Cell extracts and protein analyses For standard Western blot analysis, cells were collected by centrifugation, resuspended in ice-cold 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, centrifuged at 5000 g × 15 sec, and the pellet frozen at -80° C. For protein determination, pellets were resuspended in ice-cold 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, 0.5 mM PMSF, 5 μg/ml each of leupeptin and aprotinin, and assayed using a micro BCA protein Assay Reagent Kit, relative to a bovine serum albumin standard. S100 fractions were prepared as described. Western blotting and antibodies For SDS-PAGE, cell pellets were resuspended in 1X Laemmli sample buffer, 20 mM DTT, or cell lysates were mixed with 4X modified Laemmli sample buffer, 80 mM DTT. After boiling for 1 min, samples were separated on a 7-20% or 15-20%, or 4-12% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel at 0.5-1 × 10 6 cells/lane, and blotted as described, or on an iBlot Dry Blotting System. mAb 4H2, which specifically recognizes non-glycosylated Skp1, was generated by immunizing mice with a synthetic peptide linked to KLH, as previously described. mAb 4E1 recognizes all Skp1 isoforms. Affinity-purified anti-actin antibody was from Sigma. Alexa-680 labeled secondary Abs were from Invitrogen. anti-P4H1 was described previously. Protein levels were quantitated by densitometric analysis of Alexa-680 fluorescence imaged using a Li-Cor Odyssey infrared scanner, over an intensity range validated by analysis of a 2-fold dilution series of cell extracts probed with the same Abs. Skp1 Strain constructions Skp1A cDNA and Skp1B cDNA were amplified from p48 and p50 plasmids, using Skp1A-S and Skp1A-AS, by PCR and cloning into pCR4TOPO. The insert was released using SacI and KpnI, and ligated into similarly digested pVSE, and pVSC plasmids. Plasmids were electroporated into growing Dictyostelium, and G418-resistant cells were selected at 20 or 120 μg/ml G418 to enrich for chromosomally integrated low- or high-level expressers, and cloned on bacteria plates. Skp1B was disrupted in Ax2 cells by replacing the chromosomal gene with a fpaB fragment containing a floxed-Blasticidin S resistance marker. A 1067 bp 5’-fragment and a 780 bp 3’-fragment of Skp1B were PCR-amplified from genomic DNA using primers SB1 and SB2, and SB3 and SB4, respectively, and separately cloned into pCR4TOPO. The Skp1B 3’-fragment was cut and ligated into pCR4TOPO-5’Skp1B using BamHI and XhoI. The sequence of each PCR-generated fragment was verified. Lastly, fbsr was released from plBPLP using BamHI and ligated into pCR4TOPO-5′3’Skp1B digested with BamHI to create pCR4TOPO-5′fbsr3’Skp1B. The disruption DNA was released with SmaI and used to transform strain Ax2 cells by electroporation as above, except in the presence of 10 μg/ml Blasticidin S. Gene replacement was confirmed by PCR, and the fbsr-cassette was removed by transient transfection with pDEX-NLS-cre, which encodes Crerecombinase. Point mutations of Pro143 in fpaA were generated by replacing chromosomal fpaA with a construct containing Ala143 or Glu143. A 552 bp fragment, which started with codon143, was PCR-amplified from genomic DNA. PCR reaction used primers A1-U, in which CCA was replaced by GCA generating a PstI site; and A1-L. An 874 bp DNA, downstream of Skp1A, was PCR amplified with primers A2-U and A2-L. A full length Skp1 coding sequence was PCR-amplified from plasmid p49 with primers p49A1 and p49A-L. Fragments were separately cloned into pCR4TOPO. A 874 bp fragment was released using SacI and ClaI and ligated into similarly digested pCR4TOPO. Then the 429 bp fragment from p49 was cut and ligated into pCR4TOPO using BglII and PstI. Finally, fbsr was ligated into the pCR4TOPO using NcoI and BamHI. The Glu143 mutation was generated from the Ala143 construct using site-mutagenesis with primers SAQ-SDM and SAQ-SDM-Rev with gaa. The mutant constructs were excised using BglII and ClaI, treated with Bal 31 exonuclease to remove flanking non-homologous nt, and used to transform strain Ax2 cells by electroporation as above, in the presence of 10 μg/ml Blasticidin S. Gene replacement was confirmed by PCR with two pairs of primers: SA3 and SA4 ; SAP49 and fBSR-R1. Strains overexpressing both Skp1 and P4H1 were generated by cotransformation of equal amounts of the respective expression plasmids and selected for using G418 as described above. The majority of drug-resistant clones expressed both proteins based on Western blot analysis. RFP and GFP expression reporters Promoter DNA was amplified from strain Ax3 genomic DNA using PCR reactions containing the following primers: fpaA -sense, fpaA -antisense, fpaB -sense, fpaB -antisense. The products of the reactions were gel purified and cloned into pCR4TOPO, excised using XhoI and KpnI, and cloned into similarly digested pVSP-RFPmars and pVSP-labGFP, using standard procedures. For the fpaA promoter constructs, this resulted in replacement of the phyA -promoter DNA with 366 nt of DNA immediately upstream of the fpaA start ATG, which comprises most of the 441 nt separating fpaA from the reverse-oriented upstream coding sequence and includes all G/C nt more than 13 nt upstream of the DDB_G0269994. For fpaB, this resulted in inclusion of 2127 nt upstream of the fpaB start codon, which extended 28 nt into the upstream reverse-oriented coding sequence. Enzymes and reactions His 6 P4H1 was expressed in E. coli and purified essentially to homogeneity as described previously. The Gnt1 ORF was amplified from pTYB1-GnT51 using the following primers in a standard PCR reaction: GnT51-Zs1, and GnT51-Zas1. The product was transferred to pDEST527 using the LR Clonase II mix to yield pDONR201, which was propagated in TOP10 cells, transferred into ER2566 E. coli cells, and grown in LB medium with 100 μg/ml ampicillin at 37 °C. until OD 590 reached 0.4, at which time 1 mM IPTG was added and the culture was incubated for 16 h at 10° C on a shaker. His 6 Gnt1 was purified from the S100 fraction on a Ni ++ -column as for His 6 P4H1. Combined P4H1/Gnt1 reactions were performed on desalted S100 preparations of stationary stage or slug stage cells, in the presence of UDP-GlcNAc, and the entire reaction volume was subjected to SDS-PAGE, as described previously. Incorporation of radioactivity was measured by liquid scintillation counting of evenly spaced gel slices created using a razor blade cutter. Skp1 purification and mass spectrometry FLAG-Skp1A and Skp1B-myc were purified to near homogeneity, from stationary stage and slug stage cells, respectively, and analyzed by MALDI-TOF-MS, as described in the supplementary material. Results Biochemical screen for P4H1 substrates To probe for potential P4H1 substrates that accumulate in phyA -null cells, a desalted cytosolic extract was incubated with His 6 P4H1 and appropriate cosubstrates and cofactors. The extract also included His 6 Gnt1 and UDP-GlcNAc to transfer GlcNAc to the Hyp reaction product, and the entire reaction product was displayed on a 1D SDS-PAGE gel which was then cut into slices to measure radioactivity. As expected, Skp1 was strongly labeled. However, no other proteins were detected at more than 0.2% of the level of Skp1 labeling except for a variable, slightly more rapidly migrating peak probably corresponding to a breakdown product of Skp1. About 5% of the level of Skp1 labeled in P4H1 – cells was labeled in Ax3 cells, suggesting the existence of a small steady-state pool of unmodified protein. Similar results were obtained for an extract of slug cells. The results suggest that Skp1 is the only substrate of P4H1 that accumulates in P4H1 – cells but, since the coupled assay depends on recognition of the P4H1 product by Gnt1, other P4H1 substrates might have been missed. The significance of Skp1 as a potential substrate for P4H1 in O 2 -signaling was therefore investigated genetically. Genetic modifications of Skp1 loci The standard haploid Ax3 strain used in previous studies harbors three Skp1 genes: fpaA and two identical copies of fpaB owing to a duplication on chromosome 2 involving about 50 genes. Skp1A and Skp1B differ by a single amino acid as depicted in Fig. 2A. Another standard strain, Ax2, lacks this duplication. The O 2 -dependence of culmination was compared by incubating cells in a graded series of O 2 levels, and monitoring development after 2 d based on morphological appearance. Completion of development was quantitated by counting spores. All strains exhibited a typical, sharp dependence on O 2 -level to culminate. The level required to form 50% of the maximum number of spores was 7% O 2 for Ax2 compared to 12% for Ax3. Fig. 2 Genetic modifications of chromosomal Skp1 loci affect O 2 -dependence of culmination. Skp1 isoforms examined in this study. Morphological development of Skp1B – and normal parental strain Ax2 cells on filters after 43 h at 21% or 2.5% O 2... For additional evidence that O 2 -dependence is affected by Skp1, the Skp1B gene of Ax2 was disrupted by homologous recombination. The Skp1B – strain formed fruiting bodies with extended tenuous stalks, and exhibited an even lower requirement for O 2 with a 50% value of only 3% O 2. Similar results were obtained for an independent Skp1B – strain. Western blot analysis revealed that the steady-state level of total Skp1 was reduced to about 50% in the Skp1B – strain relative to the parental strain Ax2, whereas the level was similar between strains Ax2 and Ax3. Therefore other genetic differences may explain the distinct O 2 -requirements for culmination of Ax2 and Ax3. Efforts to disrupt Skp1A using a similar approach were unsuccessful. Thus, at a given O 2 level, the Skp1B – strain exhibited increased culmination whereas Ax3 exhibited less. As summarized in Table 1, this suggests that higher Skp1 activity inhibits culmination, whereas higher activity of the hydroxylation/glycosylation pathway, which modifies Skp1, promotes culmination. Table 1 Summary of effects To investigate whether the effect of Skp1 was influenced by its hydroxylation/glycosylation, Pro143 was changed to either Ala or Glu in the chromosomal locus of Skp1A of strain Ax2. These substitutions occur naturally in C. elegans SKR2 and human Skp1, respectively. Attempts to similarly modify the Skp1B gene, or the Skp1A gene in the Skp1B – strain, were unsuccessful. The gene replacements were confirmed by PCR, and Western blotting showed a doublet consistent with an equimolar mixture of glycosylated and unmodified Skp1, confirming that both Skp1s are normally expressed. The Skp1A3 and strains each exhibited modest but reproducibly higher O 2 -requirements for 50% culmination, intermediate between the parental Ax2 strain and Ax3. In addition, the Pro143 mutant strains were delayed by several h in the time to convert from loose to tight aggregates, whereas the time required for the other developmental transitions was not affected. The delay of tight aggregate formation is a novel phenotype, but differs from the selective delay in conversion of tipped aggregates to slugs that occurs in hypoxia. As previously described for P4H1 – strains, the above strains exhibited a higher O 2 -requirement when developed under darkness compared to overhead light, indicating that altered Skp1 levels interact with other signaling pathways as for hydroxylation/glycosylation. The inhibition of culmination seen whether Ala or Glu replaced Pro correlated with inhibition observed in P4H1 – cells, that also do not modify Skp1. Overexpression of epitope-tagged Skp1s O 2 -dependent development was then investigated in strains modified by stable transfection with additional copies of Skp1A or Skp1B genes. The previously described strain HW302, in which transgenic Skp1B-myc is expressed at a level similar to that of endogenous Skp1 in Ax3, from a tandem array of chromosomally integrated transgenes under control of the semi-constitutive discoidin 1© promoter, exhibited normal dependence on O 2 for culmination. In contrast, expression of the same protein under control of the developmental promoter cotB, which directs expression in prespore cells, resulted in an increase in the O 2 -requirement to ~18%, approximately the level required for culmination of phyA – cells. The cotB ::Skp1B-myc strain expressed 4-5-fold more Skp1B-myc than endogenous Skp1 in slugs, and Skp1B-myc was not detected in vegetative cells confirming promoter specificity. The results are consistent with the above analysis that increased activity of Skp1 increases the level of O 2 required for culmination, and the comparison with HW302 cells suggests that the level and/or timing of expression is important for the effect. Since, at a given level of O 2, elevated Skp1 leads to reduced culmination, and Skp1 contributes to the E3 SCF Ub-ligase, Skp1 may normally promote the degradation of a hypothetical activator of culmination. Fig. 3 Functional analysis of strains overexpressing epitope-tagged Skp1. Development was quantitated by spore counting as in Fig. 2C. Visual inspections confirmed that spore formation coincided with culmination. Selected examples of separate trials including... Previous studies showed that whereas Skp1B-myc expressed under control of the dscC -promoter was predominantly modified by the pentasaccharide, Skp1B-myc expressed under control of the cotB -promoter did not appear to be modified based on gel shift analysis. To address the hydroxylation status of P143, Skp1B-myc was purified essentially to homogeneity from cotB ::Skp1B-myc slugs. MALDI-TOF-MS analysis of the full-length protein was consistent with absence of glycosylation, and MALDI-TOF-MS of HPLC-separated, endo Lys-C generated peptides detected only the unmodified peptide containing P143, confirming its unmodified status. Previous Western blot analyses showed that P4H1 is present in both prespore and prestalk cells, and activity assays performed on soluble slug extracts revealed P4H1 activity at 33% of the specific activity of that of stationary stage cell extracts. Therefore, P4H1 is present in the slug, but appears to be rate-limiting for the hydroxylation of nascent Skp1B-myc. Thus, the increased O 2 -requirement resulting from overexpression of Skp1 under control of the cotB -promoter, compared to the dscC -promoter, may depend on less hydroxylation/glycosylation. A second approach to testing the role of hydroxylation was to examine the effect of overexpressing the Skp1B3-myc mutant. When expressed at a level similar to that of normal Skp1B-myc, Skp1B3-myc exerted a minimal effect on the O 2 -requirement. However, a clone that expressed a very high level raised the O 2 -requirement to a threshold that did not, however exceed that of Skp1B-myc. Although its inability to be modified appears to affect the activity of Skp1B3-myc, the possibility that the mutation reduces activity independent of the effect on modification cannot be excluded. To investigate whether failure to hydroxylate prespore-expressed Skp1B-myc was due to the C-terminal myc-tag or which isoform was expressed, Skp1A with an N-terminal FLAG-tag was expressed in Ax3, as done in yeast studies. Unlike the C-terminally-tagged protein, the majority of FLAG-Skp1A was poorly modified even in stationary stage cells when expressed behind the dscC -promoter, based on gel shift analysis. FLAG-Skp1A was also recognized by mAb 4H2, generated by immunization of a mouse with a 13-mer synthetic peptide corresponding to the sequence surrounding Pro143, that specifically recognizes unmodified or hydroxylated Skp1 but not glycosylated Skp1, confirming that it is not glycosylated. MALDI-TOF-MS analysis of tryptic peptides of FLAG-Skp1A purified from stationary stage cells showed that the great majority was unhydroxylated. FLAG-Skp1A was also poorly modified when expressed in slug cells under either a prestalk or prespore promoter, as for Skp1B-myc. Expression of FLAG-Skp1A under control of either promoter had an effect similar to that of cotB ::Skp1B-myc in elevating the O 2 -requirement for culmination. In contrast, dscC ::FLAG-Skp1A had no effect on the O 2 -requirement, despite the similar level of FLAG-Skp1A that accumulated under the different promoters. The inactivity of dscC ::FLAG-Skp1A, which unlike dscC ::Skp1B-myc was not glycosylated, suggests that preformed Skp1 is not inactive owing to its average glycosylation status, but inaccessibility to O 2 -signaling components. The inhibitory activity of tagged Skp1 expressed in slugs correlates with timing of expression and lack of glycosylation, rather than the type of Skp1, the position or identity of the peptide tag, or the cell type in which it is expressed. Overexpression of native Skp1 To address the possibility that the epitope tags inhibit Skp1 hydroxylation and thereby affect its activity, native sequences of Skp1 were overexpressed in Ax3 cells. In a range of clones expressing low to high levels of Skp1A or B, driven by ecmA - or cotB -promoters, modestly shorter fruiting bodies were formed in contrast to the taller fruiting bodies formed by Skp1B – strains. In addition, the majority of cells in the sori failed to become spores, even at O 2 levels up to 100%. The few spores produced did depend on O 2 in the same way as culmination. As represented in Fig. 4D, the culmination of these and all other Skp1 overexpression strains exhibited an elevated O 2 -requirement, as for tagged Skp1s. In addition, the overexpression strains were delayed in fruiting body formation at 21% O 2, as a result of delayed tight aggregate formation as observed also for the Skp1A3 mutants above. In comparison, strains expressing tagged Skp1s formed slugs at the normal time but tended to be delayed in culmination at 21% O 2, as observed for P4H1 – cells. Skp1A and Skp1B appeared equally inhibitory, with no correlation observed between the degree of Skp1 overexpression and the O 2 -requirement. Furthermore, similar inhibition was observed whether Skp1 was overexpressed under the prestalk or prespore promoter. Thus overexpression of native Skp1 rendered an effect on culmination very similar to that of the tagged Skp1s, confirming the trend that higher Skp1 levels are more inhibitory toward culmination, i.e., elevated O 2 are required to culminate. Overexpressed native Skp1 exerted, in addition, two novel functions: inhibition of tight aggregate formation and sporulation. Fig. 4 Functional analysis of strains overexpressing native Skp1. Strains overexpressing Skp1A under control of either the ecmA - or cotB -promoter, and the parental strain Ax3, were developed for 43 h at ambient O 2 on filters and photographed. Representative... Fig. 5 Western blot analysis of Skp1 expression in slugs of selected strains formed in 21% O 2. Summary of densitometric analyses of total Skp1 expression levels in slugs, based on Western blotting as in Fig. 2E. Slugs were analyzed 2 h after their time of... Glycosylation analysis revealed that, in contrast to the tagged Skp1s, overexpressed native Skp1 exhibited partial glycosylation at 21% O 2. Since expressed untagged Skp1 comigrates with endogenous Skp1, this was inferred from increased levels of the primary glycosylated Skp1 band based on densitometric analysis of the ecmA ::Skp1 and cotB ::Skp1 strains. Hydroxylation/glycosylation correlates with the ability of overexpressed untagged Skp1 to delay slug formation and inhibit sporulation. In addition, most strains also accumulated unmodified Skp1, based on the presence of a more rapidly migrating species in Western blots that was recognized by mAb 4H2. Accumulation of unmodified Skp1 correlates with its ability to inhibit culmination as for the tagged Skp1s. In contrast, overexpression of mutant Skp1A3 in the Ax3 background caused either no change or a slight decrease in O 2 -requirement, and did not delay culmination or inhibit sporulation. The minimal effect was potentially due to low activity of the mutant protein as suggested above for Skp1B-myc. Genetic interactions between Skp1 and its modification enzymes The significance of Skp1 modification was investigated further by testing for genetic interactions between Skp1 level and modification pathway mutants. First, the native Skp1A and Skp1B constructs were expressed in phyA – and agtA – backgrounds. Timing of tight aggregate and slug formation was normal, and culmination was delayed slightly as for phyA – and agtA – strains. In addition, sporulation was normal. Therefore the inhibitory effects of Skp1 overexpression was contingent upon activity of the hydroxylation/glycosylation pathway, as suggested by the comparison of untagged and tagged Skp1 strains. Fig. 6 Genetic interactions. Developmental timing of strains over-expressing native Skp1A or Skp1B, in normal, phyA – or agtA – backgrounds, or in combination with P4H1 overexpression, were compared with Ax3, phyA – or agtA –... In these strains, the O 2 -level required for culmination approached but did not quite achieve the O 2 -requirement of the parental phyA – and agtA – strains, which themselves differed by 2-3% O 2. The observation that O 2 -requirements were not additive was consistent with their functioning in the same pathway, with maximal signaling achieved either by absence of inhibitory modification or overexpression of Skp1 to an extent that exceeds the capacity of inhibitory modification. Culmination at higher O 2 implies the existence of an unknown bypass pathway that can override Skp1 signaling. The ask if under-modification was important for the inhibitory activity of overexpressed Skp1, strains that overexpressed both P4H1 and Skp1 were created by cotransformation with Skp1B and P4H1 expression plasmids of the same promoter type. Western blotting with anti-P4H1 and mAb 4E1 confirmed that both proteins were overexpressed. Interestingly, the majority of excess Skp1 accumulated at the position of unmodified Skp1 and reacted with mAb 4H2, consistent with their being unglycosylated. Morphological analysis showed absence of the delayed tight aggregate formation, short fruiting body stature, and reduced sporulation typical of the Skp1 overexpression strains. In addition, the O 2 -requirement for culmination was reduced to levels typical of P4H1-overexpression in Ax3 cells lacking overexpressed Skp1. The epistatic relationship of P4H1 toward Skp1 was consistent with its exerting a dominant inhibitory effect on Skp1 activity, with the biochemical data suggesting that the effect of hydroxylation is mediated by a small subpopulation of Skp1. To test for an interaction when Skp1 is expressed at subnormal levels, a double Skp1B – / agtA – mutant was created. Independent clones sporulated normally, as expected, and exhibited an O 2 -threshold for culmination intermediate between that of the single mutants, similar to that of the genomic Skp1A3 mutation in which one of the Skp1s was not glycosylated. The absence of an epistatic effect of either gene over the other is consistent with opposing effects of Skp1 level and its modification to tune the activity of Skp1 when at near physiological levels in the cell. Repeated attempts to create a phyA – /Skp1B – double mutant were unsuccessful. Skp1 expression patterns No differences between Skp1A and Skp1B were observed in the overexpression studies, suggesting that their activities are similar during development. Consistent with this, both proteins are expressed in stationary stage cells and slugs, and RT-PCR studies showed that they are similarly and constitutively co-expressed throughout development. However, because the chromosomal loci encoding Skp1A and Skp1B appeared to differ in their susceptibility to genetic modification, which might reflect non-redundant activities, their expression patterns in the slug was analyzed. Promoter-RFP and -labile GFP constructs were created by fusing the entire upstream intergenic region from Skp1A and Skp1B, excepting a distal A/T-only region for fpaA, to RFP or an unstable form of GFP, and transfected as above for overexpressing Skp1. Clones screened for modest RFP or GFP fluorescence were homogeneously fluorescent along the length of the slug. Thus no evidence was obtained for differential expression of Skp1A and Skp1B in prestalk and prespore cells of the slug, suggesting that the Skp1 isoforms do not serve prestalk and prespore cell specific functions. Stability of Skp1 protein Since changes in Skp1 levels affect O 2 -dependence of culmination, we asked if the effects of mutating genes in the hydroxylation/glycosylation pathway affected Skp1 levels. As shown in Fig. 7A, similar levels of Skp1 were detected in slugs from each of the available pathway mutants, indicating that the modification state of Skp1 does not affect its steady-state expression level. In addition, the stability of Skp1 was investigated by incubating cells for varying times in 400 μg/ml cycloheximide, which inhibited incorporation of 35 S-Met by over 95%. Skp1 was stable in normal cells with only a slight diminution observed after 80 min of treatment, as expected, and no differences were observed in mutant cells lacking P4H1 or AgtA. Similar results were obtained for stationary stage and aggregation stage cells. The results suggest that overall Skp1 levels are not regulated by the modification pathway. Fig. 7 Skp1 stability. Summary of Western blot analysis of whole cell extracts of slugs from mutant strains, showing Skp1 levels relative to actin. Standard deviations of 2-3 replicates are shown. Analysis of Skp1 stability. Stationary stage cells in... Discussion Skp1 Genetic disruption of one of the two loci for Skp1, or stable introduction of multiple transgenic copies of Skp1, yielded strains that expressed over a 10-fold range of steady-state Skp1 levels in slugs of the normal parental strain Ax3. Reduced Skp1 level lowered the O 2 -requirement for 50% culmination from ~10% to ~3%, close to the minimal amount required for unicellular growth. In comparison, overexpression to ~133% or beyond, under the control of developmental promoters, resulted in an increase to about ~18%. 4 ). Similar effects were observed at the highest levels of overexpression, suggesting absence of dominant negative activity. Skp1 was similarly active as its A or B isoforms, or when epitope-tagged, or when expressed under control of a prestalk- or prespore-specific promoter. Since lower levels of Skp1 promoted and higher levels inhibited culmination at any given level of O 2, and Skp1 is associated with polyubiquitination via E3 SCF Ub-ligases, it is proposed that Skp1 contributes to the polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of a hypothetical activator of culmination. Even at the maximal level of Skp1 activity achieved by this approach, inhibition of development was suppressed by high levels of O 2. The existence of an override pathway was also inferred from analysis of P4H1 mutants. A previously described substrate of the the Dictyostelium E3Ub-ligase, the cAMP phosphodiesterase RegA, is not a good candidate for culmination regulation by Skp1 since this enzyme inhibits development. An exception occurred for Skp1 overexpressed under control of the promoter dscC, which resulted in considerable carryover of FLAG-Skp1A or Skp1B-myc into the slug without an effect on the O 2 -requirement. This suggests that the modification status or rate of synthesis of Skp1 may be important parameters in addition to the total level of Skp1 in mediating these effects. The strains overexpressing native Skp1 exhibited two additional, novel phenotypes: delayed formation of tipped aggregates at 21% O 2, and failure of prespore cells in the sorus to efficiently differentiate into spores. Inhibition of slug formation is consistent with the initial timing of ecmA and cotB expression around the tipped aggregate stage. As for culmination, these defects occurred whether a low or high level of Skp1A or B was overexpressed in prestalk or prespore cells. Interestingly, Skp1 did not exert these effects when modified at either its N- or C-terminus by epitope-tags, which inhibited modification in vivo. These inhibitory effects were not overridden by high O 2 levels, and we have not observed effects of hypoxia on these processes in normal cells. Therefore, Skp1 may also contribute to the degradation of activators of tight aggregate formation and sporulation, but independent of O 2 -regulation per se. Relation of Skp1 activity to hydroxylation/glycosylation pathway signaling in culmination The range of O 2 -requirements exhibited by the Skp1 expression level panel is remarkably similar but inverse to that observed in a P4H1 expression level panel, in which phyA – cells required ~18% O 2, and P4H1-overexpression strains required 5% O 2 to culminate. Skp1 overexpressed in the slug is poorly hydroxylated, mimicking the phyA – condition. Together, these data suggest that the effects of altered Skp1 levels on O 2 -dependent culmination are reflective of normal effects of O 2 -regulated modification of Skp1 by P4H1. Since higher P4H1 levels promote and higher Skp1 levels inhibit culmination at any given O 2 level, we propose that hydroxylation reduces the activity of Skp1. Previous studies showed that Hyp becomes modified by GlcNAc, and subsequently by the addition of up to 4 additional sugars. Reverse genetic analyses showed that the glycosyltransferases that mediate these additions modulate O 2 -signaling, and we propose that the glycosyl-modifications also directly modulate the effect of proline hydroxylation on Skp1 activity. A direct interaction between Skp1 and the hydroxylation/glycosylation pathway is supported by other mutants and mutant combinations. Substitution of Pro143 with Ala or Glu in the chromosomal locus of Skp1A resulted in a slightly higher O 2 -requirement, consistent with its inability to be modified. The Skp1B – / agtA – double mutant, in which modification of residual Skp1A was interrupted at the trisaccharide step, exhibited an O 2 -requirement intermediate between the individual mutants, consistent with reduced inhibition of a lower level of inhibitory Skp1. Overexpression of Skp1 in a phyA – or agtA – background did not have an additive effect on the O 2 -ceiling, which differed for the two backgrounds, consistent with confinement of the effect of Skp1 to within the O 2 -range dictated by the modification potential. Interestingly, overexpression in either modification mutant background slightly reduced the O 2 -requirement, raising the possibility of a dominant negative effect of overexpression of uninhibited Skp1, resulting in slightly reduced Skp1 activity. Co-overexpression of P4H1 reduced O 2 -dependence of culmination to near the value of seen when P4H1 alone was overexpressed. Finally, the overexpressed mutant Skp1A3 had minimal effect on culmination. Possibly this point mutant has weaker activity than unmodified native Skp1 owing to secondary effects of the amino acid substitution, with its residual activity being more apparent in combination with a single wild-type copy than with the 3 wild-type copies present in the overexpression strains. Consistent with this model, very highly expressed mutant Skp1B3-myc was as inhibitory as modestly expressed Skp1B-myc. The mutant strains were monitored for expression levels of Skp1 and evidence for expected effects on its modification status. Generally, endogenous Skp1 is >90% hydroxylated and glycosylated in the steady state during growth and development. However, as suggested by that study and shown in Supplementary Fig. 2, prolyl 4-hydroxylation is rate-limiting, even at ambient O 2 -levels, for modification of Skp1B-myc overexpressed in prespore cells. In contrast, Skp1B-myc that is overexpressed during vegetative growth is fully modified, though the rates of synthesis have not been directly compared. Similar results were obtained for FLAG-Skp1A expressed in prestalk or prespore cells, except that FLAG-Skp1A is poorly modified even in vegetative and stationary cells. In contrast, while prolyl 4-hydroxylation was also rate-limiting for overexpressed native Skp1A or Skp1B, increased glycosylated Skp1 was detectable. Surprisingly, co-overexpression of P4H1, which corrected the phenotype, did not appear to increase the fraction of modified Skp1. This indicates that a subpopulation of Skp1, too low in abundance to be detected, mediates the effects of P4H1 overexpression, and suggests that accessibility of P4H1 to nascent Skp1 may be important. Alternatively, P4H1 may have other functions in this overexpression setting by signaling via another substrate. These possibilities, which are not mutually exclusive, are depicted in Fig. 7C. In an attempt to identify an alternative target, soluble extracts from normal and phyA – slug cells, and stationary cells, were incubated in the presence of recombinant P4H1, Gnt1 and UDP-GlcNAc. No targets other than Skp1 were detected, though substrates not subsequently modified by Gnt1 GlcNAcT would have escaped detection. However, since AgtA, which solely modifies Skp1 and depends on Gnt1 for its biochemical function, modulates the action of P4H1 in O 2 -regulated culmination, Skp1 clearly contributes to P4H1 signaling. Finally, non-enzymatic functions of P4H1 are excluded based on analysis of inactivating active site point mutations. Although altered levels of Skp1 affect the O 2 -requirement for culmination, there was no evidence that its modifications affect its level or stability in cells, based on Western blot analysis of the mutant strains treated with cycloheximide. Thus the role of hydroxylation of Skp1 appears to differ from that of animal HIF〈, which is destabilized by becoming a target of E3 VHL Ubligase. However, an effect of hydroxylation in the absence of subsequent glycosylation has not yet been directly analyzed. Relation of Skp1 activity to hydroxylation/glycosylation pathway activity in aggregation and sporulation The inhibitory effects of Skp1 overexpression on tipped aggregate formation and sporulation were dependent on its modification. Thus, tipped aggregate formation and sporulation were normal when Skp1 was overexpressed in phyA – or agtA – strains, or when Skp1A3 was overexpressed in the normal strain Ax3. FLAG-Skp1A and Skp1B-myc were also not inhibitory. Because tagged Skp1s were similarly overexpressed in slugs, their inactivity was possibly attributable to their lower potential for modification compared to native Skp1. A similar inhibition of tipped aggregate formation occurred when Skp1A of strain Ax2 was mutated to Skp1A3. A shared trait between these mutant strains is the simultaneous forced expression of both modifiable and unmodified Skp1, suggesting that the ratio is more influential than the absolute level of Skp1. As discussed above, these effects do not correlate with O 2 -regulated steps in development, but may portend novel regulatory mechanisms involving hydroxylation-dependent glycosylation or other modes of P4H1 regulation. These effects of Skp1 on aggregation and sporulation are promoted by the modification pathway, in contrast to the inhibition effect inferred from the analysis of culmination, as summarized in Table 1. The reason for this difference is unclear but may be related to the mechanism of Skp1 action, which is thought to involve association with F-box proteins. Potentially, each of the effects involves interaction with distinct F-box proteins, potentially synthesized at the specific time that regulation occurs. In addition, F-box proteins, which number around 50 in D. discoideum based on genomic sequence searches, fall into two classes based on ability to contact cullin in SCF complexes and sensitivity to regulation by Cand1 and NEDDylation. Modification of Pro143 may have differential effects on interactions with individual F-box proteins or classes of F-box proteins or, alternatively, non-SCF functions of Skp1 that have been proposed. Developmental significance The effects of Skp1 overexpression in either of the major cell types of the slug, prestalk and prespore cells, were indistinguishable. A similar result was observed in a previous study of P4H1 expression. It was noted that in strain mixture experiments, cells expressing higher levels P4H1 tended, regardless of the promoter used to direct its expression, to migrate to the tip, where prestalk cells direct culmination and possibly also slug formation and sporulation. If Skp1 mediates P4H1-dependent signaling as hypothesized, it is predicted that Skp1-underexpressing cells will undergo similar tip transdifferentiation to regulate development, which would explain the similar activity when initially expressed in either cell type. Although the biological significance has yet to be studied, this phenomenon suggests that development is promoted by cells experiencing the highest O 2 -levels, which would be expected to occur at the slug surface at points of minimal radius of curvature such as the tip, but might occur elsewhere. Since the O 2 -dependence of development can be controlled by the properties of <10% of the cells in the strain mixture studies, developmental regulation may be ultrasensitive to O 2. This may contribute to the sharp O 2 -thresholds within experiments and variations of the precise threshold in independent trials. In addition, ultrasensitivity may help explain why, in instances such as the double P4H1 oe /Skp1 oe strain, the modification status of the bulk pool of Skp1 does not correspond to expectation based on protein expression alone. As discussed above, Skp1-signaling may be dependent on an efficiently modified subpopulation that is nascent and/or co-compartmentalized with P4H1 and the other enzymes. As described for P4H1, Skp1 levels appear to be constant throughout the life cycle, and results here suggest that Skp1 is expressed at similar levels throughout the slug. As also shown here, Skp1 is a relatively stable protein, though ongoing synthesis replaces at least half of the steady state pool during development according to prolyl hydroxylase inhibitor studies. Based on our unpublished data that Skp1 is not hydroxylated in vitro after forming a stable complex with FbxA, we reason that cells may continuously monitor O 2, Krebs cycle intermediates, redox sensors and other factors such as sugar-associated signals, via modification of nascently synthesized Skp1 prior to association with coordinately synthesized F-box proteins. With an estimated 50 F-box proteins, the activity of multiple E3 SCF Ub-ligases targeting a potentially larger set of regulatory proteins may be selectively influenced by this ‘timer’ mechanism, to ultimately couple environmental signals reflective of soil microenvironments to appropriate developmental transitions. Pulse-chase labeling has the potential to investigate the properties of nascent Skp1 relative to background bulk Skp1 which may not be relevant to signaling. Forward genetic screens previously implicated cullins and F-box proteins, partners with Skp1 in SCF complexes, in the regulation of multiple developmental transitions in Dictyostelium. Studies on regulation of E3 SCF Ub-ligases, conducted primarily in yeast and mammals, have focused on the E2, RING, cullin, and the F-box protein subunits. Some organisms, such as Caenorhabditis elegans and Arabidopsis thaliana, have potentially diversified their SCF complexes through extensive gene duplications of Skp1. This study supports the significance of Skp1 diversification with evidence for functional modulation of Skp1 by novel posttranslational modifications in Dictyostelium. Evidence for the widespread occurrence of the pathway in select protists provides a rationale for why Skp1 became evolutionarily fixed as a discrete adaptor in the SCF lineage of E3 Ub-ligases. Supplementary Material 01 Click here to view. 