 In Metazoa, a polarized epithelium forms a single-cell-layered barrier that separates the outside from the inside of the organism. In tubular epithelia, the apical side of the cell is constricted relative to the basal side, forming a wedge-shaped cell that can pack into a tube. Apical constriction is mediated by actomyosin activity. In higher animals, apical actomyosin is connected between cells by specialized cell-cell junctions that contain a classical cadherin, the Wnt signaling protein β-catenin, and the actin-binding protein α-catenin. The molecular mechanisms that lead to selective accumulation of myosin at the apical surface of cells are poorly understood. We found that the nonmetazoan Dictyostelium discoideum forms a polarized epithelium that surrounds the stalk tube at the tip of the multicellular fruiting body. Although D. discoideum lacks a cadherin homolog, it expresses homologs of β- and α-catenin. Both catenins are essential for formation of the tip epithelium, polarized protein secretion, and proper multicellular morphogenesis. Myosin localizes apically in tip epithelial cells, and it appears that constriction of this epithelial tube is required for proper morphogenesis. Localization of myosin II is controlled by the protein IQGAP1 and its binding partners cortexillins I and II, which function downstream of α- and β-catenin to exclude myosin from the basolateral cortex and promote apical accumulation of myosin. These studies show that the function of catenins in cell polarity predates the evolution of Wnt signaling and classical cadherins, and that apical localization of myosin is a morphogenetic mechanism conserved from nonmetazoans to vertebrates. Keywords: epithelium, catenins, apical constriction, cell polarity, evolution in metazoa, a polarized epithelium forms a single-cell-layered barrier organized as a tube that separates the outside from the inside of the organism, with its constituent cells polarized, such that their apical side generally faces the lumen of the tube. A defining feature of epithelia is the specific adhesion of cells to one another at specialized intercellular junctions. These junctions are associated with an underlying cytoskeletal network, and thereby integrate mechanical forces generated by the cytoskeletons of adjacent cells. Cell-cell junctions impart shape, organization, and mechanical strength to the tissue and enable morphogenetic changes, such as movement of epithelial sheets and formation of tubes during development. In tubular epithelia, the apical side of the cell is smaller than the basal side, forming a wedge-shaped cell that can pack into a tube. The association of actin with nonmuscle myosin II and the anchorage of actomyosin fibers at intercellular junctions provide contractile force for morphogenetic changes and maintenance of mature tissue architecture. Fig. 1. Tubular epithelial organization in a typical Metazoan. The adherens junction is one part of the epithelial junctional complex, which also includes tight junctions and desmosomes. The AJ contains classical cadherin cell adhesion molecules that are linked to the actin cytoskeleton. Generally, cells of the same type express the same subset of classical cadherins, and the extracellular domains of classical cadherins bind homophilically to bind cells together into a tissue. The highly conserved cytoplasmic domain of classical cadherins contains binding sites for two proteins of the armadillo repeat family, p120 and β-catenin. β-Catenin binds to the cadherin tail and to α-catenin, a ∼900-amino acid protein that binds filamentous -actin. In Metazoa, β-catenin has a second role as a transcriptional coactivator in the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, which controls the expression of genes during development. A number of other F-actin-binding proteins are found in AJs, but they appear to be cell type-specific and/or recruited to the AJ only under specific conditions. Thus, classical cadherins, β-catenin, and α-catenin appear to be the core components of the AJ. Fig. 2. Molecular organization of a metazoan adherens junction. Classical cadherins, β-catenin, and α-catenin appear to be core components of the AJ. F-actin-binding proteins afadin, EPLIN, and vinculin appear to provide additional connections... The cell-cell junctional complex also defines the boundary between the apical and lateral membrane domains in polarized epithelia and, therefore, is intimately tied to the functional polarity of the tissue. AJs serve as a landmark for development and maintenance of apical-basal polarity in epithelia and are the first junctions to form at cell-cell contact sites. Distinct “polarity protein complexes” are localized to the apical or lateral side of the AJ, and while they are known from genetic studies to be critical for the establishment and maintenance of different plasma membrane domains in polarized cells, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. Furthermore, little is known at the molecular level about how cell-cell contacts transduce mechanical forces into biochemical signals or how these structures determine epithelial polarity. We have been studying the evolutionary origins of multicellularity by focusing on homologs of the cadherin-catenin complex. Here we summarize studies of the Amoebozoan Dictyostelium discoideum, the life cycle of which has unicellular and multicellular phases. D. discoideum contains homologs of several metazoan cell-cell junctional proteins, and our studies of these proteins and their role in patterning of the Dictyostelium fruiting body have given unique insights into the origin of multicellularity and tissue patterning. In contrast to the molecular complexity of the metazoan AJ and the concomitant challenges of defining the roles of various proteins in mechanical force transduction, apical constriction, and apical-basal polarity, D. discoideum has many of the core properties of a multicellular tissue, but with a highly reduced number of components. This, in combination with the ability to genetically manipulate the organism and its 24-h developmental cycle, makes it ideal for such investigations. D. discoideum Contains a True Epithelial Tissue D. discoideum is a single-celled amoeba that feeds on bacteria. When food runs out, ∼100,000 cells aggregate and begin a process that culminates in a fruiting body composed of a stalk bearing a spore mass. At the tip of the developing fruiting body, a single layer of cells surrounds the stalk. These cells secrete components of the stalk tube, and cells within the stalk tube are compressed as the fruiting body grows; it is thought that compression of the stalk cells by the rigid tube results in anisotropic vertical expansion, which lifts the spore head off the ground. The entire process, starting from starvation to formation of a mature fruiting body, takes ∼24 h in the laboratory. Fig. 3. Developmental program of Dictyostelium discoideum. Starvation induces aggregation of single cells, which culminates in formation of the fruiting body. The tip of the fruiting body is a simple epithelium that secretes stalk tube components. The role of the Dd IQGAP1-cortexillin complex as a downstream effector of Dd α-catenin in myosin localization is interesting in light of what is known about IQGAPs in other organisms. In fission yeast, IQGAP organizes actin filaments in the contractile ring during cytokinesis and works with other proteins, including myosin, to correctly position the cytokinetic ring. The function of IQGAP in mammals is poorly understood, but it is known to promote cell migration, tumor invasion, and disruption of cell-cell adhesion, likely by stabilizing the active forms of the small GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42, which regulate the actin cytoskeleton. Importantly, mammalian IQGAP1 and αE-catenin bind competitively to β-catenin, which would seem to be different from the colocalization of these proteins in D. discoideum, and further work is needed to understand how these proteins interact and regulate distributions. The interaction of mammalian IQGAP1 with β-catenin is inhibited by the active, GTP-bound forms of Rac1 or Cdc42. A model for myosin localization that emerges from these studies is that Aardvark/β-catenin and Dd α-catenin localized to the lateral membrane recruit the Dd IQGAP1-cortexillin complex, which prevents myosin from binding at those sites, resulting in selective localization of myosin to the apical cortex. Importantly, knockdown of Dd α-catenin leads to uniform localization of the Dd IQGAP-cortexillin complex around the cell cortex, indicating that the interaction with Dd α-catenin is not required for its recruitment to the cortex per se. Rather, it indicates that the ability of the complex to interact with cortical actin is somehow enhanced by the Aardvark/β-catenin- Dd α-catenin complex, thereby producing the lateral localization. This might be due to a Dd α-catenin-mediated change in local F-actin conformation in a manner that enhances cortexillin affinity or recruitment of another factor that can affect IQGAP1/cortexillin localization. Candidates for the latter include Rac family small GTPases, which are known to associate with IQGAP. Again, further work is needed to identify how these proteins interact and regulate their distributions and the localization of myosin. Conclusions Apical actomyosin activity mediates apical constriction and, therefore, morphogenesis of epithelial tubes in Metazoa, but the molecular mechanisms that underlie myosin accumulation at the apical membrane are poorly understood. Our study of the D. discoideum fruiting body has provided unique insights into this problem, in particular, by defining a molecular pathway that connects Aardvark/β-catenin and Dd α-catenin localized to the lateral membrane to selective localization of myosin at the apical cortex. The metazoan AJ lies at the boundary of the apical and lateral membranes, defining the apical-lateral membrane boundary in epithelia, and, therefore, it is intimately tied to the functional polarity of the tissue. In mammals, dysregulation of cell-cell contacts and loss of apical-basal polarity are defining events in cancer cell metastasis, including loss of contact inhibition, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and cellular invasiveness. Despite their importance in development and disease, little is known at the molecular level about how cell-cell contacts bear mechanical forces and transduce them into biochemical signals or how these structures determine epithelial polarity. Our findings that Aardvark/β-catenin and Dd α-catenin also control the polarized organization of the tip epithelium indicate that this organism will therefore be extremely valuable in understanding the interplay of cell-cell junction formation and apical-basal polarity. As noted above, however, the apparent junctional structures that connect epithelial cells in D. discoideum and Metazoa are not molecularly equivalent. Key unresolved questions include 1 ) how Aardvark/β-catenin and Dd α-catenin are targeted to the lateral membrane of the tip epithelium, as classical cadherins are absent in this organism, and 2 ) which molecules constitute the cell-cell junctions observed by electron microscopy. Study of D. discoideum fruiting body morphogenesis has provided novel insights into the evolution of multicellularity. 1 ) The fact that this organism has a polarized simple epithelium was a surprise, as epithelial tissue had previously been thought to be characteristic of only Metazoa. 2 ) The β-catenin-α-catenin complex appears to represent a basal machinery for organizing epithelial cells for apical-basal polarity, both for polarized membrane trafficking and apical myosin localization for generation of a contractile ring, in the absence of cadherins, Wnt signaling, and most of the polarity proteins thought to be essential for apical-basal polarity in Metazoa. Further studies are needed to examine how these basal functions became associated with cadherin-based adhesion and Wnt signaling upon the emergence of Metazoa, or if these properties represent convergent solutions to the problem of epithelial morphogenesis. We have argued previously that, to understand this problem, we must go beyond genome-wide surveys for the presence or absence of homologous proteins that might be involved in particular physiological roles. Detailed biochemical analysis will be required, as significant variations in protein-protein interactions and allosteric regulation have been found between even very closely related proteins. These differences can provide great insight into how proteins and their interactions change during evolution to meet the particular demands of the tissue and its environment. GRANTS This work was supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship and National Institute of General Medical Sciences Grants GM-035527 ; and GM-56169. DISCLOSURES No conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the authors. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS W.I.W. and D.J.D. prepared the figures; W.I.W. drafted the manuscript; W.I.W. approved the final version of the manuscript; W.J.N. and D.J.D. edited and revised the manuscript. Article information Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Dec 1; 305: C1091–C1095. Published online 2013 Sep 25. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00233.2013 PMCID: PMC3882382 PMID: 24067914 William I. Weis, 1, 2, 3 W. James Nelson, 1, 3, 4 and Daniel J. Dickinson 1 William I. Weis 1 Program in Cancer Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California; 2 Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California; 3 Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University, Stanford, California; and Find articles by William I. Weis W. James Nelson 1 Program in Cancer Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California; 3 Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University, Stanford, California; and 4 Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California Find articles by W. James Nelson Daniel J. Dickinson 1 Program in Cancer Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California; Find articles by Daniel J. Dickinson 1 Program in Cancer Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California; 2 Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California; 3 Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University, Stanford, California; and 4 Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California Corresponding author. Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: W. I. Weis, Stanford Univ. School of Medicine, Fairchild Bldg. D139, 299 Campus Dr., Stanford, CA 94305. Received 2013 Aug 5; Accepted 2013 Sep 17. Copyright © 2013 the American Physiological Society Articles from American Journal of Physiology - Cell Physiology are provided here courtesy of American Physiological Society 