The antiepileptic drug valproic acid and other medium-chain fatty acids acutely reduce phosphoinositide levels independently of inositol in Dictyostelium You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt No PDF The antiepileptic drug valproic acid and other medium-chain fatty acids acutely reduce phosphoinositide levels independently of inositol in Dictyostelium Dis Model Mech. 2012 Jan; 5: 115–124. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Dis Model Mech v.5; 2012 Jan Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view Printer Friendly Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay The antiepileptic drug valproic acid and other medium-chain fatty acids acutely reduce phosphoinositide levels independently of inositol in Dictyostelium Pishan Chang, Benoit Orabi,, and Robin S. B. Williams Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials Supplementary Material supp_5_1_115__index.html GUID: 2273D239-D114-405B-AAB5-A83E02B4CFE1 supp_008029_DMM008029FigS1.pdf GUID: 4115844E-E186-4C38-95E6-B7DEA01E0482 supp_008029_DMM008029TableS1.pdf GUID: F474CBBD-3D2F-48D7-B33C-C4DF74776954 supp_008029_DMM008029TableS2.pdf GUID: F70407F3-A39E-4A03-ACBA-0E0519EF0025 SUMMARY Valproic acid is the most widely prescribed epilepsy treatment worldwide, but its mechanism of action remains unclear. Our previous work identified a previously unknown effect of VPA in reducing phosphoinositide production in the simple model Dictyostelium followed by the transfer of data to a mammalian synaptic release model. In our current study, we show that the reduction in phosphoinositide production caused by VPA is acute and dose dependent, and that this effect occurs independently of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity, inositol recycling and inositol synthesis. In characterising the structural requirements for this effect, we also identify a family of medium-chain fatty acids that show increased efficacy compared with VPA. Within the group of active compounds is a little-studied group previously associated with seizure control, and analysis of two of these compounds shows around a threefold enhanced potency compared with VPA for protection in an in vitro acute rat seizure model. Together, our data show that VPA and a newly identified group of medium-chain fatty acids reduce phosphoinositide levels independently of inositol regulation, and suggest the reinvestigation of these compounds as treatments for epilepsy. INTRODUCTION Valproic acid is a short branched-chain fatty acid that was serendipitously discovered in 1963 to prevent pentelenetetrazole -induced seizures. Since then, its therapeutic role has expanded to include migraine and bipolar disorder prophylaxis, as well as a large list of potential new roles, including Alzheimer’s disease, cancer and HIV treatment. Despite considerable research investigating the molecular effect of VPA in mammalian systems, very few mechanisms of action have been identified that occur in the rapid time frame shown for seizure control. The introduction of new model systems for the analysis of VPA effects might thus aid in identifying and characterising the molecular actions of VPA, with an ultimate goal of developing new more potent epilepsy treatments. The social amoeba Dictyostelium is a powerful, simple model system for cell biology and molecular pharmacology research because isogenic cell lines can be easily grown and analysed for biochemical changes following drug treatment. We have employed Dictyostelium to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying VPA action in regards to both putative bipolar-disorder- and epilepsy-related signalling effects, and to study the mechanisms of uptake. Our previous work has shown that, in Dictyostelium, both VPA and a structurally unrelated bipolar disorder treatment, lithium, chronically reduce the levels of inositol phosphate. We have also previously identified a VPA-induced acute reduction in phosphatidylinositol monophosphate and diphosphate synthesis in Dictyostelium, and shown that this effect is phenocopied by attenuation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase -dependent phosphoinositide signalling. However, it remains unclear whether VPA-induced inositol phosphate and phosphoinositide effects are related, and whether signalling via type I PI3Ks is a direct target of VPA. We now continue the investigation into the cellular effects of VPA using Dictyostelium as a model. Here, we use an in vivo assay to measure phosphoinositide production to show that VPA acutely reduces PIP and PIP 2 levels, in a dose- and time-dependent manner. We then probe a range of potential mechanisms for this rapid effect : first, we rule out PI3Ks as mediators of the effect of VPA, because cells lacking all type I PI3K activity in a single cell line still show VPA-sensitive phosphoinositide levels. Second, we dismiss inositol recycling, because ablation or overexpression of a range of enzymes involved in inositol recycling does not overcome the effect of VPA. Third, we can exclude de novo inositol biosynthesis, because VPA does not reduce inositol production in the timeframe examined here, but only after longer exposure. We then investigated a cohort of structurally simple fatty acids related to VPA for the ability to attenuate phosphoinositide levels. This identified a group of medium-length fatty acid compounds with greater potency than VPA in the reduction of phosphoinositide levels. Subsequent database analysis of these compounds identified related compounds that have been previously shown to be strongly effective seizure-control agents. We then tested two of the newly identified compounds – nonanoic acid and 4-methyloctanoic acid – in an in vitro seizure model, to show vastly improved seizure control compared with that of VPA. Thus, our results suggest that, contrary to expectation, VPA does not lower phosphoinositide levels via a reduction in inositol levels in Dictyostelium, and argues for a reappraisal of medium-chain fatty acids as potential new treatments for epilepsy and other VPA-treatable disorders. Fig. 1. Schematic of phosphoinositide generation and recycling. Enzymes involved in recycling of the phosphoinositide head group include phospholipase C, which catalyses the production of inositol trisphosphate and diacylglycerol... RESULTS VPA lowers phosphoinositide levels The effect of VPA on phosphoinositide production has not been characterised previously. Here we investigate this effect by permeabilising Dictyostelium cells with saponin and incubating cells with radiolabelled ATP in the presence of phosphatase inhibitors, followed by lipid extraction, thin layer chromatography separation and phosphorimager quantification. Our method therefore eliminates potential effects due to VPA uptake and phosphoinositide degradation. Examining the time- and concentration-dependence of the action of VPA, we observed a rapid reduction in phosphoinositide phosphorylation after treatment with 0.5 mM VPA. The drug caused an approximate 48% reduction in both radiolabelled PIP and PIP 2 production following a 6-minute treatment, a 74% and 79% reduction in PIP and PIP 2 after 9 minutes, respectively, and around a 93% reduction in both phosphoinositides after 60 minutes of treatment. This reduction in phosphoinositide synthesis was also concentration dependent, with a 25% and 42% inhibition of PIP and PIP 2 production, respectively, in the presence of 0.25 mM VPA following a 9-minute treatment, increasing to a 72% and 85% reduction with 1.0 mM VPA treatment, respectively, as compared with controls. Under these conditions, we measure the inhibitory effect of VPA to be 154 μM. This acute and strong inhibition of phosphoinositide production caused by VPA makes this effect of potential therapeutic interest. Fig. 2. Time- and dose-dependent effect of VPA in reducing phosphoinositide production in Dictyostelium. Phosphoinositide synthesis was monitored by the incorporation of a radio-labelled phosphate into newly formed lipids, followed by extraction, TLC separation... We next investigated potential mechanisms giving rise to this effect. Many routes can contribute to the regulation of the levels of PIP and PIP 2. We started by analysing the role of PI3K activity as a VPA target, because our previous work had shown that both VPA treatment and pharmacological inhibition of PI3K activity mediated a reduction in Dictyostelium phosphoinositide levels and a reduction of glutamate release in isolated rat hippocampal cells. Studies such as this, analysing the role of phosphoinositide kinases using a pharmacological approach, can be hard to interpret owing to the large number of kinase enzymes and overlapping effects between inhibitors. We thus took advantage of Dictyostelium as a model system, and analysed the effect of VPA on PIP and PIP 2 levels in a strain lacking all five type 1 PI3K genes and the single PTEN gene. In the absence of VPA, these cells showed a 28% and 44% reduction in PIP and PIP 2 levels, respectively, compared with wild-type cells. Hence, the ablation of these PI3K proteins seems to have a strong effect on PIP and PIP 2 levels. We then tested the effect of VPA in these cells, identifying a reduction in PIP and PIP 2 production by 48% and 70%, respectively, compared with untreated cells following a 9-minute treatment. Surprisingly, pharmacological inhibition of PI3K activity in these cells still caused a strong reduction in phosphoinositide levels, by 43% and 47%. We extended our investigation to a further cell line, lacking all five PI3K genes as well as deletion of an additional potential PI3K. These cells still show a strong reduction in phospholipid production in the presence of VPA but they did not show a significant reduction of phosphoinositide production in the presence of LY294002. We also found that the pharmacological inhibition of PI3K and the VPA-dependent reduction in phosphoinositide production are additive: LY294002 causes around a 65% inhibition of both PIP and PIP 2, production, with an additional highly significant reduction in PIP and PIP 2 production by 37% and 30%, respectively, following simultaneous addition of VPA. These data clearly indicate that VPA and LY294002 have different cellular effects. We also analysed a second, non-PI3K-related, phosphatidylinositol kinase, PIPKinA, which lacks nuclear phosphatidylinositol 4/5-kinase activity. Ablation of PIPKinA showed no significant change in PIP and PIP 2 production in the absence of VPA, and VPA treatment still caused a 54% and 68% reduction in PIP and PIP 2 synthesis, respectively. These data indicate that type I PI3K and PIPKinA enzymes are not the target of VPA in attenuating phosphoinositide production in Dictyostelium. Fig. 3. Analysing phosphoinositide production and the effect of VPA treatment in phosphoinositide kinase null mutants. Phosphoinositide synthesis was measured in isogenic Dictyostelium cells in the absence of treatment, or following 9 minutes of treatment... Second, we and others have shown that VPA attenuates inositol recycling through inositol phosphates in models ranging from Dictyostelium to Caenorhabditis elegans, rats and humans. This effect could potentially play a role in the acute reduction of phosphoinositide levels outlined here. To examine this, we analysed PIP and PIP 2 levels in isogenic Dictyostelium mutants with the inositol recycling pathway blocked or activated. Cells lacking the single gene encoding phospholipase C, hence blocking the conversion of PIP 2 to InsP 3, showed no significant reduction in PIP and PIP 2 levels compared with wild-type cells. Importantly VPA-dependent reduction in PIP and PIP 2 production in these cells mirrors that for wild-type cells. By contrast, cells with approximately threefold higher InsP 3 levels caused by ablation of prolyl oligopeptidase showed a slight decrease in PIP levels. Also, here VPA treatment reduced PIP and PIP 2 signalling by around 67% – similar to its effect in wild-type cells. We have also previously shown that inhibition of inositol monophosphatase activity by 10 mM lithium does not reduce phosphoinositide production following acute treatment in Dictyostelium ; however, extended lithium treatment reduces PIP and PIP 2 levels, and this effect is overcome by overexpression of IMPase. By comparison, overexpressing IMPase did not overcome extended VPA treatment. These results show that elevating or reducing recycling of inositol through inositol phosphate species does not alter the effect of VPA on reducing PIP and PIP 2 levels. Thus, the mechanism of action of VPA in reducing phosphoinositide levels seems to be independent of inositol recycling. Fig. 4. Analysing phosphoinositide production and the effect of VPA treatment following altered inositol recycling. Comparison of phosphoinositide production in wild-type cells, and cells lacking either phospholipase C or prolyl oligopeptidase... Third, VPA has been identified as an inhibitor of de novo inositol biosynthesis, indirectly blocking the production of inositol 1-phosphate from glucose-6-phosphate. We therefore tested a role for VPA in reducing inositol levels following acute treatment, in a similar manner to phosphoinositide measurement experiments. Under these conditions, VPA does not reduce inositol levels, suggesting that a VPA-dependent effect on phosphoinositide production is independent of de novo inositol biosynthesis. Fig. 5. Comparison of inositol levels and phosphoinositide synthesis following treatment with VPA and related fatty acids. Treatment of cells with VPA, 3-methylbutanoic acid, 2-methylhexanoic acid, 5-methylhexanoic acid... Identifying compounds that reduce phosphoinositide levels Next we utilised the acute effect of VPA on PIP and PIP 2 production in Dictyostelium to investigate novel fatty acids and related structures for similar effects. We initially tested straight-chain fatty acids, ranging from 4 to 17 carbons, because the structure of VPA is based upon a five-carbon backbone. These compounds showed a wide breadth of inhibitory activity, with a peak effect occurring for octanoic, nonanoic and decanoic. Because VPA contains a three-carbon side chain branched from the second carbon, we tested a range of compounds within these medium-chain fatty acid structures with side chains of different length at various positions on the backbone. From these, a range of highly active compounds were identified with backbones of six to ten carbons, and short side chains branched on the second, fourth or fifth carbon. Active compounds showed a positive association with lipophilicity. Efficacy was also independent of acidity, because variable activity was shown with straight carbon acids of equivalent acidic function, although the acid head group is likely to be necessary because related alcohol and aldehyde compounds are non-active. These structural distinctions provide the first characterisation of VPA congeners for reducing phosphoinositide production and the identification of medium-chain fatty acids as highly active compounds for this effect. It is worth noting here that a small number of compounds function to elevate phosphoinositide levels, although we have not explored these compounds further in this paper. Fig. 6. Pharmacological inhibition of phosphoinositide signalling with VPA and straight-chain and branched medium chain fatty acids. A range of compounds related to VPA in structure were tested for attenuation of phosphoinositide turnover in Dictyostelium and... Because this study identified a range of compounds showing variable inhibitory effects on phosphoinositide production, we then assessed VPA and five related compounds for effects on inositol levels in acutely treated Dictyostelium cells. Related compounds were selected to include a range of activities on phosphoinositide production. Unexpectedly, VPA and all five compounds increased inositol levels, providing an opposite effect to the acute inhibition of phosphoinositide production, and thus eliminating inositol depletion as a mechanism for this acute effect. A similar lack of correlation between inhibition of PIP and PIP 2 production and inositol phosphate level reduction is seen for various VPA congeners. For example, 2-ethyl-4-methyl-pentanoic acid and S-2-pentyl-4-pentynoic acid do not attenuate phosphoinositide production to the level shown by VPA but show a stronger reduction of inositol signalling, whereas 2M2P and PIA show stronger activity than VPA for both effects. Interestingly, substituting the carboxylic acid moiety of compounds showing a strong reduction in phosphoinositide production with a carboxamide group reduces the inhibitory effect, indicating that amide derivatives are poorly effective for this effect. Thus, our experiments show that acute VPA treatment lowers phosphoinositide levels in Dictyostelium. Mechanistically, we are able to rule out this effect occurring through PI3K-dependent activity, through inositol recycling and through de novo inositol production. We also found that fatty acids related to VPA can have even stronger effects, and these compounds further allowed us to decouple effects on inositol versus PIP and PIP 2 production. Novel compounds show enhanced efficacy in an in vitro epileptiform model Early studies aimed at identifying more effective epilepsy treatments that are based upon VPA-like fatty acids focused on potential breakdown products of VPA, thus were generally short-chain fatty acids, branched at the second carbon. Thus, few studies examined longer-chain fatty acids, and no study that we are aware of has focused on fatty acids branched at, for example, the fourth or fifth carbon. To analyse the potential efficacy of medium-chain fatty acids found in our study to control seizures, we tested two compounds in an in vitro low-Mg 2+ seizure model, using rat hippocampal slices to measure frequency and amplitude of epileptiform discharges induced by low Mg 2+ in the mammalian brain. The two compounds chosen were 4-methyloctanoic acid, because this fatty acid is endogenous to animal systems, and nonanoic acid, and the effects were compared with those of VPA, with all compound concentrations based upon previous experimental protocols. VPA weakly reduced the frequency of recurrent short discharges in this model. By contrast, application of an equimolar concentration of nonanoic acid markedly reduced the frequency of recurrent short discharges, and 4-methyloctanoic acid completely abolished the discharges 30–40 minutes after application. Both of these medium-chain fatty acids showed a highly significant efficacy compared with VPA and warrant future investigation. Fig. 7. Seizure control with VPA, nonanoic acid and 4-methyloctanoic acid using an in vitro acute low-Mg 2+ model. Trace samples of low Mg 2+ -induced burst discharges by application of VPA, NA and 4-MO compared with control.... DISCUSSION VPA is used to treat a number of current medical conditions, including epilepsy, bipolar disorder and migraine, and its role is likely to expand widely to include cancer, HIV and Alzheimer’s treatment. Understanding how these conditions are controlled by VPA has proved highly complex because VPA triggers a variety of cellular changes with unknown primary targets, changes have not been related to specific clinical conditions and few structure-function studies have been carried out. In this study we used a non-sentient biomedical model system, the social amoeba Dictyostelium, to investigate potential mechanisms for the VPA-dependent reduction in phosphoinositide production. We then used this effect to identify compounds showing a stronger inhibitory effect, and showed two highly active compounds that are effective in reducing seizures in a mammalian epilepsy model. In this study, we set about examining the potential mechanisms that lead to the acute and dose-dependent reduction in PIP and PIP 2 production by VPA. We started by first examining a potential role of PI3K as a primary target, because our earlier work had implicated this activity. It is very difficult to identify the target of a drug that regulates phosphoinositide production in vivo in a mammalian system, owing to the large number of kinases and phosphatases, and the promiscuous nature of the enzyme substrates. An advantageous approach to address this problem, facilitated in Dictyostelium, is to employ isogenic cell lines containing ablated genes. In this study, we analysed phosphoinositide production in two cell lines with ablated PI3Ks: cells lacking all five type I PI3Ks and PTEN activity and cells lacking the five type I kinases and an additional unique related kinase lacking the Ras-binding domain common to this family of enzymes. Both cell lines still showed large reductions in phosphoinositide production following VPA treatment, albeit from a reduced basal level. Furthermore, pharmacological inhibition of PI3K activity was enhanced by the addition of VPA in wild-type cells. These combined data suggest that VPA causes an effect on phosphoinositide production independent of type I PI3K activity. In addition to PI3K activity, we also assessed the effect of VPA on another phosphoinositide kinase mutant, lacking a nuclear phosphatidylinositol 4/5 kinase activity. As shown for the PI3K-null cells, this mutant was still sensitive to the effect of VPA on phosphoinositide production, confirming that this gene product is not the VPA target. In this paper, we assessed the VPA-dependent reduction of PIP and PIP 2 production in isogenic cell lines lacking all type I PI3K homologues and a single phosphatidylinositol 4/5 kinase homologue; however, there are at least nine more potential phosphoinositide kinase proteins encoded within the genome with strong homology to the human kinases, and over 30 genes with related domains, and any one or several of these could be a target for VPA leading to the observed effect. However, all three phosphoinositide-kinase-ablated cell lines showed a reduced sensitivity to VPA than did wild-type cells, suggesting that VPA might function through a more generalised effect on phosphoinositide production, through inhibition of either multiple phosphoinositide kinases or non-kinase activities related to phosphoinositide signalling. This latter potential mechanism is supported by the increased levels of inositol observed following acute VPA treatment. Further analysis of the lipid species involved, and the ablation of the remaining phosphoinositide kinase activities in the genome, might help to better understand this mechanism. The highly significant additive effect of VPA and LY294002 also suggests that off-target effects of LY294002, such as TOR signalling, are also not the mechanisms of VPA-dependent reduction in phosphoinositide production. We continued the investigation of potential mechanisms leading to the reduction in PIP and PIP 2 production caused by VPA by examining mutants with altered inositol phosphate recycling. VPA has been shown to reduce inositol phosphate levels, leading to a dampening down of related cell signalling cascades, as described by the inositol depletion theory. We thus tested for a VPA-related effect on phosphoinositide production in cells containing no PLC activity, in those with increased InsP 3 levels and in those overexpressing IMPase, to show that these mutants were still sensitive to the VPA-dependent effect. Another potential mechanism for this effect is an indirect inhibition of the enzyme responsible for de novo inositol biosynthesis, myo-inositol-3P synthase. We also show no correlation between phosphinositide levels and inositol levels, because compounds that reduce phosphoinositide levels do not reduce free inositol in the same acute time period. This data provides the first strong evidence for a potential mechanism of VPA in targeting cellular mechanisms involving the acute elevation of inositol levels. Furthermore, a range of VPA-related compounds shown to inhibit MIPS activity also do not cause a corresponding reduction of phosphoinositide production. Finally, a number of VPA congeners previously shown to reduce inositol phosphate signalling in Dictyostelium and mammalian dorsal root ganglia growth cones do not cause a corresponding inhibition of phosphoinositide production. These data together suggest that VPA reduces phosphoinositide production independently of inositol levels and inositol phosphate recycling. These results therefore provide a new mechanism of action of VPA in regulating phosphoinositide production. Although the primary target for this new mechanism of VPA action is still to be identified, the characterisation of the effect enabled a structure-activity relationship study to be carried out. In studying VPA-related structures, the majority of research has centred around compounds with either a five-carbon backbone – because these were thought to be reactive metabolites of VPA – or cyclic derivatives. Our analysis has, however, identified a previously unknown family of compounds with a six- to ten-carbon backbone, showing inhibition of PIP and PIP 2 production, opening up a new range of chemical structures that could be of potential therapeutic interest. Excitingly, early research in the analysis of VPA-related compounds in seizure control has identified three compounds related to this group that exhibit enhanced activity with respect to VPA: 2-propylheptanoic acid, 2-hexyloctanoic acid and 2-ethylhexanoic. Although these early experiments support the potential relevance of the medium-chain fatty acids identified in this study for seizure control, our newly discovered compounds show a significantly broader range of structures, and thus provide a new large family of compounds with potential clinical interest. These compounds might also prove to have reduced side effects, because straight chains and compounds with alternative branching would not be predicted to show teratogenic effects, nor produce reactive metabolites associated with VPA and potentially giving rise to adverse effects. Further analysis of compounds causing elevated phosphoinositide levels, and an association with an in vivo effect, might also provide an important tool in the development of new VPA-related treatments. To examine the potential seizure control efficacy of this broad category of compounds, we analysed two compounds in a low-Mg 2+ model in vitro model of epileptiform activity, because this provides a standard in vitro model for drug-resistant seizure control. Both nonanoic acid and 4-methyloctanoic acid showed a much stronger reduction in epileptiform activity compared with VPA, suggesting that medium-chain fatty acids should be investigated as new treatments for seizure control. These further experiments would include in vivo experiments, because factors such as drug metabolism and brain penetration play an important role in this effect. Also, because VPA, nonanoic acid and 4-methyloctanoic acid do not cause an acute reduction in inositol levels, these data suggest that inositol depletion is not a seizure-protection mechanism. In support of this, pharmacological inhibitors of MIPS do not control pilocarpine-induced seizures. Our data would instead support a role for a therapeutic action of VPA in reducing phosphoinositide synthesis in relation to seizure control. A therapeutic role for the reduction in phosphoinositide production during epilepsy treatment has been supported by a range of other data. Increased phosphoinositide production has been shown during seizures, and ablation of PTEN in a mouse model also gives rise to spontaneous seizures. These data have given rise to the suggestion that altered phospholipid signalling could provide a crucial role in the pathophysiology of epilepsy. The acute nature of phosphoinositide attenuation occurs with a similar speed to that of seizure control following intravenous VPA injection in a mouse seizure model. The concentrations used in these experiments are also found in the therapeutic use of VPA, and an EC50 of 154 μM would provide a significant inhibition in mammalian systems, in which 90% of VPA is non-specifically bound to plasma proteins. Clearly, further investigation into phosphoinositide production during seizures and the inhibition of this by VPA in animal systems will be necessary to confirm this effect. Our findings identify an effect of VPA in reducing phosphoinositide production in a simple biomedical model, Dictyostelium, and show that this effect occurs independently of PI3K activity and the recycling and de novo biosynthesis of inositol. We then identify a previously unknown family of medium-chain straight and branched compounds showing a stronger reduction in phosphoinositide synthesis than VPA. Translation of this simple model-based research to a preclinical model of seizure control shows a large increase in efficacy for two of these compounds compared with VPA. These studies thus suggest that the re-investigation of medium-chain fatty acids could provide new, more effective and safer seizure-control treatments. Continued analysis of the biosynthetic pathways controlling phosphoinositide production in model and mammalian systems might also give rise to significant advances in understanding epilepsy and other VPA-treatable disorders such as bipolar disorder and migraine. METHODS All chemicals were provided by Sigma UK Ltd. Valproic acid congeners were provided by Sigma Aldrich UK, Alfa Aesar, ChemSampCo or The NCI/DTP Open Chemical Repository. Dictyostelium phospholipid labelling and inositol analysis Dictyostelium mutant strains were kindly provided by Dictybase.org or by Rob Kay. A saponin-based cell permeabilisation protocol for Dictyostelium was adapted for these experiments. Dictyostelium AX2 cells were developed for 5 hours as previously described, transferred to still dishes, allowed to settle to give a confluent monolayer in KK2 and pre-treated with compound for 3 minutes. At regular time intervals, buffer was replaced with labelling solution supplemented with compounds at defined concentrations. Following a 6-minute incubation, labelling solution was removed and cells were lysed in acidified methanol and phospholipids were separated as previously detailed. Phospholipid labelling was quantified using a Typhoon phosphor-imager. Even loading was determined using total lipid stain with copper sulphate. Inositol levels were measured from 5-hour-developed cells, following lyophilisation, as previously described. In vitro epilepsy model The in vitro epilepsy model has been described previously : the rats were decapitated after killing by intraperitoneal injection with an overdose of pentobarbitone. The brain was removed and placed in ice-cold sucrose solution, equilibrated with 95% O 2 /5% CO 2. Horizontal combined entorhinal cortex-hippocampus slices were prepared with a Leica vibratome and were then stored in an interface chamber that contained artificial cerebrospinal fluid solution containing 119 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 4 mM MgSO 4, 4 mM CaCl 2, 26.2 mM NaHCO 3, 1.0 mM NaH 2 PO 4, 11 mM glucose, and gassed with 95% O 2 /5% CO 2. They were stored for over 1 hour before being transferred to a submersion recording chamber continually perfused with carbogenated aCSF for recording. Field potential recordings were made by placing glass microelectrodes filled with aCSF solution in stratum radiatum of CA1. Bipolar stimulating electrodes were positioned in the Schaffer collateral/commissural fibre pathway in stratum radiatum to confirm slice viability. To generate rhythmic short recurrent discharges, Mg 2+ -free aCSF was then applied. Novel anticonvulsants were applied once the frequency and amplitude of the epileptiform discharges were stable over a period of 10 minutes. Anticonvulsant effects were evaluated by measuring the variation of frequency of the discharges every minute. The data acquired from 30 to 40 minutes after application of novel anticonvulsants were compared by ANOVA followed by post-hoc testing using the Tukey test, using SPSS statistical analysis. All experiments were conducted in accordance with the UK Home Office regulations under the Animal Act, 1986. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were housed under a 12-hour light-dark cycle. The room temperature was maintained at 24–25°C and relative humidity at 50–60%. Standard rodent food and tap water were provided. TRANSLATIONAL IMPACT Clinical issue Valproic acid is one of the most highly prescribed treatments for seizure control worldwide. However, 46 years of research into the function of valproic acid has failed to identify its mechanism of action, so research has been slow in finding new improved compounds for seizure control. This research has mainly focused on mammalian systems, the standard and most widely accepted model for seizure control research. There is therefore a need to identify alternative model systems to examine the mechanisms underlying valproic acid’s action, and to ultimately develop improved treatments in which valproic acid is indicated, including epilepsy, bipolar disorder and migraine. Results The authors employed a simple model system, Dictyostelium, to examine the cellular effects of valproic acid. They identify a previously unidentified ability of valproic acid to decrease phosphoinositide synthesis in this organism. This effect does not occur through regulating inositol levels, which suggests a valproic acid-dependent effect on phosphoinositide phosphorylation. By testing structurally simple fatty acids related to valproic acid, they also identify a range of medium chain fatty acids that are more potent than valproic acid at reducing phosphoinositide levels. Finally, the authors show that two of these fatty acids are more active than valproic acid in an in vitro mammalian assay of seizure activity involving rat hippocampal slices. Implications and future directions This work suggests that valproic acid targets phosphoinositide signalling in a manner that is independent of cellular inositol signalling, and that a range of medium chain fatty acids might provide more effective seizure control treatments. Based on these results, investigation of these drugs in more complex mammalian models of seizures is warranted. Supplementary Material Supplementary Material: Click here to view. 