 Background The human 6–16 and ISG12 genes are transcriptionally upregulated in a variety of cell types in response to type I interferon. The predicted products of these genes are small, hydrophobic proteins that share 36% overall amino acid identity. Gene disruption and over-expression studies have so far failed to reveal any biochemical or cellular roles for these proteins. Results We have used in silico analyses to identify a novel family of genes related to both the human 6–16 and ISG12 genes. Each ISG12 family member codes for a small hydrophobic protein containing a conserved ~80 amino-acid motif. So far we have detected 46 family members in 25 organisms, ranging from unicellular eukaryotes to humans. Humans have four ISG12 genes: the 6–16 gene at chromosome 1p35 and three genes, ISG12 and ISG12 ) clustered at chromosome 14q32. Mice have three family members, ISG12 and ISG12 ) clustered at chromosome 12F1. There does not appear to be a murine 6–16 gene. On the basis of phylogenetic analyses, genomic organisation and intron-alignments we suggest that this family has arisen through divergent inter- and intra-chromosomal gene duplication events. The transcripts from human and mouse genes are detectable, all but two and ISG12 ) being upregulated in response to type I IFN in the cell lines tested. Conclusions Members of the eukaryotic ISG12 gene family encode a small hydrophobic protein with at least one copy of a newly defined motif of ~80 amino-acids. In higher eukaryotes, many of the genes have acquired a responsiveness to type I IFN during evolution suggesting that a role in resisting cellular or environmental stress may be a unifying property of all family members. Analysis of gene-function in higher eukaryotes is complicated by the possibility of functional redundancy between family-members. Genetic studies in organisms with just one family member so far identified may be particularly helpful in this respect. Background Interferons are a family of secreted cytokines that exert their biological activities by binding to specific cell membrane receptors to trigger a well characterised intracellular signalling pathway culminating in the transcriptional induction of IFN stimulated genes. It is through the ISGs that IFNs generate diverse cellular and physiological states involving antiviral, apoptotic, antiproliferative, antitumor and immunomodulatory activities. Oligonucleotide arrays have been used to show that there are several hundred ISGs. ISGs can be responsive to type I IFNs, type II IFNs or both. The DNA motifs close to or within the ISGs that mediate these responses are the 14 nt IFN Stimulated Response Elements and the 9 nt GAS elements for type I and type II IFNs, respectively. Most ISGs code for proteins whose biochemical and cellular roles are either well understood, or partially understood. There remains some prominent ISGs, however, including 6–16 and ISG12 for which there are no known biochemical or cellular functions. IFN is used in the treatment of several human diseases including Hepatitis C and multiple sclerosis. Unfortunately, IFN treatment can have unwanted side effects the mechanisms of which remain unclear. It has, therefore, long been recognised that to thoroughly understand IFN function and to minimise the side effects of IFN therapies, a more complete understanding of the ISGs is required. The type I IFN stimulated human 6–16 and ISG12 ) are ISGs that encode small hydrophobic proteins. The predicted proteins share 36% overall amino-acid identity and 49% identity over an ~80 amino acid length. Both genes are regulated by type I IFNs in a number of cell lines. Human 6–16, in particular, is characterised by its high inducibility in response to IFN. In HeLa cells 6–16 mRNA can constitute as much as 0.1% of the total mRNA after IFN stimulation. It is therefore likely that these genes play an important role in the IFN response. Despite gene disruption and over-expression studies, cellular and/or biochemical roles for the 6–16 and ISG12 gene products have not been identified. One way to address this problem is to identify related genes whose characteristics may provide clues to function. Here we present in silico data identifying a novel family of genes related to human 6–16 and ISG12. Each family member codes for a small, hydrophobic protein that contains a conserved, 80 amino-acid motif. So far, 46 members of this family have been determined in 25 organisms ranging from higher mammals to single celled amoeba. While none of the genes has a known function, identification of this family indicates a number of systems in which gene function can be investigated. Results and discussion Identification and characterisation of ESTs related to human 6–16 and ISG12 We have used the human 6–16 and ISG12 sequences to conduct an online BLAST search, at the protein level, of EMBL and Genbank databanks and so uncover ~1,500 separate nucleotide sequences. Alignment of these sequences allowed subdivision into 46 different transcripts originating from 25 different species. 1 ). Clustal W was used to align the ~1,500 nucleotide sequences and generate a consensus sequences for each of the 46 different transcripts. These consensus sequences were then submitted to EMBL as third party annotations. 1 ). Putative protein coding sequences were determined using the first ATG rule. Performing a BLAST search with any of these 46 putative proteins uncovers nearly the same set of ~1,500 genes described above. This suggests that there is a highly conserved region shared by these sequences. Table 1 ISG12 genes found through Blast database searches Identification of a conserved ISG12 protein motif An alignment of the 46 putative amino-acid sequences listed in Table ​ Table1 1 was used to identify an ~80 amino-acid ISG12 motif 1 ) shared by all. This alignment has been submitted to Pfam and represents a newly identified gene family, the ISG12 gene family. Using the ISG12 motif for BLAST searches did not uncover any further family members. All family members encode a single motif except for one of the mouse genes, ISG12, which encodes two. Figure 1 Alignment of putative protein sequences identifies a ISG12 protein motif. Putative protein product of the genes in Table ​ Table1 1 were aligned using Clustal W and annotated using Boxshade. The... Analyses of predicted protein sequences with programme suites such as PredictProtein or EMBOSS did not give many clues as to signalling, structure or function. The proteins identified are hydrophobic 2 ) raising the possibility that they may be membrane-associated proteins. Transmembrane prediction programmes gave varied and therefore inconclusive results, although immunocytochemical analysis appears to locate ISG12 to the nuclear membrane. Figure 2 Predicted protein hydrophobicity. Kyte-Doolittle schematics were formulated using GREASE software to show the hydrophobicity of predicted protein sequences for mouse ISG12, human ISG12 and human 6–16. ISG12 motifs... Regions outside the motif do not share good sequence identity, but are similar in that they are often short, hydrophobic and contain a high percentage of residues with small side groups. Phylogenetic analysis In order to determine whether the 46 genes identified form particular subgroups, phylogenetic analysis was performed in higher mammals. The mammalian sequences from Figure ​ Figure1 1 were used to compose a parsimonious tree using Dictyostelium discoideum as a distant relative for the out-grouping of the tree. 3 ). Four tentative clades were identified in this way: 6–16, ISG12a, ISG12b and ISG12c. Bootstrapping shows that, where the 6–16 genes have stable branches, the remaining genes cannot be as stringently divided in this way. Only genes in closely related species seem to give stable branching points suggesting that the ISG12 gene-products are less uniformly divergent than the 6–16 gene products. Figure 3 Phylogenetic analysis of the ISG12 family. Maximum parsimony tree with bootstrap confidence levels based on putative protein coding sequence of higher mammals using D. discoideum as an out-group. Two stars represent a bootstrap... Gene organisation To clarify the grouping of family members, BLAST was used to identify ISG12 genomic sequences. Aligning mRNA and genomic DNA sequence revealed intron/exon structure and, for organisms with sufficiently complete genome sequences, chromosomal locations of ISG12 family members could be identified. The results for human and mouse genes are summarised in Figure ​ Figure4. 4. The human, mouse and rat ISG12 genes cluster at syntenic loci. By identifying conserved genes immediately flanking these clusters and Heat-Like Repeat-containing protein isoform 1), the mouse and human loci could be correctly aligned, simplifying comparison of ISG12 gene organisation between the two species. The relative positions and opposing orientations of hISG12 and hISG12 are matched in the mouse locus by mISG12 and mISG12/mISG12. This, plus the conserved intron/exon arrangement in hISG12, mISG12 and the two halves of mISG12, suggests that hISG12 and mISG12 are orthologues, and that the mISG12 and mISG12 genes arose from an ancestral murine orthologue of hISG12 by two gene duplications and one gene fusion. This leaves only hISG12 whose orientation is consistent with it having arisen by duplication of hISG12. Thus the phylogenetic relationship of the ISG12 genes, reflected in their assigned suffixes, is supported by the analysis of gene structure. Figure 4 Genomic organisation of ISG12 genes in humans and mice showing ISRE positions. Regions of human chromosomes 1p35 and 14q32, and mouse chromosome 12F1, carrying ISG12 genes are shown. Transcribed regions are coloured... Where intron/exon structure is available, intron position was marked on an alignment 1 ) of predicted protein sequences. 5 ). Intron site conservation at the N and C termini of the motif is much more pronounced than elsewhere. This is consistent with the possibility that the motif represents a structural domain that is evolutionarily conserved while being placed in different sequence contexts by exon shuffling. Stuctural analyses will be required to test this possibility. Figure 5 Alignment of introns in ISG12 amino-acid sequences. Predicted ISG12 protein sequences, for genes whose intron/exon structures are available, are aligned as in Figure ​ Figure1, 1, with the ISG12 motifs highlighted in yellow. Positions of introns... We can postulate, then, that the ISG12 family arose from an ancestral gene that underwent an initial gene duplication event to form ISG12 and ISG12. This event probably happened between the emergence of amoeba and divergence of fish, judging by the identification of only one ISG12 in simple eukaryotes, such as Dictyostelium, and multiple ISG12's in mammals, fish and birds. The 6–16 clade appears to have arisen by interchromosomal duplication just before the divergence of the ungulates and primates. The ISG12 and ISG12 genes probably arose relatively recently ) 3 )) as these have not been found in other organisms. That the ISG12 motif has been found in organisms that do not host the IFN signalling pathway indicates that the IFN responsiveness seen in human 6–16 and ISG12 arose later in evolution. There may be a basic function shared by all family members that has been co-opted in higher organisms to become part of the IFN response. IFN responsiveness of ISG12 transcripts The finding that the ISG12 motif occurs in simple eukaryotes suggests that not all ISG12 genes in higher organisms have necessarily been incorporated into the IFN response. We therefore looked at the number and fidelity of Interferon Stimulated Response Elements in the vicinity of the human and mouse ISG12 genes. Table 2 ISREs found at human and mouse ISG12 gene loci Semi-quantitative, RT-PCR analysis was used to determine whether the human and mouse ISG12 genes were responsive to type I IFN. 6 ). This confirmed that, as previously shown, human 6–16 and ISG12 are highly IFN-responsive in the human fibrosarcoma HT1080 cell line. As might be expected from the positioning of ISRE's so close to exon 1, 4 ), mouse ISG12 is also IFN-responsive, though much less strongly 6 ) than human ISG12. Mouse ISG12 and are IFN-responsive in the fibroblast cell line L-929, but human ISG12 and were not induced in HT1080 cells despite the proximity of putative ISRE sequences. Figure ​ Figure6 6 does show that all the genes tested are transcribed in the cell lines tested and does not preclude IFN-stimulation in other cell lines of those genes so far not found to be inducible. Figure 6 Expression of human and mouse ISG12 genes in cell lines. Transcripts for the indicated human and mouse ISG12 genes were detected by RT-PCR. RNA was isolated from the human HT1080 cells or mouse L-929 cells treated with or without... Conclusions Using EMBL and Genbank searches, we have been able to compile a family of 46 genes related to the human 6–16 and human ISG12 genes. Aligning all 46 genes reveals an ~80 amino-acid motif that is shared between genes in species as diverse as amoeba and humans. The 46 genes identified code for highly hydrophobic, potentially membrane-embedded proteins and fall into four main groups; 6–16, ISG12, ISG12 and ISG12. These four distinct gene groups seem to have been derived through gene duplication and divergent evolution, with all genes, other than 6–16, remaining clustered in syntenic loci. The existence of a member of the ISG12 gene family in Dictyostelium discoideum, which does not possess the IFN system, combined with evidence that some family members in higher eukaryotes are not IFN-responsive, suggests that IFN stimulation plays an ancillary role in ISG12 gene function, and is not a defining characteristic. Further work is required to identify any unifying biochemical or cellular function for the ISG12 family. One such function may be as part of a response to cellular or environmental stress. This would certainly encompass those family members that have become part of the IFN system, which is itself a response cellular insults such as viral infection and oxidative stress, while allowing for the possibility that other family members contribute to combating cellular stress independently of the IFN system. In organisms that have multiple family members, functional redundancy may complicate genetic analyses of ISG12 gene function, and multiple gene-knockouts or knockdowns may be required to reveal a clear phenotype. Members of the ISG12 gene family were not found in common laboratory model organisms such as fruit flies or nematode worms, despite searching complete genomes with the motif. However, studies of simpler organisms, such as the slime mould D. discoideum, with only one ISG12 gene, may provide a useful alternative approach. Methods Database searches and sequence alignments The Genbank and EMBL databases were screened using the online BLAST server at and respectively. Searches were performed at both the nucleotide and amino acid levels. Sequences were aligned using Clustal W in the MAGI suit at and then manipulated for presentation using Boxshade at. Putative proteins for mouse ISG12, human ISG12 and human 6–16 were used for basic in silico protein structure analysis using the programmes HMMTOP, SMART and TMHMM to give prediction of transmembrane helices and hydrophobicity plots. Phylogenetic analysis Putative amino acid sequences of genes found above were aligned using Clustal W as above. Phylogenetic analyses of the alignment were conducted using Protpar on the Phylip package through the PIE suit at. A maximum parsimony tree with branch confidence values based on 1000 bootstrap replicates was constructed. The putative protein coding sequence for D. discoideum was used as an out-grouping species. The tree was then annotated with bootstrap confidence levels. Cell lines The human cell lines HT1080 and HEK293 and mouse cell lines L-929 were cultured as monolayers in 1 × Dulbecco's modified eagle medium supplemented with heat inactivated FCS, Globepharm), L-glutamine, non-essential amino acids, sodium pyruvate and antibiotics penicillin/streptomycin. The cells were grown to ~40% confluency and then induced using type I IFN. RT-PCR of ISG12 transcripts RNA was prepared from cultured cells as described and used with oligo 18 primer to synthesis first-strand cDNA. PCR reactions were set up with dNTPs, experiment primers, control primers, 1 × reaction buffer, Taq polymerase and template. The following oligonucleotides were used as primers; mISG12f: 5'-GGTGTGTCTTCCTGCACAGTGG-3'; mISG12b: 5'-GGCAATATGTGTTAGGAGATTGTCG-3'; mISG12f: 5'-TTGCCAATGGAGGTGGAGTTGCAG-3'; mISG12b: 5'-ATCAGTGAGGGTTCTGAAGGTGCC-3'; mISG12f: 5'-CCATAGCAGCCAAGATGATGTCTG-3'; mISG12b: 5'-TTGCCACACCAACAAACCATC-3'; hISG12f: 5'-TCTCACCTCATCAGCAGTGACCAG-3'; hISG12b: 5'-CCTCTGGAGATGCAGAATTTGG-3' hISG12f: 5'-GTAACACCCCAAGAACGCTGTC-3'; hISG12b: 5'-GCATCTGCATGTGACCTTTATTCC-3' hISG12f: 5'-GCACCTCCTCTTACAGCTTTACTCC-3'; hISG12b: 5'-GGAGACTTGTCCTTTGGAAGATTG-3'; h6–16f: 5'-GATTGCTTCTCTTCTCTCCTCCAAG-3'; h6–16b: 5'-TCGAGATACTTGTGGGTGGCGTAG-3'. Non-saturating, duplex PCR was performed under the following conditions: 1 cycle, 28 cycles, 1 cycle. Products were analysed by agarose gel electrophoresis. Authors' contributions NP designed and carried out all in silico and experimental analyses, and participated in the preparation of the manuscript. ACGP supervised the study and participated in the preparation of the manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Medical Research Council. Article information BMC Genomics. 2004; 5: 8. Published online 2004 Jan 19. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-5-8 PMCID: PMC343271 PMID: 14728724 Nadeene Parker 1, 2 and Andrew CG Porter 1 Nadeene Parker 1 Gene Targeting Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College Faculty of Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK 2 Present address: Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Addenbooke's Hospital, Cambridge, CB2 2QR, UK Find articles by Nadeene Parker Andrew CG Porter 1 Gene Targeting Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College Faculty of Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK Find articles by Andrew CG Porter 1 Gene Targeting Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College Faculty of Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK 2 Present address: Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Addenbooke's Hospital, Cambridge, CB2 2QR, UK Corresponding author. Nadeene Parker: ku.ca.mac.lhcsdem@502pn ; Andrew CG Porter: ku.ca.crm.csc@retrop.ydna Received 2003 Nov 10; Accepted 2004 Jan 19. Copyright © 2004 Parker and Porter; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL. Articles from BMC Genomics are provided here courtesy of BMC 