 Although the DNA methyltransferase 2 family is highly conserved during evolution and recent reports suggested a dual specificity with stronger activity on transfer RNA than DNA substrates, the biological function is still obscure. We show that the Dictyostelium discoideum Dnmt2-homologue DnmA is an active tRNA methyltransferase that modifies C38 in tRNA Asp in vitro and in vivo. By an ultraviolet-crosslinking and immunoprecipitation approach, we identified further DnmA targets. This revealed specific tRNA fragments bound by the enzyme and identified tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly as new but weaker substrates for both human Dnmt2 and DnmA in vitro but apparently not in vivo. Dnmt2 enzymes form transient covalent complexes with their substrates. The dynamics of complex formation and complex resolution reflect methylation efficiency in vitro. Quantitative PCR analyses revealed alterations in dnmA expression during development, cell cycle and in response to temperature stress. However, dnmA expression only partially correlated with tRNA methylation in vivo. Strikingly, dnmA expression in the laboratory strain AX2 was significantly lower than in the NC4 parent strain. As expression levels and binding of DnmA to a target in vivo are apparently not necessarily accompanied by methylation, we propose an additional biological function of DnmA apart from methylation. INTRODUCTION Dnmt2 is a member of the eukaryotic DNA methyltransferase family. A few model organisms, especially Drosophila melanogaster, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Entamoeba histolytica and Dictyostelium discoideum contain only one Dnmt2 homologue but lack the more active homologues Dnmt1 and Dnmt3. Though highly conserved during evolution, loss of Dnmt2 homologues has no obvious phenotypic effects in Mus musculus, D. melanogaster, S. pombe and D. discoideum. In Danio rerio, disruption of dnmt2 has been reported to cause pleiotropic effects and in E. histolytica a gene disruption could not be obtained, suggesting that Dnmt2 was required for viability. On closer inspection, more subtle long-term effects of Dnmt2 loss were observed: in D. melanogaster, for example, H4K20 me3 was strongly reduced, and telomeric sequences were lost. Durdevic et al. recently showed that in D. melanogaster, Dnmt2 was also involved in virus control. At least in D. melanogaster, E. histolytica and D. discoideum, low amounts of DNA methylation, especially on retroelements, were detected and attributed to Dnmt2, although these data are controversially discussed. In 2006, Bestor’s group reported that Dnmt2 rather methylates transfer RNA than DNA in M. musculus, D. melanogaster and Arabidopsis thaliana. Specifically, they found C38 in tRNA Asp as the major or only substrate for the enzyme. A dual role of Dnmt2 had been discussed, and Jurkowski et al. could show that tRNA Asp was methylated by an enzymatic mechanism characteristic for DNA methyltransferases rather than by the reaction pathways of enzymes that methylate RNAs. tRNA Asp methylation activity was also reported for the Dnmt2-homologues from E. histolytica and D. melanogaster. Schaefer et al. showed that D. melanogaster tRNA Val and tRNA Gly were also methylated at position C38 in vivo and by human Dnmt2 in vitro. They further found that dnmt2 knockout flies were more sensitive to oxidative stress. A more detailed analysis of tRNA Asp and tRNA Gly suggested that methylation protected tRNAs from stress-induced cleavage. Double-knockout mutant mice of Dnmt2 and Nsun2, the second known m 5 C-tRNA-methyltransferase in higher eukaryotes, showed a phenotype with impaired cellular differentiation, an overall reduction in protein synthesis and early lethality. Recently, we identified tRNA Glu as an additional novel substrate of Pmt1, the Dnmt2-homologue in S. pombe. Pmt1-dependent tRNA methylation seemed to be regulated by nutrient conditions. Nutritional control was also reported for Ehmeth, the Dnmt2 homologue from E. histolytica that is inhibited by the glycolytic enzyme enolase. Here, we demonstrate that recombinant D. discoideum DnmA and hDnmt2 can methylate tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly from D. discoideum in vitro with different efficiencies. Both enzymes formed covalent complexes with specific tRNAs with similar kinetics, but they were significantly slower for the minor substrate tRNA Glu than for the major substrate tRNA Asp. Ultraviolet -crosslinking and immunoprecipitation experiments showed that specific fragments of the three target tRNAs associated with DnmA in vivo. However, in vivo, only methylation of tRNA Asp by DnmA was confirmed, whereas methylation of the target nucleotide C38 in other substrates was not detectable by bisulfite sequencing. As revealed by quantitative reverse transcription -PCR, dnmA is differentially expressed in development, cell cycle and in the recovery phase after temperature stress. The increase in dnmA expression levels correlated with elevated tRNA Asp methylation in development but not after temperature stress. The other targets identified by in vitro methylation and by CLIP were apparently also not methylated in vivo in development. Our data document that additional RNA molecules can serve as substrates for Dnmt2 binding and that the full range of targets is probably not yet recognized. The results also suggest that binding of the methyltransferase to an RNA molecule not necessarily results in methylation but may have different biological functions. MATERIALS AND METHODS Dictyostelium discoideum cultures and nomenclature Dictyostelium discoideum AX2-214 was grown in HL5+ medium containing 50 µg/ml Ampicillin, 0.25 µg/ml Amphotericin-B, 100 µg/ml Penicillin/Streptomycin at 22°C, constant light under selective conditions as required. NC4 cells were grown in a suspension of Klebsiella aerogenes in phosphate buffer. When indicated, AX2 cells were also grown in bacterial suspension to allow for comparison with NC4. For cold treatment cells were shaken at 4°C for 2–14 h. Cells were allowed to recover at 22°C for 2½ h before RNA isolation. For synchronization, cells at a density of 1–3 × 10 5 /ml were incubated at 4°C over night. Before cold treatment, cells were briefly cooled down in a water bath with ice. For synchronization, cells were then warmed up in a 25°C water bath before cultivating at 22°C. Synchronization was measured by counting cells every 30 min during a period of at least 7 h. Samples for RNA isolation were taken at the times indicated. Gene names and accession numbers refer to DictyBase. Complete sequences for tRNAs relevant for the experiments are given in Supplementary Table S2. In silico folded clover leaf structures for tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly are given in Supplementary Figure S1. Nucleotides in tRNAs have been numbered according to Motorin et al.. Expression and purification of recombinant DnmA and human hDnmt2 DnmA and hDnmt2 were both cloned with N-terminal His 6 -tags in pET28a into the Nde I and Xho I sites. Recombinant proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli Rosetta pLysS cells. Induction and protein purification were done as described previously. Briefly, the cells were induced at an OD 600 of 0.6 with 1 mM IPTG and incubated for 3 h at 37°C for hDnmt2 and at 22°C for DnmA. After harvesting, cells were resuspended in sonication buffer containing protease inhibitors and lysed by sonication with a Dr Hielscher up200s sonifier. The cell lysate was cleared by centrifugation, and the supernatant was incubated on NiNTA-Sepharose for 15 min at 4°C. After washing with sonication buffer, His 6 -tagged proteins were eluted with a buffer containing 30 mM KPi, 300 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 200 mM imidazole and 0.1 mM DTT. The eluate was dialysed in two steps. UV-crosslinking and RNA immunoprecipitation For UV CLIP, 2 × 10 8 D. discoideum cells expressing DnmA-GFP in the dnmA KO -background and cells expressing GFP only were harvested, washed once and resuspended in 20 ml of phosphate buffer. Ten microlitre aliquots of the suspension were spread in 10 cm petri dishes and UV irradiated with 250 mJ/cm 2. Cells were spun down and collected in 4 ml of modified RIPA-Buffer. Lysis was supported by three times sonication with a Dr Hielscher up200s sonifier. Samples were centrifuged, and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube; it was again centrifuged, and the supernatant collected for a third centrifugation step. Hereafter, the supernatant was pre-incubated with 250 µl Sephadex™ G-50 Medium and then transferred to 50 µl GFP-trap beads. Incubation was carried out for 15 min at 4°C on a rotating wheel, followed by two washing steps with 1.5 ml stringency RIPA buffer A and two washing steps with stringency RIPA buffer B. For further analysis, aliquots were taken from input and the last wash. Beads were equilibrated and resuspended in RIPA elution buffer. To each sample, proteinase K was added at a final concentration of 1 mg/ml and incubated for 1 h at 42°C and 5 h at 56°C. Samples were extracted with phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol solution, and RNA was precipitated with isopropanol and 20 µg of glycogen. Deep sequencing of co-immunoprecipitated RNAs cDNA synthesis and Illumnia sequencing was carried out according to previously published protocols. Specifically, the two RNA samples from the CLIP experiment were poly-tailed using poly polymerase. After that, the 5′PPP was converted into 5′P using tobacco acid pyrophosphatase. Then, an RNA adapter was ligated to the 5′-phosphate of the RNA. First-strand cDNA synthesis was performed using an oligo-adapter primer and the M-MLV reverse transcriptase. The resulting cDNAs were PCR-amplified to ∼20–30 ng/μl using a high-fidelity DNA polymerase. Adaptors that were used for ligation are listed in Supplementary Table S1. The cDNA libraries were sequenced using an Illumina GAIIx machine with 100 cycles resulting in 5 674 433 and 5 540 257 reads. After removal of the barcodes and adaptor sequences, the reads were aligned to the genome of D. discoideum using the short read mapper segemehl. For unmapped reads, polyA-tails were computationally searched in the 3′-end and clipped if found. The resulting sequences were mapped again to the reference sequences. In all, 1 249 579 reads of the DnmA-GFP pulldown and 514 809 reads of the control sample could be successfully aligned. Enrichment of RNAs was calculated by comparison of normalized read numbers from the DnmA-GFP pull down and the control. In case of multiple genes resulting in the same transcript, the reads are mapped to the first copy in the genome starting from chromosome 1. Cloning and in vitro transcription of RNAs The genes for tRNA Asp, tRNA Phe, tRNA Leu, tRNA Leu, tRNA Val and tRNA Gly were cloned into pJET1/blunt vector according to the suppliers suggestions. In the case of multiple identical genes for one tRNA, only one gene is listed here. The annotation of tRNAs, sequences, potential isoacceptor tRNAs and in silico folding are shown in Supplementary Table S2 and Supplementary Figure S1. Genes were produced by recursive PCR using overlapping oligos. For tRNA Asp, tRNA Leu, tRNA Leu, tRNA Val and tRNA Gly, the respective oligos 2 and 3 served as template and oligo 1 and 4 as primers. A restriction site was added at the 3′-end and a T7-promotor at the 5′-end. For tRNA Phe, oligo 1, 2 and 3 are used as template. Amplification was done with oligo 4 and 5. The tRNA Glu and suppressor tRNA Glu were recloned into pJET1/blunt vector from pGEM T vector. The mutated versions tRNA AspC38A and tRNA GluC38A were constructed by using the respective oligonucleotides. For in vitro transcription, 500 ng of linearized plasmid was incubated at 37°C for 2 h in 50 µl with 1 µl T7-RNA polymerase, 1 mM NTPs, 1× transcription buffer and RiboLock™ RNase Inhibitor. After transcription, samples were treated with DNaseI for 15 min, extracted with an equal volume of phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol and purified over a Sephadex G-50 spin column. For radio-labelled in vitro transcription, 2 µg of linearized plasmid were incubated at 37°C for 2 h in 100 µl volume with 2 µl T7-RNA polymerase, 2 mM ATP, GTP and CTP, 1 mM UTP and 2 µl UTP, 1× transcription buffer and RiboLock™ RNase Inhibitor. After transcription, samples were treated as aforementioned. Preparation of small RNA fraction RNA isolation was done using the Trizol®-method. For enrichment of the small RNA fraction, 0.5 M NaCl/5% PEG 8000 was added to the RNA solution and incubated at −20°C for 30 min. After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected in a fresh tube and precipitated with three volumes of 100% EtOH. SDS-EMSA Detection of denaturant-resistant DnmA-tRNA was carried out by SDS-electrophoretic mobility shift assay as described elsewhere with some modifications. Briefly, DnmA was incubated in 20 µl of 10 mM KPi, 22.5 % glycerol, 25 mM KCl, 10 mM DTT, 2 mM MgCl 2 and 100–500 µM S-adenosyl-methionine with the respective 32 P labelled tRNA at 22°C. Reactions were terminated at the indicated times by addition of 10 µl of SDS-stop mixture and heated for 10 min at 65°C. Samples were cooled down to room temperature and subjected to electrophoresis on 6 or 12% SDS–polyacrylamide gels, sealed in Saran Wrap and exposed to an imager plate for 12–40 h at RT. Plates were read in a phosphoimager. In some cases, samples were transferred from the gel to a nitrocellulose membrane for immunodetection of DnmA using an anti-His antibody and a secondary mouse antibody coupled to alkaline phosphatase. In vitro methylation assay Methylation of RNA substrates was carried out as described previously : 3 µM of recombinant hDnmt2 and 3–12 µM of DnmA were incubated with 500 ng of tRNA-transcript, 1× methylation buffer and 1.7 µM -SAM, 1 u/µl RiboLock™ RNase Inhibitor at 22°C for 1 min to 1.5 h as indicated in the text. The reaction was stopped by adding 1 mM non-radioactive SAM and 2 mg/ml proteinase K for 30 min. Loading buffer was added, and samples were run on a 12% denaturing polyacrylamide gel for 2–5 h at 400 V. The gel was stained with ethidiumbromide, fixed and immersed for 1 h in amplify solution, dried and exposed to X-ray film for 16 h up to 2 weeks at −80°C. In vitro blocked methylation assay The in vitro blocked methylation assay is based on the assumption that RNA methylation is inhibited if the target site is covered by hybridization with a complementary DNA oligo. RNA was mixed with 2 µM of the respective oligonucleotide in 1 × STE-buffer, heated up to 80°C in a thermocycler and then cooled down stepwise to room temperature. The blocked RNA was subsequently used in a 3 H-methylation assay as described earlier in the text. Blocking oligos are shown in Supplementary Table S1. dnmA expression analysis by real-time quantitative PCR For analysing dnmA expression levels, RNA was extracted by the Trizol®-method. qPCR was performed in an Eppendorf realplex light cycler with the SensiFAST SYBR No-ROX One-Step Kit according to the suppliers instructions. Relative quantification was done with the ΔΔCt-method using gapdh as a normalization control. Microscopy For fluorescence analysis, cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde dissolved in 20 mM phosphate buffer for 10 min at 22°C and stained with DAPI. Images were acquired on a Leica DMIRB inverted microscope equipped with a DC350 camera and IM50 Acquisition software. For the movie, DnmA-GFP cells were analysed with a Zeiss Cell Observer SD with Rapp UGA-40-2 L Scanner. Images of living cells were taken in 15 s intervals at 7 layers with a 0.8 µM distance between each layer during a period of 120 min. Further image analysis was done with ImageJ 1.46. The movie is displayed with eight frames per second. RNA bisulfite sequencing RNA bisulfite sequencing was carried out as described elsewhere. Primer sequences are listed in the Supplementary Material. RESULTS DnmA is an active tRNA Asp methyltransferase in vitro and in vivo Previous experiments have shown that hDnmt2 can methylate a D. discoideum RNA in the size range of tRNAs in vitro. Here, we investigated whether the D. discoideum Dnmt2-homologue DnmA is also an active tRNA Asp methyltransferase. In vitro transcribed D. discoideum tRNA Asp was used as a substrate for methylation by DnmA and hDnmt2 in vitro. The assays showed that the tRNA was efficiently methylated by both enzymes. The reaction was time dependent, the activity was sensitive to Mg 2+ concentrations and almost lost at 10 mM Mg 2+. In contrast to the human enzyme, DnmA was inactive at 37°C. Therefore, all reactions were carried out at 22°C where hDnmt2 still showed good activity. Figure 1. In vitro methylation of tRNA Asp. In vitro methylation of tRNA Asp by DnmA at 2 mM, 5 mM and 10 mM MgCl 2 and by hDnmt2 at 5 mM Mg 2+. The upper panel shows ethidium bromide staining of the in vitro transcripts separated in a denaturing polyacrylamide... To investigate methylation in vivo, RNA bisulfite analysis of tRNA Asp from D. discoideum was performed. Figure 1 B shows that in wild-type cells, tRNA Asp was methylated at position C38 to ∼30%, whereas methylation was at background levels in DnmA knockout strains. Ectopic overexpression of hDnmt2 in wild-type cells increased tRNA Asp C38 methylation to ∼50% indicating cross-species activity of Dnmt2-homologues. C49 was methylated at ∼90%, independently of DnmA and served as an internal control for the bisulfite reaction. As tRNA Asp appeared to be not the only target for Dnmt2 in other organisms, we examined if more cellular-derived RNAs could be methylated in vitro. Total RNA from dnmA KO AX2 cells was subjected to in vitro methylation by recombinant DnmA for various times. Methylated RNAs were separated by gelelectrophoresis and visualized by autoradiography. Figure 1 C shows that a substantial RNA fraction in the tRNA size range could be methylated. At longer incubation times, a second minor methylated RNA species appeared, indicating that at least one further substrate could be methylated in vitro. Identification of further substrates— in vitro binding and methylation of tRNA Glu The group of Helm had proposed a sequence pattern that may serve as a target recognition motif for C38 methylation by hDnmt2. We therefore examined all D. discoideum tRNAs in silico to identify candidates for the additional methylated band in the ex vivo experiment. In addition to tRNA Asp, we found tRNA Glu and tRNA Glu to match the pattern. Figure 2. Target site sequences of tRNAs used for in vitro methylation. The position of the putative signature nucleotides are indicated and printed in bold if present. The anticodon is underlined. tRNA Glu also harbours the nucleotide pattern.... To test for tRNA Glu as a potential substrate, we modified the methylation assay by addition of a 50 nt DNA antisense oligonucleotide to tRNA Asp covering the methylation target site. Figure 3 A shows, as a control, that methylation of in vitro transcribed tRNA Asp was completely blocked. We then performed ex vivo methylation assays with enriched small RNAs isolated from D. discoideum after blocking tRNA Asp with the antisense oligo. Figure 3 B shows that the majority of 3 H-incorporation disappeared. However, with both DnmA and hDnmt2 a significant amount of methylation was still detectable in the size range of tRNAs. Assuming that this signal contained tRNA Glu, we used a second antisense oligo directed against tRNA Glu for blocking methylation. The oligo also covered the isoacceptor tRNA Glu with minor mismatches. A further reduction of ex vivo methylation was observed. Notably, the lower band in the tRNA size range disappeared, suggesting that this represented a tRNA Glu population that could be methylated at least in vitro. The residual methylation after blocking with both oligos may represent additional tRNAs or other unknown targets. As we only concentrated on small RNAs, larger methylated molecules and less abundant targets may have escaped detection. Figure 3. Ex vivo methylation and blocking assay. Methylation of in vitro transcribed tRNA Asp was completely blocked when a complementary antisense oligo was hybridized. Using enriched small RNA from dnmA KO cells, ex vivo methylation in the tRNA size... To further analyse methylation on tRNA Asp and tRNA Glu ), we carried out assays with wild-type sequences and C38A mutated in vitro transcripts. We also included a suppressor tRNA Glu that differed in only 2 nt from tRNA Glu. Assays were done in parallel with the recombinant hDnmt2 and D. discoideum DnmA. The experiment showed that tRNA Asp was the best substrate for both DnmA and hDnmt2. Substantial methylation was also observed for tRNA Glu and suppressor tRNA Glu. Moreover, the complete loss of methylation in the C38A mutations of tRNA Asp and tRNA Glu confirmed that methylation occurred at position C38 and largely ruled out that methyl group incorporation was due to another contaminating methyltransferase in the recombinant protein preparation. Figure 4. C38 is the target for in vitro methylation of tRNA Asp and tRNA Glu. In vitro methylation of tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu and a suppressor tRNA Glu. C38A mutations confirmed C38 as the target nucleotide. tRNA Asp methylation was most efficient.... The methylation experiments using in vitro transcribed tRNAs showed that no other modifications were necessary for C38 methylation by DnmA and hDnmt2 and that the processed ends of a mature tRNA were not required for target recognition, as the tRNA transcripts contain no 3′-CCA. Even tRNA Glu embedded in a long dsRNA molecule with small stem-loop structures at the ends was a specific substrate of DnmA and hDnmt2. By EMSA, no difference in in vitro binding could be seen for the specific target tRNA Glu and non-target RNAs, indicating that DnmA associated non-specifically with any nucleic acid. However, specific covalent enzyme-substrate intermediates can be detected by denaturing SDS–PAGE. Figure 5 A and Supplementary Figure S4 show that radioactively labelled tRNA transcripts that can be methylated in vitro by DnmA formed denaturation resistant complexes while non-target RNAs did not. To confirm that the denaturation resistant complexes were really due to binding of the enzyme to the substrate, SDS gels were blotted, and His-tagged DnmA was detected by a specific anti-His antibody. A small amount of the tagged protein was shifted to the same position as the labelled tRNA. Figure 5. Formation and turnover of tRNA-methyltransferase complexes. Turnover of covalent complexes of tRNA substrates with DnmA and hDnmt2. Examples of time courses on covalent complex formation with tRNA Asp and tRNA Glu. Complex bands in A were... We then performed time courses for the reaction and found that covalent complex formation was only transient under the conditions used. For tRNA Asp, adducts reached a maximum after 1 min and were undetectable after 15 min, whereas the tRNA Glu complex only began to accumulate after 1 min but persisted for almost 60 min. This coincided with the high methylation activity on tRNA Asp and a lower one on tRNA Glu. The human enzyme appeared to be slightly faster in the reaction but otherwise showed a similar behaviour compared with D. discoideum DnmA. tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly bind specifically to DnmA in vivo The blocking assay suggested that further substrates could be targeted by DnmA. To identify such targets and to further investigate the interaction between DnmA and RNAs in vivo, we established a UV-CLIP procedure for D. discoideum. DnmA-GFP expressing cells and control cells expressing GFP only, were UV cross-linked, and complexes were precipitated under denaturing conditions by a GFP nanobody. Then, co-precipitated RNAs were isolated, converted into strand-specific cDNA libraries and analyzed by Illumina sequencing. Figure 6. tRNA and tRNA fragments associated with DnmA-GFP. After UV crosslinking, RNA bound to DnmA was co-immunoprecipitated under denaturing conditions. The number of normalised reads for tRNAs detected by Illumina sequencing is shown for DnmA CLIP and... Various tRNA fragments were enriched in the DnmA CLIP sample compared with the control. By their length and position, fragments appeared not to be random but specific. We found mid-fragments of 20–24 nt that covered the C38 methylation site in the respective tRNAs, 5′-fragments of 17 nt, 3′-fragments of 20/21 nt and 3′-half tRNAs of 41–43 nt. Mid-fragments of tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly were significantly enriched in the DnmA-GFP fraction in comparison with the control CLIP assay. tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu and tRNA Glu harbour the sequence pattern, which has been suggested as a signature for C38 methylation, tRNA Gly contains the pattern except for C40. For tRNA Ala, which does not contain C38 and the signature pattern, a different fragment from the 3′-end was enriched in the DnmA-CLIP sample. For other tRNAs, no significant accumulation was observed in the experiment. For several tRNAs, varying amounts of full-length molecules were found, but these were never enriched in the DnmA sample in comparison with the control. tRNA Gly is an additional methylation substrate in vitro The CLIP data suggested that tRNA Gly was another target for DnmA. We therefore cloned this and several other tRNA genes that contained the pattern only partially. We generated in vitro transcripts and examined methylation by DnmA and hDnmt2 in vitro. Indeed, tRNA Gly was methylated by both enzymes, while none of the other tRNAs, tRNA Leu, tRNA Val and tRNA Phe ) resulted in detectable methylation signals in the assay. Interestingly, the in vitro methylation efficiency of the three tRNA substrates, tRNA Glu, tRNA Gly ) correlated roughly with the number of tRNA fragments found in the RNA-CLIP experiment. Figure 7. In vitro methylation of tRNA Gly by recombinant DnmA and hDnmt2. In vitro transcribed tRNAs were methylated in vitro as described before. The top panel shows the ethidium-bromide stained gel, the bottom panel the fluorogram of 3 H-labelled methylated... The data supported the conclusion from the ex vivo blocking assay that in addition to D. discoideum tRNA Asp and tRNA Glu, other RNAs were substrates for DnmA and hDnmt2 in vitro. Expression of dnmA is regulated during development, cell cycle and on temperature stress DnmA expression in growing vegetative D. discoideum cells is low. To examine tRNA methylation in vivo, it was therefore advantageous to determine conditions under which dnmA was most highly expressed. Prompted by previous studies, we assumed that the biological function of DnmA was connected to developmental and/or environmental conditions. We therefore examined expression levels of dnmA under different regimes. dnmA mRNA was quantified by qPCR over the 24 h developmental cycle of D. discoideum and confirmed the data deposited in Dictyexpress. Interestingly, an ∼5-fold increase in expression was observed at 16 h in development. This time coincides with a presumed synchronous mitotic division where a multitude of cell-cycle regulated genes are expressed. Therefore, we synchronized vegetative D. discoideum cells to examine dnmA expression during the cell cycle. For these experiments, the D. discoideum wild-type strain NC4, the parent of the axenic laboratory strain AX2 was used. This was prompted by the observation that D. melanogaster and E. histolytica laboratory strains may lose dnmt2 expression. The data confirmed our assumption of a cell-cycle-dependent transcriptional regulation of dnmA. The peak of expression coincided with late mitosis or early S-phase, as D. discoideum does not display a G1 phase. Using AX2 cells cotransformed with PCNA-RFP and DnmA-GFP, we observed GFP accumulation in the nucleus during S phase and a loss of DnmA from the nucleus during mitosis. This is further exemplified by the movie in the Supplementary Material. Figure 8. Expression, localization and tRNA Asp methylation activity of DnmA under various conditions. dnmA expression is regulated during the cell cycle. Cells were arrested in the cell cycle by cold treatment and then released by transfer to 22°C.... In other organisms, dnmt2 was observed to be upregulated during stress response. We therefore examined expression after anoxia, heat shock and cold shock but did not find any significant changes. Only during recovery from cold shock, we detected a strong transient increase in dnmA mRNA by ∼47-fold. Thus, dnmA expression was differentially regulated during the cell cycle, development and on temperature stress. Furthermore, DnmA localization changed specifically during the cell cycle. Though the basic expression in vegetative cells was indistinguishable, dnmA expression in NC4 was ∼30-fold higher at 16 h of development, whereas developmental upregulation was only 5-fold in AX2. The data are summarized in Figure 8 D. NC4, the parent strain of AX2, displays increased tRNA Asp methylation during development Based on these observations, we asked the question whether expression levels correlated with tRNA methylation activity in vivo. Bisulfite sequencing was done with primers for tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly on RNA isolated from vegetative AX2 cells, AX2 cells developed for 16 h, AX2 cells subjected to cold shock, AX2 recovered for 2.5 h after cold shock, vegetative NC4 cells and NC4 cells developed for 16 h. The results on C38 methylation of tRNA Asp are summarized in Figure 8 E. The methylation status of all C residues from all tested tRNAs in this study is shown in Supplementary Figure S8. Indeed, tRNA Asp methylation at C38 increased to 76% in development in NC4 cells. No increase was observed in AX2 cells during development, possibly due to insufficient sensitivity of the assay. Interestingly, no increase in tRNA Asp methylation was observed at the highest dnmA expression levels during stress recovery. In Figure 8 E, the 30–35% methylation level in all tRNA Asp samples represents significant methylation as compared with other C residues. We did, however, not detect any significant methylation of tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly under any conditions. In contrast, C49/C50 methylation, which does not depend on Dnmt2 enzymes, was found in all samples and thus served as an internal control. In all, 1.175 bisulfite-sequence reads were examined for tRNA Glu and 4.040 for tRNA Gly. No methylation above background was found. Though it cannot be excluded that the failure to detect C38 methylation of tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly was due to inefficient reverse transcription or low levels of methylation, we conclude that tRNA Asp is the major or possibly the only in vivo target for methylation by DnmA in D. discoideum. DISCUSSION The biological function of Dnmt2 methyltransferases is largely unknown, and its role in DNA methylation is controversially discussed. In contrast, tRNA methylation by Dnmt2 is robust in vitro and in vivo and evolutionary conserved. In addition to the originally described tRNA Asp, two further tRNAs targets and tRNA Gly ) have been defined in D. melanogaster and tRNA Glu in S. pombe. To get insight into potential functions of the D. discoideum Dnmt2 homologue DnmA, we examined expression levels in development, in the cell cycle and under different environmental conditions. We confirmed by qPCR an expression peak at 16 h of development. Weijer and co-workers had previously proposed a synchronous cell division at this developmental stage. We therefore investigated dnmA expression in the cell cycle and found a strong transient increase of mRNA in S-phase or shortly thereafter. The expression peak was accompanied by reaccumulation of DnmA in the nucleus. We assume that DnmA is degraded during mitosis and re-synthesised after cell division. In S. pombe as well as in D. melanogaster, tRNA methylation changes in response to environmental challenges like temperature stress, anoxia or nutrients. We tested heat shock, cold shock, anoxia and various nutrient media but did not observe altered levels. Only during the recovery phase after cold treatment, a transient, almost 50-fold increase in mRNA abundance was seen. Reuter and Ankri had observed a loss of Dnmt2 expression in laboratory strains of D. melanogaster and E. histolytica. We therefore examined D. discoideum NC4, the parent of the axenic laboratory strain AX2. The developmental regulation in AX2 and NC4 was qualitatively similar, but expression levels were much higher in NC4. The observation supports the assumption that Dnmt2 expression was reduced under optimal growth conditions in the laboratory strain and may actually be selected against. We show that the D. discoideum Dnmt2 homologue DnmA is an active tRNA Asp methyltransferase in vitro and in vivo. To identify further potential targets for DnmA, we established a UV-CLIP method to analyse DnmA–RNA interaction in vivo. In addition to the known target tRNA Asp, fragments of tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly were most abundant in comparison with the control. Unexpectedly, complete tRNAs were not enriched in the DnmA CLIP fraction but rather specific ‘mid-fragments’ that covered the putative methylation site and the recognition pattern proposed by Helm. A minor exception was tRNA Gly, which lacks C40. We do not know whether these fragments were directly or indirectly generated by DnmA in vivo or whether they were protected by DnmA from degradation during the experimental procedure. As no co-crystal of Dnmt2 and a tRNA substrate is available, the exact interface for the interaction is unknown. Jurkowski et al. mapped the binding site on Dnmt2 by mutational analysis. A manual placement of a tRNA into the crystal structure suggests that Dnmt2 mainly contacts the anticodon stem loop. Assuming that mid-fragments are footprints of DnmA, our data support this notion but suggest that the interaction surface extends into the D-loop, which is partially covered by the mid-fragments. We examined the putative DnmA targets in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo. Furthermore, we investigated by SDS–PAGE the kinetics of covalent complex formation between tRNA Asp and tRNA Glu with DnmA and hDnmt2. All three tRNAs were readily methylated by recombinant DnmA and hDnmt2 in vitro, although the activity was much higher on tRNA Asp compared with tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly. For tRNA Asp and tRNA Glu, this correlated well with the formation and decay of covalent RNA—protein complexes where kinetics for tRNA Asp were much faster than for tRNA Glu. Instead of C methylation, the covalent intermediate may also proceed to a hydrogen exchange reaction or to a deamination of the cytosine. In both cases, an intermediate will be detected, but it will not result in a methylated product. It may be that slower off rates represent these alternative pathways that would result in unmethylated tRNAs. Using antisense oligos, we showed that tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu and at least one additional RNA could be methylated ex vivo. A quantification of the results was not possible: the apparently low methylation of tRNA Glu ex vivo could be due to the low activity of the enzyme on this substrate. The data for the examination of in vivo methylation by bisulfite sequencing were rather unexpected. Although tRNA Asp was consistently found to be methylated at C38, we never detected any methylation at C38 of tRNA Glu or tRNA Gly. There could be two reasons to explain the failure to detect C38 methylation for these in vitro substrates: due to the low activity of DnmA on tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly as shown in vitro, there was low or no significant methylation in vivo and methylation escaped detection because other unknown modifications blocked reverse transcription of the methylated molecules. However, if this was the case, one has to assume that C49/C50 methylation occurs independently of these unknown modifications, whereas C38 methylation strictly depends on them. As C38 methylation does not require any other modifications in vitro, we believe that this scenario is less likely. If in vitro methylation activity was comparable with in vivo methylation, 10% methylation of tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly could be expected relative to tRNA Asp. As tRNA Asp was methylated to ∼30%, a 3% methylation of tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly could be below the detection level of the bisulfite assay. We find that high expression of dnmA did not necessarily correlate with increased methylation of tRNAs. During recovery from cold shock, D. discoideum cells displayed the highest level of dnmA expression, but this had no effect on tRNA Asp methylation. Only in development and with the high expressing NC4 strain, a significant increase of tRNA Asp methylation to ∼70% was observed. It has to be considered, however, that bisulfite sequencing does not necessarily allow for quantitative evaluation of data: detected C-methylation depends on reverse transcription efficiency, which may be hampered by other modifications that could be different under different conditions. Furthermore, the completeness of bisulfite-mediated conversion could also depend on RNA structure, which may be altered by other modifications. However, incomplete conversion will lead to an overestimation of C-methylation as maybe the case for, for example, C30, C31, C35 in tRNA Gly in some samples. Taken together, the data from CLIP, complex formation and methylation show that all three substrates can be bound and methylated in vitro. The CLIP data show that there is a specific interaction of DnmA with tRNA mid-fragments of tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly but not with other tRNAs. In contrast, bisulfite sequencing could only detect methylation on tRNA Asp, even at the highest expression levels of dnmA. Even though low amounts of methylation may have escaped detection in bisulfite sequencing, there is still a discrepancy between dnmA expression levels, DnmA binding to substrates and methylation in vivo. We therefore suggest that DnmA binding to specific targets could elicit functions in addition to RNA methylation, e.g. by promoting processing or degradation and/or recruitment of other proteins. At least for some rRNA methyltransferases, such as Bud23 or Nep1 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, it is known that they execute functions independent from the methylation activity. As shown by Schaefer and co-workers, methylation protects tRNAs from degradation or processing after stress. By a different pathway, binding of DnmA may initiate processing that leads to specific tRNA fragments that could serve for other biological functions. Interestingly, tRNA Glu is also a substrate for the Dnmt2 homologue Pmt1 in S. pombe. However, tRNA Glu is found to be methylated to a low but significant extend in vivo in fission yeast when Pmt1 is overexpressed. The detection of tRNA Ala fragments in the CLIP assay brings up a new question. tRNA Ala has a T instead of a C in position 38 and does not contain the signature nucleotides in the anticodon stem-loop. Instead of a mid-fragment, a distinct 3′ fragment was associated with DnmA, suggesting that a recognition motif was located in this part of the molecule. As methylation also occurred in a large artificial molecule with embedded tRNA Glu, it could be that other longer RNAs containing an appropriate recognition motif may also be bound by the enzyme. We thus propose that the biological functions of Dnmt2 proteins could extend far beyond our present knowledge. Investigation of further targets and of the significance of RNA fragments associated with Dnmt2 should shed light on the importance of this enzyme. SUPPLEMENTARY DATA Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online. FUNDING Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Studienstiftung des Deutschen Volkes. Funding for open access charge:. Conflict of interest statement. None declared. Supplementary Material Supplementary Data: Click here to view. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors thank Thomas Winckler for providing the tRNA Glu and suppressor tRNA Glu plasmids, Susanne Junk for cloning tRNA AspC38A. Matthias Schäfer and Robin Lorenz are acknowledged for RNA bisulfite sequencing and Richard Reinhardt for deep sequencing. Mark Helm generously provided data before publication. Carsten Seehafer helped with the analysis of deep-sequencing data. Article information Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Oct; 41: 8615–8627. Published online 2013 Jul 22. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt634 PMCID: PMC3794594 PMID: 23877245 Sara Müller, 1 Indra M. Windhof, 1 Vladimir Maximov, 1 Tomasz Jurkowski, 2 Albert Jeltsch, 2 Konrad U. Förstner, 3 Cynthia M. Sharma, 3 Ralph Gräf, 4 and Wolfgang Nellen 1, * Sara Müller 1 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel, Germany, 2 Institute of Biochemistry, University Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, 3 Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg and 4 Universität Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Abt. Zellbiologie, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, 14476 Potsdam – Golm Find articles by Sara Müller Indra M. Windhof 1 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel, Germany, 2 Institute of Biochemistry, University Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, 3 Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg and 4 Universität Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Abt. Zellbiologie, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, 14476 Potsdam – Golm Find articles by Indra M. Windhof Vladimir Maximov 1 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel, Germany, 2 Institute of Biochemistry, University Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, 3 Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg and 4 Universität Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Abt. Zellbiologie, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, 14476 Potsdam – Golm Find articles by Vladimir Maximov Tomasz Jurkowski 1 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel, Germany, 2 Institute of Biochemistry, University Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, 3 Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg and 4 Universität Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Abt. Zellbiologie, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, 14476 Potsdam – Golm Find articles by Tomasz Jurkowski Albert Jeltsch 1 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel, Germany, 2 Institute of Biochemistry, University Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, 3 Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg and 4 Universität Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Abt. Zellbiologie, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, 14476 Potsdam – Golm Find articles by Albert Jeltsch Konrad U. Förstner 1 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel, Germany, 2 Institute of Biochemistry, University Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, 3 Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg and 4 Universität Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Abt. Zellbiologie, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, 14476 Potsdam – Golm Find articles by Konrad U. Förstner Cynthia M. Sharma 1 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel, Germany, 2 Institute of Biochemistry, University Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, 3 Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg and 4 Universität Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Abt. Zellbiologie, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, 14476 Potsdam – Golm Find articles by Cynthia M. Sharma Ralph Gräf 1 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel, Germany, 2 Institute of Biochemistry, University Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, 3 Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg and 4 Universität Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Abt. Zellbiologie, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, 14476 Potsdam – Golm Find articles by Ralph Gräf Wolfgang Nellen 1 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel, Germany, 2 Institute of Biochemistry, University Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, 3 Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg and 4 Universität Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Abt. Zellbiologie, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, 14476 Potsdam – Golm Find articles by Wolfgang Nellen 1 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel, Germany, 2 Institute of Biochemistry, University Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, 3 Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg and 4 Universität Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Abt. Zellbiologie, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, 14476 Potsdam – Golm *To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +49 561 8044805; Fax: +49 561 8044800; Email: ed.lessak-inu@nellen Present addresses: Sara Müller, Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Georg-August-University, Humboldtallee 23, 37073 Göttingen, Germany. The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. Vladimir Maximov, Department of Plant Biology and Forest Genetics, Uppsala BioCenter, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, PO-Box 7080, SE-75007 Uppsala, Sweden. Received 2012 Dec 12; Revised 2013 Jun 24; Accepted 2013 Jun 26. Copyright © The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License, which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com Articles from Nucleic Acids Research are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press 