 Eukaryotic protein sequences often contain amino-acid homopolymers that consist of a single amino acid repeated from several to dozens of times. Some of these are functional but others may persist largely because of high expansion rates due to DNA slippage. However, very long homopolymers with over a hundred repeats are very rare. We report an extraordinarily long homopolymer consisting of 306 tandem serine repeats from the single-celled eukaryote Dictyostelium discoideum, which also has a multicellular stage. The gene has a paralog with 132 repeats and orthologs, also with high serine repeat numbers, in various other Dictyostelid species. The conserved gene structure and protein sequences suggest that the homopolymer is functional. The high codon diversity and very poor alignment of serine codons in this gene between species similarly indicate functionality. This is because the serine homopolymer is conserved despite much DNA sequence change. A survey of other very long amino-acid homopolymers in eukaryotes shows that high codon diversity is the rule, suggesting that these too may be functional. Keywords: amino-acid repeats, serine homopolymer, evolution, Dictyostelium Introduction Amino-acid homopolymers are common and abundant in eukaryotic proteins. Some of these repeat sequences are functional. Some exhibit dysfunctional effects in individuals that have expanded homopolymers, as in several human neurological diseases and developmental disorders. However, there is considerable debate over whether such sequences are generally functional. Because of the high expansion rate due to DNA slippage, many homopolymers may persist despite an absence of selection for them. Exceptionally long natural homopolymers are rare but might provide insight into the functionality question. We report on one of the longest known homopolymers in any eukaryote, 306 tandem iterations of the hydrophilic amino acid serine in the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, a soil-living eukaryote able to switch from solitary single cell growth to multicellular development upon starvation. Two factors suggest that the repeat is functional. First, it has homologs, although with shorter repeats, throughout the ancient Dictyostelids. Second, these serine repeats have very high codon diversity, something that is also true of other long amino-acid homopolymers in eukaryotes. The high diversity of serine codons has previously been used to infer selection on serine repeat genes. The genome of the social amoeba D. discoideum is extremely rich in amino-acid homopolymers. These occur in 34% of the predicted proteins and make up 3.3% of all amino acids of the whole proteome. The most abundant are homopolymers of asparagine and glutamine, with 2091 gene models containing homopolymers with over 20 of one of these amino acids, but threonine and serine repeats are also common. A multispecies comparison suggests that this high abundance is largely attributable to its unusually high genomic AT content, which allows more simple triplet DNA repeats to be initiated by chance, providing more raw material for the normal repeat expansion process via replication slippage. Selection on the proteins bearing these repeats may not be strong because they tend to be coded by genes with low expression and high rates of substitutional change. An unusually large fraction of these proteins lack homologs in D. purpureum and when they do have homologs, the existence, type and location of repeats usually differs. Moreover, a set of 50 genes with long asparagine homopolymers had just as much variation in repeat number among individuals as a comparable set of noncoding triplet repeats. This is consistent with the protein-coding repeats being under no greater selection than the noncoding ones. In this study, we focus on an extraordinarily long polyserine repeat, provide some evidence that it is functional and suggest that this may often be true of extremely long amino-acid homopolymers. Materials and methods Genome and transcriptome data Expression sequence tags, predicted gene models and proteins of D. discoideum and D. purpureum were retrieved from dictyBase. The predicted gene models and proteins of Polysphondylium pallidum and D. fasciculatum were retrieved from the database. The gene models of D. intermedium and P. violaceum were predicted using the program GENEID and MAKER based on the assemblies of 454-sequencing reads with 63 × and 19 × coverage of the genome, respectively. These species range across groups 1, 2 and 4 of Schaap's categorization of social amoebae. The RNA-seq transcriptome data of D. discoideum and D. purpureum were provided by Parikh et al.. Homopolymer identification Amino-acid homopolymers with ⩾20 perfect tandem iterations were identified from the predicted proteins using the in-house Perl scripts. Ortholog identification Orthologs of genes with large serine repeats were identified using the program Inparanoid version 3.0, a method based on the best reciprocal blast hits of protein sequences. A minimum cutoff for similarity of 50 bits and 50% overlap was used. Codon diversity calculation We calculated the codon diversity of coding sequences of each homopolymer on the basis of the genetic diversity proposed by Hedrick : Here p i is the frequency of the i th codon and k is the overall number of codon types used by the homopolymer. This is the probability that two randomly drawn codons are different. Database search of amino-acid homopolymers To identify other long amino-acid homopolymers, we searched using 200-mer amino-acid repeats as queries against NCBI's nr database. We manually checked the matched protein sequences and screened out those with truncated coding sequences and homopolymers of fewer than 100 repeats. To assess the expression of genes with homopolymers we searched, using BLAST, the ESTs from NCBI's EST database that match our gene sequences with homopolymers. Gene ontology To test whether the 80 serine proteins with serine repeats of at least 20 residues was overrepresented in gene ontology categories, we use a hypergeometric test in the program BiNGO a plugin of the platform Cytoscape. Phosphorylation site prediction We predicted phosphorylations site on the protein sequence using an artificial neural network method-based program NetPhos. Results and discussion The homopolymer poly-S 306 was identified from a protein model, which we named LSR 1, of D. discoideum. The 306 serine repeats occupy 82% of the entire protein sequence with only 65 non-serine amino acids at the N-terminus and 3 at the C-terminus. The repeat is exceptional not just in length, but also in several other characteristics. Except for a 70-tandem repeat of the codon TCA in the middle, this polyserine is encoded by a complex mixture of five synonymous codons rather than iteration of a single codon. We measured its codon diversity, which is the probability that two randomly chosen codons are different. The D =0.58 of poly-S 306 is in the top 9 among overall of 3391 amino-acid homopolymers with over 20 repeats in D. discoideum. Serine homopolymers generally have higher codon diversity than other amino-acid repeats in D. discoideum, but the poly-S 306 ranks in the top 5 of 81 even among serine homopolymers of >20 repeats. The very high codon diversity is consistent with selection for point mutations that break up perfect repeats and reduce excessive replication slippage. At the same time it is clear that, of all the point mutations that would reduce slippage, only serine coding ones have been favored; preservation of serines seems to be crucial. Figure 1 Structure and expression pattern of genes containing the extraordinarily long amino-acid homopolymer. Gene structure of the D. discoideum LSR 1 that includes 306 serine tandem repeats. The gray lines show the sequences of DNA,... Figure 2 Distribution of codon diversities of the long homopolymers from D. discoideum. The D values are plotted against the length of homopolymers with a different color and symbol for each amino acid. The two... The homopolymer poly-S 306 has a paralog in D. discoideum. Although its serine homopolymer is far shorter, it is still the second longest homopolymer in the genome. It also has exceptional codon diversity, ranking third among all D. discoideum homopolymers longer than 20 amino acids, and second among the serine homopolymers. These two genes have interspecific orthologs, with 51–196 iterations of serines, identified from five other species of Dictyostelids. Unlike most homopolymers in D. discoideum, there is an ortholog in D. purpureum with serine repeats in the same position of the protein. The proteomes of these two species are generally as divergent as those of mammals and bony fish, so this is a long-term conservation of the repeat sequence in this location. Moreover, apparent homologs also exist in even more distant Dictyostelids, P. pallidum and D. fasciculatum, although in the former the region after the serine repeat has greatly expanded and has homology to Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factors. The genes from other species have similar gene structure as LSR 1 and LSR 2 in D. discoideum. The flanking amino-acid residues of the polyserines share high sequence similarities among species, especially at the longer N-terminus of the protein sequence. However, codons of the polyserines are nearly completely diverged between species. As with poly-S 306 in D. discoideum, the polyserines of its homologs are a diverse combination of the serine codons, with high codon diversities, D ranging from 0.41 to 0.79, among which ‘TCA' is the most common codon. The conservation of the serine repeats in the absence of much underlying DNA conservation strongly suggests that selection is maintaining the serines. Despite conservation of gene structure and the serine repeat, the function of this gene is unclear. The ESTs from full-length cDNAs indicate that the genes producing the exceptionally long polyserines in D. discoideum and D. purpureum are transcribed. The RNA-seq transcriptional profiles show that the latter two are strongly upregulated in the multicellular stages in contrast to the solitary stage, but that LSR1 with 306 serine repeats is expressed more consistently throughout the life cycle. It may be that selection for the very long repeats in D. discoideum LSR1 is related to this shift in timing, with perhaps also a shift in function. The NetPhos program predicted a very high phosphorylation potential for many of the serine residues in the long repeat regions. Finally, the 80 D. discoideum genes with 20 or more tandem serines did not show overrepresentation in any gene ontology categories. Although our bioinformatics/evolutionary approach indicates functionality, what the function is will need to be discovered through more mechanistic studies. That this gene is special is also supported by a database search, which found only 35 homopolymers with over 100 iterations of a single amino acid in 17 eukaryotic organisms apart from those found in Dictyostelids. Most of them are from predicted proteins without functional annotation and only eight of them have data showing EST coverage of coding sequences. Strikingly, most of them also have high codon diversities. These are not usually as high as the Dictyostelium long serine repeats, but serine has six codons and therefore a maximum D of 0.83, whereas the maximum for four codons is D =0.75 and for two codons is D =0.5. Eighteen of the 31 D s in Supplementary Table S1 are for two-codon amino acids, and many of these approach the maximum diversity possible. There is a possible bias in that extremely long perfect repeats might be missed in genome projects because of alignment difficulties. However, our results indicate that the high codon diversity of very long repeats is real and may indicate that these repeats may more often be functional than shorter, less diverse homopolymers. Even if their initial expansion was through slippage of perfect triplet repeats, their high codon diversity suggests that they have endured through millions of years. Functionality of the sequence would explain why, during that long time, the repeat sequence has not been lost via deletion or modified to include other amino acids. Data archiving The gene sequences from D. intermedium and P. violaceum were deposited in the GenBank, which can be assessed by the accession number } JX847295 and } JX847296, respectively. 