 Microfluidic devices designed for chemotaxis assays were fabricated on fused silica substrates using femtosecond laser micromachining. These devices have built-in chemical concentration gradient forming structures and are ideally suited for establishing passive diffusion gradients over extended periods of time. Multiple gradient forming structures, with identical or distinct gradient forming characteristics, can be integrated into a single device, and migrating cells can be directly observed using an inverted microscope. In this paper, the design, fabrication, and operation of these devices are discussed. Devices with minimal structure sizes ranging from 3 to 7 lm are presented. The use of these devices to investigate the migration of Dictyostelium discoideum cells toward the chemoattractant folic acid is presented as an example of the devices' utility. I. Introduction Chemotaxis, the directed movement of cells up or down an extracellular chemical concentration gradient, is a vital cellular response that plays a critical role during the life cycle of many organisms. Directed cell migration plays a fundamental role in the feeding and mating processes of many single celled organisms. 1 In multicellular systems, che-motaxis plays a large role early on in the life of an organism and is responsible for many of the complex cellular movements that help pattern the early embryo. 2, 3 The sensing of chemical cues is also critical for defending the body against invading pathogens. 4 – 6 Chemotaxis is also central to wound healing and has been implicated in many disease states such as tumor metastasis and allergic inflammation. 2 – 9 Understanding chemotaxis is essential in finding appropriate treatments for a host of diseases. The social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum has played a significant role in revealing the mechanisms involved in chemotaxis. 10 – 15 These eukaryotic cells exhibit chemotaxis toward folic acid during vegetative growth and respond to cyclic adenosine monophosphate during their developmental cycle. 14 The standard method for visualizing eu-karyotic cells undergoing chemotaxis is to perform a micropipette assay in an open chamber on an inverted micro-scope. 16 Typically, the cells are pipetted in and allowed to settle at the bottom of a microscope coverslip. While the cells settle and attach to the surface of the coverslip, a micropipette containing the chemoattractant is inserted into the buffer solution and positioned near the cells using a micro-manipulator. The micropipette tip has a 1 µ m diameter opening that sets up a radially diffusive concentration gradient across the microscope coverslip as the chemotactic solution emanates. The cells sense and interpret the chemical concentration gradient and respond with directed migration. One can restrict the presence of the gradient to a particular region of interest, and thus only expose a select group of cells, by supplying the chemotactic solution via a microfluidic pipette that uses flow recirculation to establish a limited self-confining volume and maintain a stationary concentration profile. 17 One can also confine cell migration paths and expose cells to various concentration profiles by inserting a network of microfluidic channels between the cells and a standard micropipette. 14 For reproducible and quantitative results, micropipette assays require the micropipette to be positioned precisely every time a new chemotaxis experiment is performed. In general, precise three-dimensional positioning of a micropipette is a time consuming operation, prone to accidental damage of the fragile glass micropipette tip. In addition, such assays allow only one or two micropipettes to be used at any given time, thus limiting the number of chemotactic factors that can be individually supplied to cells during an experiment and also restricting the number of cell chemotaxis assays that can be conducted simultaneously. Cells live in complex and dynamic chemical microenvironments where multiple chemotactic factors are often present. Quantitative studies are needed to further our understanding of chemotaxis. A cell's response to specific chemical concentrations and gradient profiles must be precisely quantified and dynamic microenvironments eliciting multiple chemotactic factors that induce physiologically relevant gradients need to be designed and created. To be fruitful, in vitro chemotaxis analysis must succeed in exposing cells to single or multiple chemoattractants, each with its own spatiotemporal profile, in a controlled and reproducible manner that can be easily predicted and measured. Microfluidic devices with built-in chemical concentration gradient forming structures are ideally suited for in vitro chemotaxis analysis. 18 Sub-micrometer resolution of the structures is necessary to achieve micropipette-equivalent gradient forming control on a microfluidic platform. Femtosecond laser micromachining of transparent dielectrics is a viable, fast, and flexible direct-write method of fabricating microfluidic devices, which offers unprecedented capability when it comes to machining micrometer and nanometer scale features that cannot be attained using conventional lithography techniques. 19 – 24 This capability derives from the highly nonlinear dependence of the material removal process on the instantaneous irradiance of a tightly focused ultra-short laser pulse, a dependence that allows sub-diffraction limited features to be machined. 24 – 27 With femtosecond laser direct writing processes, the dimensional characteristics of each gradient forming structure can be individually tailored to achieve a particular spatial profile for the chemotactic factor being delivered. The micrometer precision with which gradient forming structures can be fabricated suits the need for effective experimental reproducibility and quantitative characterization, while the small physical footprint facilitates integration of multiple gradient forming structures within a single device. Several independent chemotaxis experiments can be conducted on the same culture of cells with multiple gradient structures. The chemical concentration gradients that form can be accurately modeled and quantified using the laws of laminar flow and diffusion, the two mechanisms that drive the transfer of chemical species inside microfluidic environments. While fluid flow rate may be used to shape and control the spatiotemporal profile of the chemotactic factors, fluid flow subjects cells to confounding or damaging shear and drag forces. 14 Steady-state concentration gradients established exclusively by passive diffusion not only avoid any undesirable fluid flow effects, but are also easier to model and quantify and provide ideal conditions for observing cell responses and correlating them with the specific concentrations and spatiotemporal profiles. Microfluidic devices with built-in gradient forming structures fabricated via femtosecond laser micromachining are currently being explored for cell chemotaxis imaging applications. 28 The goal of the ongoing research effort is to create devices containing both micro and nanofluidic channels, where the chemical concentration gradients are established exclusively by passive diffusion. This paper presents some of the devices that have been developed. The design, fabrication, and operation of these devices are discussed, and their use in investigating the chemotaxis of Dictyostelium discoideum cells toward a 10 µ M folic acid chemoattractant solution is briefly summarized. II. Design of Microfluidic Devices for Cell Chemotaxis Imaging The basic layout of a microfluidic device for cell chemotaxis imaging is shown in Fig. 1. The device is patterned onto the bottom surface of a 500 µ m thick fused silica substrate where two chemoattractant delivery ports and one cell delivery port have been opened through the thickness of the wafer. The bottom of the fused silica substrate is sealed with a polydimethylsiloxane coated cover glass. PDMS is optically clear and non-toxic. A delivery manifold, machined out of acrylic, is silicone-bonded to the top surface of the fused silica substrate. The connection between the chemoattractant supply tubing and buffer solution are dropped into the cell delivery port and allowed to settle and attach the acrylic manifold inlet is sealed via a rubber o-ring. Cells suspended in to the PDMS coated cover glass. To establish a passive diffusion concentration gradient for an extended period of time, the chemoattractant delivery ports are built to hold a relatively large volume of solution that seeps into an equally large cell delivery port, filled with buffer solution, through one or more gradient forming structures that exhibit openings in the range of a few square micrometers. The cells chemotax over the smooth PDMS surface ensuring direct and clear imaging of the individual-cell responses on an inverted microscope. Fig. 1 Schematic of a microfluidic device for cell chemotaxis imaging. Cross-sectional view. For illustrative purposes, the position of the inverted microscope objective used to observe the chemotaxing cells is also indicated. Top view of the bottom... III. Experimental A. Fabrication of microfluidic gradient forming devices The devices were fabricated and assembled in an ISO 1000 class clean room. Femtosecond laser micromachining of UV grade fused silica was performed using the system described in Refs. 24 and 29. Amplified femtosecond pulses are generated by a system consisting of a Tsunami oscillator seeding a Ti-Sapphire RegA 9000 regenerative amplifier, both of which are pumped with a cw green solid-state Verdi-18 laser. This system is operated at a center wavelength of 800 nm, with a repetition rate of 250 kHz, with a measured pulse width of 160 fs, and a maximum average power of 1.4 W. The average power was varied between 150 mW and 1.4 W using a neutral density filter to attenuate the laser beam. The beam was expanded using a pair of lenses so as to fill the entrance pupil of a H32 × /0.60 dry microscope objective that was used to focus the laser beam onto the surface of the fused silica substrate. The fused silica substrate was affixed to an aluminum sample holder, attached to an Aerotech ANT95-50-XY nMT stage with nanometer resolution that moves under the microscope objective in a pre-programmed pattern under LabView control. This micromachining facility allows the dimensional and surface characteristics of the microfluidic devices to be tailored precisely as a function of the energy-per-pulse and laser rastering conditions. Surface patterning of the fused silica was performed using a travel rate of 0.1–0.5 mm/s. Chemoattractant supply channels having a width greater than 8 µ m were machined using an average power of 1.4 W and a hatch spacing between adjacent laser passes of 1 µ m or less. Narrow gradient forming structures, having a width smaller or equal to 8 µ m, were machined in a single longitudinal pass. The width of each single longitudinal pass structure was determined by the choice of average laser beam power. Devices with minimal structure sizes ranging from 3 µ m, produced at 150 mW, to 7 µ m, produced at 1.2 W, were obtained in this way. The laser patterned substrates were soaked in a 10 M KOH solution at 80 °C for 30 min, sonicated in 10 M KOH for 10 min, and rinsed in de-ionized water to remove all debris produced during laser micromachining. The washed substrates were dried under a stream of nitrogen. The microfluidic device side of the fused silica substrate was sealed with a polydimethylsiloxane coated cover glass using the plasma oxidation bonding method. 30 The Sylgard 184 silicone elasto- mer kit was used to produce a 20–30 µ m thick PDMS film on a BK7 cover glass by spin coating. Spin coating was performed at 2500 rpm for 30 s in a KW4A spin coater. The PDMS layer was cured at 85 °C for 3 h. The fused silica microfluidic device and the PDMS coated cover glass were then plasma oxidized in a PDC-32G plasma cleaner. After oxidation, the exposed surfaces were immediately brought into conformal contact and bonded. The device was heated to 60 °C for 1 h to strengthen the adhesive seal. The devices sealed using this method were determined to be water-tight and were stored in de-ionized water. B. Examples of microfluidic chemical concentration gradient forming devices An example of a microfluidic device, built according to the layout depicted in Fig. 1, is shown in Fig. 2. A device designed to restrict cell migration paths while exposing cells to numerous concentration gradients by inserting a network of microfluidic channels between the cell delivery port and a built-in chemoattractant delivery micropipette is shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 2 Optical microscope image of a microfluidic device designed for cell chemotaxis imaging. The chemoattractant is delivered to the cells through a set of delivery channels machined with different opening widths, ranging from 3 to 7 µ m. The chemoattractant... Fig. 3 Optical microscope image of a microfluidic device designed for cell chemotaxis imaging. The chemoattractant supply and delivery channels are approximately 25 µ m deep. C. Dictyostelium discoideum chemotaxis in folic acid The device shown in Fig. 2 was used to observe the chemotaxis of Dictyostelium discoideum to a gradient of folic acid. Detailed information on cell culture, preparation of buffer and chemoattractant solutions, and microscopy imaging can be found in Ref. 14. A syringe, connected to one of the chemoattractant supply tubes, was used to flush the device with buffer solution. Particular attention was given to removing all entrapped air bubbles. Another syringe, filled with 10 µ M folic acid, was used to load the chemoattractant supply channel. The device was mounted on the inverted microscope, as shown in Fig. 4, and positioned so as to place the cell delivery port within the field of view of a 10× objective. With the objective focused on the PDMS surface, the amoeba cells suspended in buffer solution were pipetted into the cell delivery port and allowed to settle on the PDMS surface. The cells settled and attached to the PDMS surface after approximately 15 min. The response of the cells to the chemoattractant gradient at several chemoattractant delivery channels was imaged using a 40× oil immersion objective. Figure 5 shows a sequence of images captured at a 3 µ m wide channel where a cell was visualized extending pseudopods toward the chemoattractant source over a period of 10 min. However, the cell was incapable of migrating through such a tight passage. Figure 6 shows an image of cells near a 4 µ m wide channel. Numerous cells were seen migrating toward this passage which was large enough to allow cells to pass through and into the main chemoattractant supply channel. Fig. 4 The cell chemotaxis microfluidic device, shown in Figure 2, positioned on an inverted microscope. Fig. 5 Sequence of images captured at a 3 µ m wide channel. These images were captured at 5 min intervals. The indicated cell migrated towards this passage and started to extend pseudopods into the passage. The red... Fig. 6 Image captured at a 4 µ m wide channel. The green shapes represent the cells. The red arrows display the direction of the folic acid concentration gradient. Numerous cells migrated towards this passage and some cells were seen passing through it... IV. Summary Microfluidic devices were specifically designed for imaging of cells during chemotaxis. Each microfluidic system contained multiple built-in chemical concentration gradient forming structures and were fabricated using femtosecond laser micromachining. Devices with distinct gradient forming structures were presented. The suitability of these devices for chemotaxis investigation purposes was demonstrated by successfully visualizing Dictyostelium discoideum cells migrating up a gradient of folic acid formed in one of the presented devices. The technique is not limited to eukaryotic cells and can be applied to a variety of biological systems. Femtosecond laser micromachining allows these microfluidic devices to be flexibly designed with features that are beyond the capabilities of conventional lithography techniques. Devices can be easily fabricated in transparent dielectric materials such as fused silica, which is an ideal substrate for biological studies using advanced fluorescence microscopy. This microfluidic approach to in vitro chemotaxis analysis overcomes several shortcomings of micropipette assays. 