 Copines are calcium-dependent membrane-binding proteins found in many eukaryotic organisms. We are studying the function of copines using the model organism, Dictyostelium discoideum. When under starvation conditions, Dictyostelium cells aggregate into mounds that become migrating slugs, which can move toward light and heat before culminating into a fruiting body. Previously, we showed that Dictyostelium cells lacking the copine A gene are not able to form fruiting bodies and instead arrest at the slug stage. In this study, we compared the slug behavior of cells lacking the cpnA gene to the slug behavior of wild-type cells. The slugs formed by cpnA- cells were much larger than wild-type slugs and exhibited no phototaxis and negative thermotaxis in the same conditions that wild-type slugs exhibited positive phototaxis and thermotaxis. Mixing as little as 5% wild-type cells with cpnA- cells rescued the phototaxis and thermotaxis defects, suggesting that CpnA plays a specific role in the regulation of the production and/or release of a signaling molecule. Reducing extracellular levels of ammonia also partially rescued the phototaxis and thermotaxis defects of cpnA- slugs, suggesting that CpnA may have a specific role in regulating ammonia signaling. Expressing the lacZ gene under the cpnA promoter in wild-type cells indicated cpnA is preferentially expressed in the prestalk cells found in the anterior part of the slug, which include the cells at the tip of the slug that regulate phototaxis, thermotaxis, and the initiation of culmination into fruiting bodies. Our results suggest that CpnA plays a role in the regulation of the signaling pathways, including ammonia signaling, necessary for sensing and/or orienting toward light and heat in the prestalk cells of the Dictyostelium slug. Keywords: cell differentiation, copine, Dictyostelium, phototaxis, thermotaxis Introduction Dictyostelium discoideum lives as unicellular haploid amoeba feeding on bacteria. However, when food is depleted, the amoeba will secrete and respond to periodic waves of cAMP to aggregate into a hemispherical mound. A tip is formed on the mound that elongates into a finger-like structure that falls over to form a migratory slug. The slug is capable of moving toward light and heat in processes called phototaxis and thermotaxis, respectively. When conditions are favorable, slug movement will cease, and the slug will culminate into a fruiting body consisting of a mass of spores on top of a long thin stalk made up of vacuolated cells. Classical genetic studies carried out by Darcy et al. revealed there are at least 20 genes important for slug phototaxis. Most of these genes are also involved in thermotaxis, indicating that the signaling pathways for phototaxis and thermotaxis converge. Although the phototaxic and thermotaxic receptors have not been identified, many intracellular signaling molecules have been implicated as being involved in phototaxis and thermotaxis; these include cAMP,, cGMP, IP 3, and Ca 2+. Disruption of the rasD gene, a member of the Ras superfamily of small GTPases, causes impaired phototaxis and thermotaxis indicating that the Ras signaling pathway is also involved. The actin-binding protein, filamin is essential for both phototaxis and thermotaxis, while GRP125, another actin binding protein, has been shown to be necessary for normal phototaxis. Both of these actin-binding proteins co-immunoprecipitated with RasD, along with the kinases ERK and PKB, suggesting that all of these proteins form a phototaxis signaling complex. The region at the anterior end of the slug is made up of prestalk cells that will eventually become the stalk of the fruiting body. The prestalk cells found at the anterior tip of the slug control several aspects of slug behavior including phototaxis and thermotaxis, which require that the slug be able to turn toward or away from light and warmth. A growing body of evidence indicates that the slug’s ability to turn is dependent on whether the tip is activated or inhibited. Several secreted molecules have been shown to control tip activation and inhibition. cAMP acts as a tip activator in phototaxis, while slug turning factor, ammonia, and adenosine act as tip inhibitors. The cells at the tip of the slug also control culmination into fruiting bodies and many phototaxis mutants exhibit defects in fruiting body formation. Therefore, the proteins involved in signal transduction during slug phototaxis and thermotaxis are also important in culmination and cell differentiation processes that accompany fruiting body formation. We are studying the function of copines in Dictyostelium development. Copines make up a family of calcium-dependent membrane binding proteins found in many diverse eukaryotic organisms. Copine proteins contain two C2 domains in the N-terminal half of the protein followed by a VWA in the C-terminal half of the protein. The Dictyostelium genome has six copine genes, cpnA-cpnF. Previously, we found that cells lacking cpnA are arrested in the slug stage and do not culminate into fruiting bodies. Mixing a small percentage of wild-type cells with cpnA- cells rescued the culmination defect, but produced fruiting bodies with short stalks suggesting that cpnA is specifically involved in prestalk cell function and stalk cell differentiation. Time-lapse imaging of developing cells also revealed that the slugs formed by cpnA- cells appeared to be larger than wild-type slugs. In this study, we investigated the slug behavior of cpnA- cells as compared to the behavior of slugs formed from wild-type cells. We measured slug sizes, carried out phototaxis and thermotaxis assays, and asked whether mixing cpnA- cells with wild-type cells and reducing extracellular ammonia could rescue these defects. We also investigated whether cpnA is specifically expressed in prestalk cells in the anterior region of the slug. Materials and Methods Dictyostelium Strains and Cell Culture The cpnA- null mutant cells were made as previously described by homologous recombination using Dictyostelium discoideum NC4A2 cells, an axenic strain derived from the wild-type NC4 strain, as the parental strain. The parental wild-type cells were transformed with the pDd- cpnA ::Gal-15 plasmid by electroporation. Wild-type and cpnA- cells were grown on plastic Petri dishes in HL-5 media supplemented with penicillin-streptomycin at 60 Units/mL. cpnA- cells were cultured in HL-5 media supplemented with 30μg/mL blasticidin and pDd- cpnA ::Gal-15 transformed cells were cultured in HL-5 media supplemented with 50μg/mL G418. Thermotaxis and Phototaxis Assays Dicytostelium cells were harvested from plates, counted using a hemocytometer, pelleted at 1500 RPM for 5 minutes at 4°C, and then washed three times in ice-cold development buffer. The cells were then resuspended in DB at 5×10 8 cells/mL and one to two 10μL of the resuspended cells were placed as drops on DB agar plates. For thermotaxis assays, three layers of dark paper were wrapped around each of the agar plates. Approximately one- third of each plate was set on a slide warmer set at various temperatures in a 20°C incubator. For phototaxis assays, only one layer of the dark paper was wrapped around the plate, then a layer of aluminum foil was wrapped around the plate. A single hole approximately 1mm in diameter was made in both the paper and foil. A small lamp with a 60W 130V bulb was placed approximately 30 cm from the agar plate with the hole facing the lamp. For cell mixing experiments, the same protocol was used except the cpnA- cells were mixed with wild-type cells to contain 0, 1, 5, 10, 20, 50, and 100% wild-type cells before being placed on the agar. For the ammonia reduction assays, 10μL drops of an enzyme mixture were placed directly on the formed slugs approximately 24 hours after plating cells on the DB agar plates. After 48 hours, the slugs were imaged with a Leica MZ 16F dissecting microscope and Leica imaging software. After imaging the slugs with the Leica dissecting scope, a 0.43μm white nitrocellulose membrane was placed on the slug trails for two hours in order to transfer the trails from the agar to the filter. The filters were stained for 10 minutes in 0.1% Amido Black in 30% methanol and 10% acetic acid. Once removed from the staining solution, the filters were placed in destaining solution for 10–15 minutes. The filters were then rinsed in distilled water and allowed to dry. The trails on the filters were imaged using a Gel Logic 2200 Imaging System and Kodak Molecular Imaging software. Slug areas and the linear distance the slugs moved from the middle of the initial drop area of the cells on the agar were measured in arbitrary units with Image Pro-Plus software. Creation of the cpnA promoter:: lacZ Construct The plasmid containing the cpnA promoter upstream of the lacZ gene was constructed by means of PCR subcloning. The following primers were used to amplify a 1500 bp sequence upstream of the cpnA gene start codon from Dictyostelium genomic DNA: 5′-GTCCAAATAGTGCAAAAGTTC-3′ and 5′-GATGTTGGTGGTTTTAAATTCATC-3′. The PCR amplified cpnA promoter sequence was cloned into the TOPO cloning vector and sequenced. The cpnA promoter sequence was digested from the TOPO cloning vector with EcoRI and then subcloned into the EcoRI site in the pDdGal-15 plasmid. A digest was performed with DdeI and HindIII enzymes to determine if the promoter sequence was in the correct orientation. X-Gal Staining of Developing Structures Dictyostelium cells were prepared for development as previously described, except that cells were plated on white nitrocellulose filters. At various time points in development, one-sixth of the filter was cut and removed for fixing and staining. Filter pieces were placed in Petri dishes in a fume hood and developing structures were fixed with 1% glutaraldehyde and 1 mM EGTA in Z-buffer applied with an aerosol spray bottle. After 10 minutes, filter pieces were moved to a 6-well plate and washed once with Z-buffer. To permeabilize the membranes, a 1% NP-40 solution was transferred onto the filters using a pipette and allowed to incubate for 10 minutes. The filter pieces were washed with Z-buffer to remove the NP-40 solution and the filters were allowed to dry for 20 minutes. Next, the staining solution 6, 5mM K 4 Fe 6, 1mM EGTA, 2mM X-Gal in Z-buffer) was pipetted into the well containing the filter and the plate was placed in the dark for 15–30 minutes. The filter pieces were then washed once with Z-buffer and incubated with stop stain solution for 10 minutes. Next, a 0.02% Eosin Y solution was added to act as a counter stain for 5–10 minutes. The excess counter stain was removed and the filters were placed again in the stop stain solution. Developing structures were photographed using a Nikon SMZ1500 dissecting microscope equipped with a colored camera using the SPOT digital imaging software. For spore staining, fruiting bodies were removed with forceps and placed in Z-buffer. Spore cells were then pelleted using a microcentrifuge and resuspended in 1% glutaraldehyde and 1mM EGTA in Z-buffer. Spores were then washed in Z-buffer and resuspended in a 1% NP-40 solution. Spores were stained in X-Gal in the dark for 1 hour at 37°C. Finally, spores were pelleted again, resuspended in Z-buffer, and placed on slides for imaging. Spore cells were imaged using a Zeiss Axio upright DIC microscope equipped with an AxioCam camera using AxioVision Imaging software. Over 200 spores were imaged and the number of stained vs. nonstained spores were counted. Results cpnA- Cells Form Larger Than Normal Slugs Previous studies on Dictyostelium cells lacking the cpnA gene indicate that cpnA plays a role in regulating aggregation, slug size, and culmination. To further characterize the role of CpnA in Dictyostelium development, we studied the morphology and behavior of slugs formed from cpnA- cells. Both wild-type and cpnA- cells were plated as 10μL drops at a density of 5 × 10 8 cells/mL on agar plates and developed for 48 hours. The cpnA- cells appeared to form larger and fewer slugs than the wild-type cells. To estimate the size of the slugs, we used Image Pro-Plus software to measure the area of individual slugs from images. We found that on average cpnA - cells formed slugs that were 2.5 times larger in area than slugs formed from wild-type cells. A distribution graph of slug areas showed that when starting with the same number of cells, wild-type cells formed more than twice as many slugs as cpnA- cells. The areas of the cpnA- slugs varied greatly with some slugs being similar to the wild-type slugs and others being up to 24 times the area of wild-type slugs. Figure 1 cpnA- cells form larger than normal slugs cpnA- Slugs Exhibit No Phototaxis and Negative Thermotaxis Wild-type slugs are able to move toward heat and light in processes called thermotaxis and phototaxis, respectively, before culminating into fruiting bodies. To determine whether slugs formed from cpnA- cells exhibited similar behaviors to slugs formed from wild-type cells, we carried out thermotaxis and phototaxis assays. Cells were placed as 10μL drops at a density of 5 × 10 8 cells/mL on agar plates and the plates were exposed to directional heat or light. After 48 hours, migration behaviors of slugs were recorded by transferring the slugs and their trails to nitrocellulose filters and using Amido black to stain the slugs and slug trails. Slugs formed from c pnA- cells exhibited no phototaxis and negative thermotaxis under the same conditions in which the wild-type slugs exhibited positive phototaxis and thermotaxis. The cpnA- slugs moved in what appeared to be a random pattern when exposed to a small pinhole of light, while all of the wild-type slugs moved toward the light. The cpnA- slugs, however, did respond to being in a heat gradient, provided by a slide warmer, but moved away from the heat source instead of toward it like the wild-type slugs. Figure 2 Slugs formed from cpnA- cells exhibit aberrant phototaxis and thermotaxis To explore this behavior further, we did thermotaxis assays with the slide warmer set at different temperatures. Cells were plated in small drops on agar plates and then approximately one-third of the plate was placed on a slide warmer inside a 20°C incubator as before. We performed three-six thermotaxis trials of each cell type with the slider warmer set at five different temperatures. We found that both wild-type slugs and cpnA- slugs exhibited positive thermotaxis when the slide warmer was set at 23°C. While wild-type slugs continued to exhibit positive thermotaxis at all higher temperatures tested, the cpnA- slugs switched from positive to negative thermotaxis between 27°C and 29°C. Figure 3 Slugs formed from cpnA- cells have a lower thermotaxis transition temperature than slugs formed from wild-type cells We also estimated the distance traveled by each slug under no taxis, phototaxis, and thermotaxis conditions by using Image Pro-Plus software to measure the linear distance between individual slugs and the original drop of cells. The mean linear distances traveled by slugs formed from cpnA- and wild-type cells were similar under no taxis conditions. However, wild-type slugs moved more than twice as far as cpnA- slugs when exposed to light and a little less than twice as far as cpnA- slugs under thermotaxis conditions in which the cpnA- slugs moved away from the heat. These data indicate that cpnA- slugs are as motile as wild-type slugs, but are defective in sensing or orienting toward light and heat. Figure 4 Slugs formed from cpnA- cells are motile Mixing Wild-type Cells with cpnA- Cells Rescues the Phototaxis and Thermotaxis Defects When under no taxis conditions, wild-type cells develop into fruiting bodies within 24 hours, whereas cpnA- cells arrest in the slug stage and do not form fruiting bodies. In a previous study, we found that mixing 5% or more wild-type cells with cpnA- cells was able to rescue this culmination defect and that wild-type cells within these mixed chimerics were located throughout the slug. In this study, wild-type cells were mixed with cpnA- cells at various percentages and chimeric slugs were formed during phototaxis and thermotaxis assays. Slugs formed from a mixture of cells consisting of 5% or more wild-type cells exhibited positive phototaxis. Mixing wild-type cells with cpnA- cells also rescued the thermotaxis defect of cpnA- cells. Some of the slugs formed by mixtures of 5% wild-type/95% cpnA- cells exhibited positive thermotaxis, while most of the slugs formed by mixtures of 10% wild-type/90% cpnA- cells exhibited positive thermotaxis. We also measured the areas of the chimeric slugs in no taxis conditions. Average slug areas at each percentage of wild-type cells are shown in Figure 6. In general, as the percentage of wild-type cells in a slug increased, the size of the slug decreased. These results suggest that CpnA may be regulating the production, release, or modification of a diffusible signaling molecule. Several secreted molecules have been shown to control slug behavior by acting as tip activators or inhibitors. Figure 5 Mixing wild-type cells with cpnA- cells rescues defects in phototaxis and thermotaxis Figure 6 Mixing wild-type cells with cpnA- cells decreases slug size Enzymatic Removal of Ammonia Partially Rescues Thermotaxis and Phototaxis Defects of cpnA- Slugs One candidate signaling molecule that may be regulated by CpnA is ammonia, which acts as a tip inhibitor. The phenotypic defects observed during cpnA- cell development are consistent with the idea that cpnA- cells are overly sensitive to ammonia or perhaps export increased amounts of ammonia into the environment. To test this idea, we used an enzyme-catalyzed reaction to remove ammonia from the environment around the slugs. The enzyme mixture was added at 24 hours when slugs had formed, but had not starting moving away from the original drop of cells. Reducing ammonia did not appear to affect the phototaxis and thermotaxis behaviors of wild-type slugs; wild-type slugs moved towards both light and heat. However, the enzymatic removal of ammonia did result in improved phototaxis of cpnA- slugs. Although the cpnA- slugs did not move as straight toward the light as wild-type, all of the slugs formed moved in the direction of the light in all trials. We also did thermotaxis assays with the slide warmer set at 31°C, a temperature at which wild-type slugs move toward the heat source and cpnA- cells move away from the heat source. Although reducing ammonia levels did not appear to affect the ability of wild-type slugs to move toward the heat, we did see a change in the thermotaxic behavior of the cpnA- slugs. Instead of always moving away from the 31°C heat source, we found that some of the cpnA- slugs moved away and others moved towards. We repeated these assays 19 times and observed that in one trial all the slugs moved toward the heat, in five trials all the slugs moved away from the heat, in five trials there was a mixture of slugs that moved toward and away from the heat, and in eight trials the slugs did not move out of the original drop. This data is similar to what was observed with the cpnA- slugs in thermotaxis assays performed close to their thermotaxic transition temperature, suggesting that reducing the ammonia levels raised the transition temperature of the cpnA- slugs. Figure 7D is a representative trial in which the slugs moved in both directions. Therefore, reducing the ammonia levels in the environment appeared to partially rescue the behavior of the cpnA- slugs, in that they behaved more like wild-type slugs. Although we did not measure the size of the slugs, ammonia reduction did not appear to rescue the large slug defect of cpnA- cells, even if the enzyme cocktail was added to cells at the beginning of development. However, ammonia reduction in no taxis conditions some times resulted in the cpnA- cells being able to culminate into morphologically normal fruiting bodies. Figure 7 Enzymatic removal of ammonia partially rescues thermotaxis and phototaxis defects of cpnA- slugs Spatial Expression Pattern of cpnA in Developing Wild-type Dictyostelium We previously used real time RT-PCR to measure changes in cpnA expression levels over the 24-hour development of Dictyostelium. We found that cpnA was expressed throughout development and expression levels were highest in vegetative cells and during the finger/slug stage of development. To determine if cpnA is preferentially expressed in particular cell types during development, we transformed wild-type Dictyostelium cells with a plasmid to express the lacZ gene under the cpnA promoter. X-gal staining of the developing cells transformed with the cpnA::lacZ construct revealed β-galactosidase expression at all time points during development. Aggregating cells and cells within streams forming mounds expressed β-galactosidase and were stained blue. Once the tight mound stage was reached, staining became more pronounced around the outer edge and in the middle of the mound. As development continued, staining was observed in the tip of the mound and the anterior tip of the slug. As culmination began, staining appeared to be in the anterior tip and base of the Mexican hat structure. This pattern of staining at the anterior tip and posterior end of the structure remained through culmination. The pattern of staining observed in the mound, slug, and early culmination is mostly consistent with prestalk cells. However, once cells neared the end of culmination and formed fruiting bodies, staining was also observed in the sporehead of the fruiting body. To determine whether the spores themselves were stained blue, we also took individual spores from the fruiting bodies and stained them separately. We found that ~ 75% of the spores imaged were stained blue. Figure 8 cpnA is expressed in prestalk cells of the slug Discussion Previously we showed that Dictyostelium cells lacking the cpnA gene were arrested at the slug stage of development and the slugs formed from cpnA- cells appeared to be much bigger than those formed from cells of the parental wild-type strain. During Dictyostelium development, cells normally form evenly sized groups of 1 × 10 5 cells that become slugs. In this study, we measured the area of the slugs from images as an estimation of their overall size. We found that compared to wild-type slugs, slugs formed from cpnA- cells varied widely in their size; some cpnA- slugs were similar in size to wild-type slugs, while others were several times larger than wild-type slugs. This result suggests that cpnA- slugs have a defect in group cell counting. Roisin-Bouffay et al. found that a secreted 450 kDa protein complex called counting factor regulates the number of cells per group by repressing cell-cell adhesion. In the countin mutant where CF is not secreted, streams of aggregating cells do not break up and therefore form larger than normal groups. CpnA may have a role in the production or release of CF or alternatively, CpnA may have a direct role in cell adhesion. Previously, we found that when cpnA- cells labeled with GFP were mixed with wild-type cells, the cpnA- cells appeared to form clumps or aggregates within the slug, suggesting that cpnA- cells are more adhesive than wild-type cells. In addition, time-lapse imaging of cpnA- cells showed that cpnA- cells are delayed in aggregation suggesting inefficient cell movement. Tang et al. showed that CF also increases cell motility by affecting the actin cytoskeleton. Therefore, if CpnA has a role in regulating cell adhesion, it may be due to a defect in a signaling molecule like CF or due to a defect in cell adhesion and/or the actin cytoskeleton. The large size of the slugs could account for why the slugs do not culminate into fruiting bodies; however, CF mutants can culminate and they produce larger than normal fruiting bodies. Furthermore, even the small slugs formed from cpnA- cells do not form fruiting bodies, suggesting that the large slug size is not the reason cpnA- slugs do not culminate. Phototaxis and thermotaxis assays showed that the slugs formed from cpnA- cells did not sense and move toward light and heat as did the wild-type slugs. Specifically, cpnA- slugs moved randomly when placed in directional light. In contrast, cpnA- slugs moved away from the heat at a temperature that wild-type slugs moved toward the heat. These results indicate that cpnA- slugs have the ability to move, but are not able to properly respond to the light and heat. In addition, the ability of the cpnA- slugs to move away from the heat suggests that the problem is not in the ability to orient or move, but in the sensory mechanism. Dictyostelium slugs can sense very small changes in temperature and will exhibit positive thermotaxis toward temperatures close to growth temperature and will move away from temperatures that are too high or too low. Therefore, cpnA- slugs are sensing and responding to the temperature, but the transition temperature from positive to negative thermotaxis is at a lower temperature than wild-type slugs. It is not surprising that cpnA- slugs exhibit defects in both phototaxis and thermotaxis. Most phototaxis mutants also exhibit altered transition temperatures in thermotaxis, indicating that the signaling pathways converge. The cells found in the tip of the slug within the prestalk region have been shown to control phototaxis, thermotaxis, and culmination. If CpnA is involved in the signaling pathways controlling these processes, we would expect that cpnA is expressed in the cells found in the anterior prestalk region of the slug. Using the lacZ gene as a marker, we were able to visualize the expression pattern of cpnA in developing Dictyostelium. Our results indicated that cpnA is preferentially expressed in the anterior prestalk portion of the slug. However, since many genes expressed in the prestalk region of the slug do not function in tip organization, prestalk cell expression alone is not enough to indicate a role in tip control. We previously showed that mixing a small percentage of wild-type cells with cpnA- cells is able to rescue the culmination defect. In this study, we showed that mixing a small percentage of wild-type cells with cpnA- cells is also able to rescue phototaxis and thermotaxis defects. These results suggest that CpnA may be regulating the production, release, and/or modification of a diffusible signaling molecule. Several secreted molecules have been shown to control slug behavior by acting as tip activators or inhibitors. One candidate signaling molecule that may be regulated by CpnA is ammonia, a tip inhibitor. Ammonia is produced by the degradation of proteins and excreted as a waste product from Dictyostelium cells. However, ammonia also serves as a signal for monitoring the environment and regulating several developmental processes including chemotaxis, phototaxis, thermotaxis, culmination, and cell differentiation. High extracellular concentrations of ammonia inhibit culmination and cause disorientation of slugs so that they fail to carry out phototaxis. Likewise, extracellular concentrations of ammonia have also been shown to regulate thermotaxis. In addition, high concentrations of ammonia decrease the volume of the prestalk region and inhibit stalk cell differentiation and promote spore cell differentiation in monolayer cultures of Dictyosteliu m cells. The phenotypic defects observed during cpnA- cell development, including a specific defect in stalk cell differentiation, are consistent with the idea that CpnA acts as a negative regulator in ammonia signaling pathways. This idea is consistent with copine mutant studies in other organisms that indicate copines act as negative regulators in signaling pathways. Ammonia sensing in Dictyostelium is coupled to cAMP concentrations. High concentrations of ammonia lead to a drop in intracellular cAMP concentrations and subsequent inhibition of PKA, while low levels of ammonia lead to cAMP accumulation and subsequent activation of PKA. Ammonia is thought to regulate cAMP levels by triggering a phosphorelay from the histidine kinase DhkC to the protein RdeA and then to RegA, a cAMP phosphodiesterase. Several ammonia transporter genes have been discovered in Dictyostelium. One of these genes, amtC, not only transports ammonia, but also acts as an ammonia sensor to inhibit the phosphorelay in response to low ammonia levels, thus allowing for cAMP accumulation. Cells lacking the amtC gene, like cpnA- cells, exhibit the slugger phenotype and are arrested in the slug stage of development. Two other genes involved in the slug/culmination decision are STATa and cudA. STATa is a transcription factor that is translocated into the nucleus in response to cAMP and induces the expression of the nuclear localized protein CudA. Analysis of the amtC mutant strain has shown that in the absence of amtC, STATa is not translocated into the nucleus and cudA expression is absent from the prestalk zone of the slugs. CpnA may have a role in regulating ammonia signaling any where along this pathway. The results of our mixing experiments suggest that CpnA is more likely to function in the regulation or modification of the signaling molecule itself. Therefore, CpnA may regulate the amount of ammonia produced or the amount of ammonia imported or exported through one of the ammonia transporters. We could test this idea by measuring intracellular and extracellular ammonia levels in cpnA- cells compared to wild-type cells. Alternatively, CpnA may have a role in the downstream effects of ammonia and indirectly regulate intracellular cAMP levels. CpnA’s role may also be downstream of cAMP by regulating a transcription factor like STATa. Indeed, several human copines have been shown to translocate into the nucleus and human copine I has been shown to regulate the transcription factor, NF-κB. 