 The WASP family of proteins has emerged as important regulators that connect multiple signaling pathways to regulate the actin cytoskeleton. Dictyostelium cells express WASP, as well as a WASP related protein, WASP-B, endoded by wasB gene. WASP-B contains many of the domains present in WASP. Analysis of wild type, wasB null cells revealed that WASP-B is required for proper control of F-actin polymerization in response to a cAMP gradient. Due to the lack of tight control on actin polymerization, wasB null cells exhibited higher level of F-actin polymerization. wasB − cells extend more de novo pseudopods laterally and their average life span is longer than those of wild type cells, causing more turns and inefficient chemotaxis. YFP-WASP-B appears to be uniformly distributed in the cytosol and shows no translocation to cortical membrane upon cAMP stimulation. Active RacC pull-down assay reveals that the level of active RacC in wasB − cells is significantly higher than wild type cells. Moreover, the distribution of active RacC is not localized in wasB − cells. We conclude that chemotaxis defects of wasB − cells are likely to result from the aberrant regulation of RacC activation and localization. INTRODUCTION Chemotaxis, a directed migration of cells, is a critical component of many biological processes. Cell migration is fueled by the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, thus it is essential to explore and comprehend the signaling pathways that regulate dynamics of F-actin organization. The WASP family of proteins, including WASP, N-WASP, and SCAR or WAVE, has emerged as important regulators that connect multiple signaling pathways to regulate the actin cytoskeleton in response to a chemoattractant. WASP is held in an inactive state by an auto-inhibitory domain, which is relieved upon binding of activated Rac/Cdc42 and phospholipids, such as PIP 2 or PIP 3. WASP’s C-terminal A segment has been shown to activate the Arp2/3 complex, a crucial component necessary to nucleate actin filaments. Two of the seven subunits of the Arp2/3 complex, Arp2 and 3 are structurally similar to monomeric actin, which allows them to serve as nucleation sites for new actin filaments. The Arp2/3 complex binds to the sides or the barbed end of existing filaments and initiates the growth of a new filament at a 70 degree angle, creating an expansive network of branching actin fibers. The social amoeba Dictyostelium Discoideum utilizes similar mechanisms as mammalian systems to regulate chemotaxis. A Dictyostelium homologue of WASP was discovered and studies of WASP mutants in Dictyostelium have revealed WASP’s critical role in cell polarization and localization of F-actin in response to a chemoattractant. Dictyostelium genome has a gene encoding a WASP-related protein, WASP-B, with a significant sequence homology to WASP. In this study, we examined the role of WASP-B, in the regulation of F-actin organization and chemotaxis of Dictyostelium. Analysis of wasB null Dictyostelium cells revealed that WASP-B is required for proper F-actin polymerization and chemotaxis in response to a cAMP gradient. wasB null cells exhibited a higher level of F-actin polymerization for a sustained period of time upon cAMP stimulation and extend more pseudopods with longer life span than those of wild type cells, causing more turns and inefficient chemotaxis. From these results, we conclude that WASP-B plays an attenuating role in the regulation of F- actin polymerization that is important for the regulation of the dynamics of pseupod extension and retraction. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture and molecular biology Dictyostelium Discoideum cells were cultured in HL5 medium supplemented with 60 U of penicillin and 60 μg of streptomycin per ml. The plasmid for homologous recombination was constructed by insertion of Bsr gene cassette into the wasB ORF at the Sty I site. YFP-WASP-B expression construct was produced by PCR amplification of wasB from cDNA library and subcloned into the pEXP4 vector in frame with eYFP at the N-terminus separated by the flexible linker GSGSG. Yeast two-hybrid assays were performed as described previously. In vivo and in vitro actin polymerization assays were performed as described. Chemotaxis Assay Chemotaxis assays were done as previously described. Cells competent to chemotaxis toward cAMP were plated on glass-bottomed microwell dishes. A micropipette filled with 100 μM cAMP was positioned to stimulate cells by using a micromanipulator, and the response and movement of cells were recorded by using Metamorph software. Cell movement was examined by tracing the movement of a single cell in a stack of images. Active RacC pull-down assay Ax3 and wasB − cells expressing CFP-RacC were pulsed with 50 nM cAMP at 6-min intervals for 5 h. Cells were then shaken at 200 rpm with 3 mM caffeine for 20 min, washed twice, and resuspended in 2 mL Na/K buffer. 100 μl of cells were lysed at 0, 10, 20, 30, 45, 60, and 80-second after global cAMP stimulation with 1ml of the lysis buffer. Nuclei were removed by centrifugation at 2,500 × g and GST-WBD -bound-agarose beads were added to the lysate. After an hour of incubation, beads were washed three times with TBS-tween and active RacC bound to GST-WBD beads were eluted with SDS-PAGE sample buffer and run on a 10% gel. Relative amount of active RacC was assessed by western blot assays. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A BLAST search of the Dictyostelium genome reveals a WASP-related protein, WASP-B with a significant sequence homology to WASP. wasB encodes a WASP-related protein, WASP-B, that shares functional domains with WASP, specifically the actin/Arp2/3-binding VCA region, the Cdc42/Rac-binding GBD domain, and the SH3-binding poly-proline domain. WASP-B lacks the N-terminal WH1 and the basic domains of WASP. To examine the role of WASP-B, wasB null cells were created by homologous recombination, which was confirmed by Southern blot. Figure 1 WASP-B domain structure. The genomic DNA was digested with cla I restriction enzyme and analyzed by Southern blotting with the wasB probe. F-actin organization revealed by phalloidin staining in wasB − cells. The... Loss of F-actin organization polarity in wasB − cells We examined F-actin organization of wild type Ax3 and wasB − cells by rhodamine-phalloidin staining. In aggregation-competent Ax3 cells, F-actin organization is highly polarized with F-actin localized at the anterior leading edge and, to a lesser degree, the posterior of the cell. Fluorescence intensity measured along the longitudinal axis was significantly greater than the intensity along the lateral axis in aggregation-competent wild type Ax3 cells as little F-actin staining was detected at the lateral membrane. This polarity was partially maintained even in cells globally stimulated with cAMP. In contrast, wasB − cells showed an increase in F-actin assembly throughout the lateral membrane, resulting in the less polarized F-actin organization even in the absence of cAMP stimulation. Prolonged F-actin assembly following cAMP stimulation in wasB − cells To examine the role of WASP-B in dynamic F-actin polymerization, wasB − cells were tested for in vivo actin polymerization responses to cAMP stimulation. Aggregation competent cells were lysed with lysis buffer at different time points following cAMP stimulation. Cytoskeletal fractions containing polymerized actin were collected by centrifugation at 18,000 g, resolved on SDS-PAGE gels, and the intensity of the actin band was quantified. Wild type Ax3 cells show a biphasic response to cAMP stimulation. The first phase occurs within 5–10 seconds after cAMP stimulation and consists of a significant increase of F-actin levels, followed by a decrease in actin levels. A second smaller peak of F-actin assembly is seen after about 40–60 seconds following cAMP stimulation. This second peak is associated with recruitment of plekstrin homology domain containing proteins to the membrane and can be disrupted by PI3K inhibition. wasB − cells showed a higher basal level of F-actin than the wild type Ax3 cells, which is consistent with the results of the phalloidin staining. wasB − cells appear to retain the first peak of F-actin polymerization upon cAMP stimulation. However, the main difference of wasB − cells from the wild type was that the size and duration of the second peak was much bigger and longer. The second peak of wasB − cells was as big as the first one and lasted over 20 sec. Thus, the lack of wasB appears to have a positive impact on the size and duration of the F-actin assembly response upon cAMP stimulation. To support this data, in vitro F-actin polymerization assays were performed using high-speed supernatants prepared from cAMP-pulsed Dictyostelium cells as described previously. GTPγS-bound RacC initiated a roughly two-fold stimulation of actin polymerization in the wild-type supernatant, but stimulation of F-actin polymerization was much faster and greater in the wasB − supernatant. This result suggests that WASP-B might have an inhibitory role in the regulation of F-actin polymerization upon cAMP stimulation. It has been determined that the VCA domains of N-WASP, WASP, and Scar1 stimulate actin nucleation to different extents, with the N-WASP VCA region inducing nucleation 70-fold more quickly than Scar1 VCA domain. Significantly lower Arp2/3-stimulating activity of WASP-B VCA domain might produce a level of stimulation low enough that would appear to be negatively contributing to actin polymerization, especially when compared to the higher activity of WASP VCA domain for the Arp2/3 complex. We compared the activation potency of the VCA domains of WASP and WASP-B. Both GST–VCAs of WASP and WASP-B increased the rate of actin polymerization at similar levels. In vitro F-actin polymerization assays were repeated on glass coverslips and used to visualize assembled F-actin with fluorescent microscopy. Short actin filaments were observed in Ax3 supernatant. In contrast, significantly elongated and branched filaments were found in wasB − supernatant. Actin assembly is regulated through the generation of free barbed ends. The number and location of free barbed ends that are available for F-actin polymerization was determined by labeling with Rhodamine-actin in permeabilized cells. In aggregation-competent Ax3 cells, the distribution of free barbed ends was localized to the periphery of cells and polarized toward the leading edge and uropod. Global cAMP stimulation caused equal distribution of free babrbed ends around the periphery of cells, consistent with the change of cellular morphology, and some concentrated barbed ends were observed in the cell as bright spots. In contrast, the number of free barbed ends in wasB − cells was significantly greater than wild type cell, localizing not only around the periphery, but in the cell body too. Similarly to wild type cells, cAMP stimulation also caused appearance of bright puncta in the cell. These results indicate that the localization and number of free barbed ends are significantly altered in wasB − cells, suggesting that WASP-B is required for the proper regulation of F-actin polymerization. We examined the dynamic changes of the F-actin polymerization in live cells by observing the localization of a F-actin reporter, mRFP-LimE-Δ-coil in wasB − cells. mRFP-LimE-Δ-coil fusion protein binds specifically and dynamically to F-actin. mRFP-LimE temporarily localized to the cortical membrane within 6 seconds after cAMP stimulation both in wasB − cells and wasB − cells expressing YFP-WASP-B. However, a clear difference was observed in later time in response to cAMP. mRFP intensity on the membrane drops back to basal level in wasB − cells expressing YFP-WASP-B after 30 sec, but lasted significantly longer in wasB − cells, suggesting prolonged cortical F-actin polymerization. These results support the findings from our in vivo actin polymerization assay and suggest that WASP-B might play an inhibitory or, at least attenuating role in the regulation of F-actin polymerization. Figure 2 Increased and prolonged F-actin polymerization response in wasB − cells. In vivo actin polymerization assay measuring F-actin assembled in response to the cAMP stimulation. The top panel shows actin bands of the representative gel. Results... Frequent protrusion of pseudopods causes aberrant chemotaxis of wasB − cells To test whether the changes in the actin cytoskeleton described above alter chemoattractant-induced cell migration, images of chemotaxing cells were captured with time lapse microscopy and their movements were analyzed. The results show that wild type cells are well polarized and migrate quickly and linearly towards the chemoattractant source. We analyzed the motility of Dictyostelium cells with bimodal analysis, a method that compares time spent in persistent versus reorientation mode. Bimodal analysis segregates the movements of a cell into alternating directional and reorientation modes based on the direction in which the cell is traveling. Bimodal analysis of the motility showed that wild type cells spent a relatively longer time in the directional mode than in the reorientation mode, thus migrating very directionally towards the cAMP source. wasB − cells did not migrate efficiently towards the cAMP source even though they were polarized and could sense the chemoattractant source as, over time, they migrate towards the source. wasB − cells changed their directions quite often, resulting in spending a significantly longer time in the reorientation mode rather than making directional displacements. This is consistent with a lower chemotaxis index and a decreased velocity of wasB − cells when compared to that of wild type cells. Expression of YFP-WASP-B in wasB − cells appears to rescue this defect as the cells move quite directionally, resulting in a higher chemotaxis index and greater velocity. To examine chemotaxis defects of wasB − cells more closely, we measured the number and lifespan of pseudopods extended from the wild type and wasB − cells. Wild type cells generally extend pseudopodia in the direction of the chemoattractant, creating few lateral and rear pseudopodia. wasB − cells extend rear and lateral pseudopods almost twice as frequent as wild type cells. Moreover, the average lifespan of pseudopods in wasB − cells was ~75% longer than in wild type cells. This contributed to the inefficient chemotaxis of wasB − cells. Recent studies found that nearly all pseudopodia produced during chemotaxis fall into one of two categories: 1) those that form by splitting from existing pseudopodia, or 2) those that are produced at apparently random positions around the cell cortex. wasB − cells clearly showed more de novo pseudopodia than wild type cells. Expression of YFP-WASP-B restored the ratio back to a level similar to that of the wild type cells. These results indicate that the extension of rear and lateral de novo pseudopods disrupts the directional movement of these cells in a particular direction. Figure 3 Defects in chemotaxis of wasB − cells. Bimodal analysis of chemotactic movement of wild type, wasB −, or wasB − cells expressing YFP-WASP-B with a five second sampling interval over 15 minutes is shown. Chemotaxis indices... Subcellular localization of YFP-WASP-B In an attempt to examine spatio-temporal localization of WASP-B, we examined wasB − cells expressing YFP-WASP-B. Phalloidin staining of these cells revealed almost uniform distribution of YFP-WASP-B at a steady state and absence of YFP-WASP-B at newly formed pseudopods where F-actin is enriched. Examination of YFP-WASP-B localization in live cells reveals lack of specific localization of YFP-WASP-B. There might be a temporary absence of YFP-WASP-B localization in developing pseupods especially at an early stage.. Many proteins involved in F-actin polymerization such as WIPa translocates to the cell cortex upon global cAMP stimulation. However, examination of YFP-WASP-B localization upon cAMP stimulation exhibited no translocation to cortical membrane. This result was confirmed by determining the association of YFP-WASP-B with the detergent insoluble cytoskeleton/membrane fraction. Aggregation competent wasB − cells expressing YFP-WASP-B were stimulated with 1 μM cAMP and lysed with lysis buffer. DIF was pelleted by spinning lysate at 18,000 rpm. The association of YFP-WASP-B with the DIF was detected by western blot. Upon cAMP stimulation, Most YFP-WASP-B remain in the detergent-soluble fraction as little amount of YFP-WASP-B translocates into the detergent-insoluble cytoskeleton fraction. These results indicate that the localization of WASP-B do not change upon cAMP stimulation. WASP is thought to be localized to the anterior leading edge of chemotaxing cells by binding of the basic domain to phosphoinositides P 2 or PIP 3 ) on the anterior membrane. In contrast, WASP-B does not have an obvious stretch of basic residues. Thus, WASP-B might have less strict control on its localization. We demonstrated that WASP-B appears to be rather uniformly distributed in the cytoplasm either at steady state or in live cells and, surprisingly, not in protruding pseupodia where WASP localizes, indicating that WASP-B localization does not overlap with F-actin polymerization. This also suggests a negative regulatory role of WASP-B in controlling F-actin polymerization. Figure 4 Aggregation-competent wasB − cells expressing YFP-WASP-B were fixed and stained with Texas-red-labeled phalloidin and representative image is shown. Bar = 5 μm. Localization of YFP-WASP-B in live cells. Aggregation-competent wasB... Aberrant regulation of RacC in wasB − cells Our previous study examined the interactions between the GBD domain of WASP with specific Rho GTPases. Through the use of a yeast two-hybrid analysis, we found that WASP and WASP-B showed exactly the same binding preference to RacC, RacB, and Rac1B, suggesting a possibility that WASP and WASP-B might compete for the binding of active Rho GTPases. Thus, it is plausible that more active RacC might be available for downstream effectors in wasB − cells. To directly test this hypothesis, we used an affinity precipitation assay, which takes advantage of the selective interaction of the GBD domain of WASP with active RacC. Ax3 and wasB − cells expressing CFP-RacC were lysed at 0, 10, 20, 30, 45, 60, and 80-second after cAMP stimulation and active CFP-RacC was pulled down with GST-GBD beads and relative amount of active RacC in different time points was determined by western blots as shown in Figure 4D. A clear difference in the basal level of active RacC was observed as ~60% of total RacC in lysate can be pulled down with GST-GBD in wasB − cells compared to ~35% in Ax3 cells, indicating higher level of active RacC in wasB − cells. This result suggests that RacC is not competing for binding between the two GBD domains in wasB − cells and that more active RacC is present in wasB − cells, which might drive more F-actin polymerization as manifested in our earlier assays. Kinetics of RacC activation also showed a clear difference. The level of active RacC gradually increased and peaked at 30–45 sec after cAMP stimulation in Ax3 cells, but stayed at a constant level until 45 sec and rapidly decreased in wasB − cells. mRFP-RacC in live Ax3 and wasB − cells was uniformly distributed in the cytoplasm. YFP-B-GBD was localized to vesiclular structures concentrated in the front of Ax3 cells as we described in our previous study. However, YFP-B-GBD is rather uniformly distributed in wasB − cells, suggesting aberrant localization of active RacC in wasB − cells. Thus, chemotaxis defects of wasB − cells are likely to result from the aberrant regulation of RacC activation and localization. ​ Highlights WASP-B is a WASP-related protein found in Dictyostelium. F-actin assembly response is increased and prolonged in wasB − cells wasB − cells exhibit frequent protrusion of pseudopods causing aberrant chemotaxis wasB − cells exhibit aberrant regulation of RacC activation and localization chemotaxis defects of wasB − are likely to result from aberrant regulation of RacC 