 N -acylethanolamines are endogenous lipid-based signaling molecules best known for their role in the endocannabinoid system in mammals, but they are also known to play roles in signaling pathways in plants. The regulation of NAEs in vivo is partly accomplished by the enzyme fatty acid amide hydrolase, which hydrolyses NAEs to ethanolamine and their corresponding fatty acid. Inhibition of FAAH has been shown to increase the levels of NAEs in vivo and to produce desirable phenotypes. This has led to the development of pharmaceutical-based therapies for a variety of conditions targeting FAAH. Recently, our group identified a functional FAAH homolog in Dictyostelium discoideum, leading to our hypothesis that D. discoideum also possesses NAEs. In this study, we provide a further characterization of FAAH and identify NAEs in D. discoideum for the first time. We also demonstrate the ability to modulate their levels in vivo through the use of a semispecific FAAH inhibitor and confirm that these NAEs are FAAH substrates through in vitro studies. We believe the demonstration of the in vivo modulation of NAE levels suggests that D. discoideum could be a good simple model organism in which to study NAE-mediated signaling. Keywords: N -acylethanolamine, endocannabinoid, anandamide N -acylethanolamines are lipid-based molecules that play a role in many cell signaling pathways. The most renowned NAE, anandamide, plays a central role in the endocannabinoid system by being an endogenous agonist for the cannabinoid receptors. The enzyme fatty acid amide hydrolase plays an important role in regulating the concentration of anandamide, as well as other NAEs, in vivo by hydrolyzing NAEs to ethanolamine and their corresponding fatty acid. FAAH knockout studies in mice have demonstrated that inhibition of FAAH can produce analgesic, anxiolytic, neuroprotective, and anti-inflammatory effects. This has resulted in considerable research into developing highly specific FAAH inhibitors as potential pharmaceutical-based therapies. Although much emphasis has been placed on studying NAE-mediated cannabinoid signaling in mammals, NAE signaling is also involved in noncannabinoid signaling pathways in humans and other eukaryotic organisms. For example, N -palmitoylethanolamine and N -stearoylethanolamine have been shown to be involved in noncannabinoid receptor anti-inflammatory signaling pathways. Evidence from plant studies have indicated that NAE signaling may be involved in pathogen defense, as evidenced by increased levels of N -myristoylethanolamine in the presence of the fungal elicitor xylanase and the down-regulation of defense-related transcripts and increased pathogen susceptibility in FAAH over-expressing plants. NAE signaling, specifically N -lauroylethanolamine, has also been shown to inhibit phospholipase D α activity and abscisic acid-induced stomata closure and to induce microtubule, actin, and endomembrane reorganization. NAEs and their precursors have also been shown to be present in several lower eukaryotic organisms. It has long been known that the precursors of NAEs, N -acylphosphatidylethanolamines, are present in Dictyostelium discoideum, and NAEs and N -acylphosphatidylethanolamines have been shown to be present in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Recently, it has been shown that the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila possesses numerous NAEs. Along with evidence of an enzyme similar to FAAH present in Tetrahymena pyriformis, this suggests that NAE signaling is carried out in lower eukaryotes. Furthermore, cannabinoid and cannabinoid-like molecules have been shown to elicit responses in lower eukaryotes, with Δ 9 -tetrahydrocannabinol affecting cellular growth, movement, and division of T. pyriformis and 2-arachidonoyl glycerol inhibiting cellular growth in free-living amoebae. Finally, arachidonic acid, the product of anandamide and 2-arachidonoyl glycerol hydrolysis by FAAH and monoacylglycerol lipase, respectively, is a known chemoattractant for D. discoideum. It is not known whether NAEs are present in D. discoideum. The identification of FAAH in D. discoideum by our group led to our hypothesis that these lipids are present in this organism. To test this hypothesis, we further characterized the D. discoideum FAAH enzyme and then, using a targeted lipidomics approach, identified NAEs native to D. discoideum in the presence and absence of a semispecific FAAH inhibitor. These substrates were then confirmed as FAAH substrates through in vitro studies. We believe that this establishes D. discoideum as a suitable model organism in which to study NAE-mediated signaling, which may help elucidate these signaling pathways with broader implications on human health. MATERIALS AND METHODS Chemicals N -arachidonoylethanolamine, N -arachidonoylethanolamine- d 4, N -palmitoylethanolamine, N -palmitoylethanolamine- d 4, N -stearoylethanolamine, N -oleoylethanolamine, N -linoleoylethanolamine, arachidonoyl p -nitroaniline, CAY10435, and URB597 3-yl)-cyclohexylcarbamate) were purchased from Cayman Chemicals. Arachidonoyltrifluoromethyl ketone, methoxyarachidonoyl fluorophosphonate, LY2183240 methyl] N, N -dimethyl-1H-tetrazole-1-carboxamide), and JNJ1661010 -1-piperazinecarboxamide) were purchased from Tocris Biosciences. 1--3-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride, 4-dimethylaminopyridine, dodecanoic acid, myristic acid, phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, and p -nitroaniline were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Preparation of N-acylethanolamines NAE standards were prepared for NAE12:0 and NAE14:0 as described by Williams et al.. 1--3-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride was reacted with a solution containing the corresponding fatty acid, ethanolamine, and 4-dimethylaminopyridine in 20 ml ice-cold acetonitrile. The reaction was warmed to 21°C and stirred for 6 h. The acetonitrile solvent was then exchanged for dichloromethane to fully dissolve solids before adding SiO 2 to adsorb the NAE. Dichloromethane was then evaporated, and the SiO 2 was packed into a column, dry-loaded onto a SiO 2 flash chromatography column, and purified using a flash chromatography system using an acetone/hexane gradient from 5-80%. Fractions containing NAEs as determined by UV absorbance were pooled and the solvent evaporated. Bioinformatics FAAH protein sequences were selected based on previous work performed by McPartland et al.. FAAH 1 sequences were obtained for Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Takifugu rubripes, Ciona intestinalis, Caenorhabditis elegans, Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288c, and Tetrahymena thermophila SB210. FAAH 2 sequences were obtained for Homo sapiens, Takifugu rubripes, and Drosophila melanogaster. Another FAAH sequence was obtained for Arabidopsis thaliana. Other amidase signature sequence proteins, most annotated as glutamyl-tRNA Gln amidotransferases, were obtained for Homo sapiens, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Archaeoglobus fulgidus DSM 4304, and Plasmodium falciparum 3D7. Amidase signature sequence-containing protein sequences from D. discoideum AX3, Dd1, and Dd2 were obtained from previous sequencing studies by our group. Takifugu and Ciona sequences were obtained from the Joint Genome Institute, and the Tetrahymena sequence originated from the The Institute for Genomic Research. All other sequences were obtained from GenBank. Protein sequences were aligned with ClustalX using default parameters, and phylogenetic trees were generated using a minimum evolution algorithm using MEGA4. Confidence values for trees were generated by bootstrapping based on 500 resampling replicates. Enzyme purification The Dd2 gene from D. discoideum AX3 was cloned into Escherichia coli BL21 as previously described. Enzyme was produced by diluting a fresh overnight culture of E. coli BL21 containing pCWMalET-FAAH vector in LB medium containing 0.2% glucose and 100 µg/ml ampicillin. The culture was grown at 25°C and 200 rpm to an OD 600 of 0.6, at which time it was induced with 0.1 mM isopropyl-1-thio-β-D-galactopyranoside to produce a recombinant FAAH linked to a maltose binding protein. Cells were harvested 5 h later by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 min. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing Complete ® protease inhibitor mixture, EDTA-free and 10 µg/ml each of RNaseA and DNaseI. Cell lysis was performed via two passes through an Emulsiflex C5 at 20,000 psi. Lysates were then centrifuged at 100,000 g for 50 min at 4°C. The supernatant was batch bound to an amylose resin for 1 h at 4°C. Protein-bound resin was packed onto a column using gravity flow and washed with 10 column volumes of wash buffer. MBP-FAAH was eluted over 5 column volumes with elution buffer. Maltose-eluted fractions containing MBP-FAAH, as determined by absorbance at 280 nm, were pooled and dialyzed overnight in dialysis buffer at 4°C. Protein size was verified using SDS-PAGE, and protein yield was determined by Bradford assay using BSA as protein standard. In the case of further purification of MBP-FAAH, MBP was removed via an overnight digestion at 4°C using a recombinant human thrombin. The resulting protein consisted of Dictyostelium FAAH with a hexahistidine tag located at the N -terminus, which was constructed in the initial cloning of the gene. Protein was then batch bound to a Ni-NTA resin for 1 h at 4°C before being packed onto a column. Protein-bound Ni-NTA resin was washed with 10 column volumes of wash buffer. To elute recombinant FAAH, a linear gradient was applied from 10 to 100 mM imidazole in wash buffer over 30 volumes followed by a final pulse of 10 volumes of wash buffer containing 200 mM imidazole. Fractions containing recombinant FAAH, as determined by absorbance at 280 nm, were pooled and dialyzed against a dialysis buffer. Protein size was verified using SDS-PAGE, and protein yield was determined by Bradford assay. Inhibitor studies Inhibitor studies were carried out using A p NA as the substrate. The rate of hydrolysis by FAAH was determined by monitoring the production of p -nitroaniline at 380 nm with a microplate reader. Substrate conversion was extrapolated from A 380 versus mass of p -nitroaniline using the microplate reader. Reactions were carried out in 96-well plates where A p NA was added to 100 µl reaction buffer to a final concentration of 0–300 µM. Wells were preincubated with inhibitor and preheated to 37°C. Reactions were initiated through the addition of 30 µg of MBP-FAAH. Final reaction volumes were 200 µL, and reactions were performed in duplicate. Kinetic constants were determined using three different inhibitor concentrations and calculated using GraphPad Prism version 4.0. Results of inhibitor studies were verified on thrombin-digested MBP-FAAH to demonstrate that the maltose binding protein played no significant role in enzyme inhibition. Dictyostelium strain growth and lipid extraction D. discoideum AX3 cells were grown axenically in liquid culture at 150 rpm and 21°C to a density of 5 × 10 6 cells/ml. To study the effect of FAAH inhibition, cells were grown for a further 24 h in the presence of 10 µM MAFP. Cells were then harvested via centrifugation at 500 g for 10 min. To remove phospholipids, which have been demonstrated to be potentially problematic in downstream analysis of NAEs, neutral lipids were extracted from Dictyostelium cell pellets using a mixture of ethyl acetate and hexane. PEA-d 4 and AEA-d 4 were added to Dictyostelium cell pellets containing 5 × 10 6 cells and resuspended in 250 µL of PBS. A 9:1 mixture of ethyl acetate and hexane was then added, and the solution was vortexed at maximum speed for 30 s before separating the phases via centrifugation at 4,500 g for 5 min. The organic layer was then transferred to a clean glass vial and dried under nitrogen and stored at −20°C until analysis by LC-MS/MS, at which time dried samples were reconstituted in a 50% ethanol/water mixture. LC-MS/MS analysis Analyses were performed on an LC-MS/MS system consisting of an Ultimate3000 HPLC system linked to a 4000 Qtrap triple quadrupole linear ion trap mass spectrometer equipped with a Micro Ion Spray interface. Samples were loaded from an autosampler that was kept at ambient temperature. Chromatographic separation was performed on a Kappa BioBasic C18 column with dimensions of 150 × 0.32 mm. Mobile phase A consisted of 10 mM ammonium acetate in water. Mobile phase B consisted of 10 mM ammonium acetate in methanol. Gradient elution was performed at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. The initial composition of the gradient was 50% B for 3 min before a ballistic gradient raised the composition to 96% B over 1 min. The gradient was held at 96% B for 26 min. At 30 min, the gradient was returned to 50% B to reequilibrate the column for 10 min. The total run time was 40 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode. Nitrogen was used as the curtain and nebulizer gas with the following source conditions: capillary voltage: 5.1 kV, temperature: 100°C, GS1: 12. The declustering potential was set at 70 eV for all masses. The collision energy and dwell times were set at 30 eV and 100 ms, respectively, for all multiple reaction monitoring transitions. Q1 and Q3 were operated at unit resolution. The following MS parameters were used to measure NAEs : NAE12:0, NAE14:0, NAE16:0, NAE18:0, NAE18:1, NAE18:2, NAE20:4, PEA-d 4, and AEA-d 4. Detection limits for all NAEs were determined during standard curve construction and were 5 fmol on column for NAE12:0 and 1 fmol on column for NAE14:0, NAE16:0, NAE18:0, NAE18:1, NAE18:2, and NAE20:4. Substrate consumption assays Measurement of FAAH activity was determined through a modified LC-MS/MS based assay. The rate of hydrolysis of putative FAAH substrates was determined by measuring the depletion of reactant via LC-MS/MS. NAEs tested include NAE12:0, NAE14:0, NAE16:0, NAE18:0, NAE18:1, NAE18:2, and NAE20:4. Reactions were carried out in 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes where the addition of the corresponding NAE to a final concentration of 300 µM was added to reaction buffer to a final volume of 1.0 ml and preincubated at 21°C. Enzymatic reactions were initiated through the addition of 10 µg of MBP-FAAH and incubated at 21°C. Aliquots were taken at 0, 1, 2, 5, 10, and 20 min. Another 100 µL aliquot was taken for an overnight reaction to determine reaction completion. Enzymatic reactions were stopped by placing aliquots in 300 µL of a 9:1 mixture of ethyl acetate and hexane and purified and stored as described previously. For analysis by LC-MS/MS, dried samples were reconstituted in a 50% ethanol/water mixture. Kinetic assays were performed in triplicate. RESULTS Phylogenetic characterization of Dictyostelium FAAH Two putative genes found in the D. discoideum genome containing the amidase signature sequence were compared with confirmed and potential FAAH protein sequences as identified in silico by McPartland et al.. The analysis resulted in the formation of five distinct phylogenetic groupings. These groupings can be described as FAAH 1 and its putative homologs, FAAH 2 and its putative homologs, other FAAH homologs, eukaryotic amidotransferases, and prokaryotic amidotransferases. Neither of the two D. discoideum proteins containing the amidase signature domain clustered among the FAAH 1 or FAAH 2 clades. The Dd2 protein clustered with the well characterized FAAH protein from Arabidopsis thaliana in a separate grouping to both the FAAH 1 and FAAH 2 clades. The identity between Dd2 and Arabidopsis FAAH is only 32%, but this increases to 50% across the amidase signature sequence. By comparison, Dd2 has only 20% identity with human FAAH 1. This suggests that Dd2 is a FAAH homolog but is more closely related to Arabidopsis FAAH than to human FAAH. The other putative D. discoideum protein analyzed, Dd1, clustered among known eukaryotic amidotransferases, suggesting that Dd1 is not a homolog of FAAH. From this point on, this paper will refer to the protein Dd2 as Dictyostelium FAAH. Fig. 1. Phylogenetic tree of FAAH and putative FAAH homologs. Two D. discoideum proteins containing the amidase signature sequence were analyzed along with FAAH and putative FAAH protein sequences identified by McPartland et al.. After alignment, a minimum... Purification of a recombinant FAAH from D. discoideum The Dictyostelium FAAH gene from D. discoideum was cloned into E. coli BL21 and expressed as a recombinant fusion protein linked to a maltose binding protein. Typical yields of the MBP-FAAH fusion protein from E. coli BL21 cells were in the order of 3 mg/L of liquid media. Because the fusion protein was designed with an internal thrombin cleavage site and a hexahistidine tag, further purification of MBP-FAAH was possible via a thrombin digestion to separate the maltose binding protein followed by further purification via a Ni-NTA agarose column. The yield of His 6 -FAAH after the thrombin digestion and purification was 0.8 mg/L liquid media. To ensure the proper protein product was purified, the proteins were analyzed using SDS-PAGE to verify protein size. The calculated molecular weight of Dictyostelium FAAH was approximately 70 kDa. Given that the maltose binding protein has an approximate molecular weight of 42.5 kDa, the approximate molecular weight of the MBP-FAAH fusion protein is 112.5 kDa. All proteins migrated near their theoretical weights on the SDS-PAGE gel. Fig. 2. SDS-PAGE of purification of FAAH from D. discoideum. A recombinant N -terminal hexahistidine tagged FAAH from D. discoideum linked to a maltose-binding protein was expressed in E. coli BL21. After lysis, MBP-FAAH was purified using an amylose... Inhibition of Dictyostelium FAAH The effect of known mammalian FAAH inhibitors on Dictyostelium FAAH was determined. The rate of hydrolysis of A p NA was measured by monitoring the release of p -nitroaniline at 380 nm with each inhibitor being tested at three different concentrations. The mode of inhibition was determined through Lineweaver-Burk analysis, whereas K I was determined via a nonlinear regression of reaction velocity versus substrate concentration plots. Dictyostelium FAAH had a V max and K M on A p NA of 127 nmoles/min/mg and 74 µM, respectively. Results of the inhibitor studies are summarized in Table 1. Fig. 3. Inhibitor studies of Dictyostelium FAAH. Saturation curves of the reaction of Dictyostelium FAAH hydrolyzing arachidonoyl p -nitroaniline to arachidonic acid and p -nitroaniline with four different inhibitors at three different inhibitor concentrations.... TABLE 1. Summary of inhibitor studies detailing mode of inhibition on Dictyostelium FAAH, K I on Dictyostelium FAAH, and either K I or IC 50 on mammalian versions of FAAH First-generation mammalian FAAH inhibitors ATFMK and MAFP inhibited Dictyostelium FAAH with a K I of 15.4 µM and 658 nM, respectively. ATFMK and MAFP are less effective on Dictyostelium FAAH than mammalian homologs of the enzyme, where IC 50 values of 1.9 µM and 2.5 nM have been reported, respectively. CAY10435, an α-keto oxazolopyridine, was a strong inhibitor of Dictyostelium FAAH with a K I of 835 nM. This compares with a K I of 0.57 nM for the mammalian enzyme. Furthermore, CAY10435 was shown to be a noncompetitive inhibitor of Dictyostelium FAAH, whereas for the mammalian enzyme the inhibition was competitive. Other mammalian FAAH inhibitors tested in this study were far less effective inhibitors of Dictyostelium FAAH. The irreversible serine protease inhibitor PMSF inhibited Dictyostelium FAAH with a K I of 4.2 mM, whereas the highly potent mammalian FAAH inhibitors JNJ1661010, URB597, and LY2183240 were all poor inhibitors of Dictyostelium FAAH, with negligible inhibition at inhibitor concentrations of 500 µM, 150 µM, and 250 µM, respectively. These values compare with a K I value of 34 nM for JNJ1661010 and with the IC 50 values of 4.6 nM and 12.4 nM for URB597 and LY2183240, respectively, on mammalian FAAH homologs. D. discoideum AX3 NAEs NAEs were identified in D. discoideum AX3 through a targeted lipidomics approach consisting of the extraction of neutral lipids with a mixture of ethyl acetate and hexane followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. Initially, potential NAE candidates were identified via a precursor scan, with electrospray ionization carried out in positive mode of uninhibited and MAFP-inhibited AX3 neutral lipid extracts. These scans revealed peaks consistent with the expected peaks of NAE12:0, NAE14:0, NAE16:0, NAE18:0, NAE18:1, NAE18:2, and NAE20:4. To confirm the identity of these peaks as NAEs, LC-MS/MS was performed on lipid extracts from an MAFP-inhibited culture. One sample was spiked with a 1 nmol mixture of the seven NAE standards, and the other was not. In terms of lipophilicity, all seven peaks in the unspiked sample had the same retention time as their corresponding NAE standard. Also, the two deuterated internal standards, PEA-d 4 and AEA-d 4, coeluted with their corresponding nondeuterated NAE. Furthermore, MS/MS was carried out on each putative NAE to produce a collision-induced dissociation spectrum. The peaks in the unspiked sample produce a similar spectrum to that of the synthetic NAE standards for six out of the seven NAEs. The lone exception was NAE20:4, where the MS/MS spectral quality of unspiked sample did not allow for a confident spectral match to the standard. The presence of NAEs in D. discoideum has been demonstrated by lipophilicity and gas-phase ion chemistry. Fig. 4. Multiple reaction monitoring chromatograms for each of the seven putative NAEs identified in D. discoideum. The sample was obtained from D. discoideum culture that had been grown to a density of 5 × 10 6 cells and then exposed to MAFP at... Fig. 5. Collision-induced dissociation mass spectra for the three C18 NAEs identified in D. discoideum. The putative NAEs in D. discoideum underwent CID, and their spectra were compared with the CID spectra of their respective synthetic NAE standard. The... After the confirmation of the identity of NAEs in D. discoideum, they were quantified in uninhibited and MAFP-inhibited lipid extracts using multiple reaction monitoring. The uninhibited AX3 strain produced quantifiable levels of NAE12:0, NAE14:0, NAE16:0, and NAE18:0, with quantities ranging from 0.4 pmol per 10 8 cells for NAE16:0 to 9.0 pmol per 10 8 cells for NAE12:0. There were no detectable levels of NAE18:1, NAE18:2, or NAE20:4 in the uninhibited AX3 extracts. As for the MAFP-inhibited extracts, addition of 10 µM MAFP for 24 h resulted in detectable levels of NAE18:1 and NAE18:2. The addition of MAFP also resulted in a significant increase in the level of NAE16:0 from 0.41 to 1.2 pmol per 10 8 cells. TABLE 2. Quantitation of NAEs in D. discoideum in the presence and absence of 10 µM MAFP Substrate consumption rate of Dictyostelium FAAH An attempt to determine the in vitro kinetics of Dictyostelium FAAH on a variety of NAE substrates was made by measuring the rate of substrate depletion in 300 µM reactions via LC-MS/MS. The determination of true initial reaction rates was difficult due to the variance of LC-MS/MS measurements at low substrate consumption levels. To reduce this variance, we report our results as a substrate consumption rate from time 0 to 20 min. At this time, approximately 30% of the substrate was consumed. All seven NAE substrates tested were completely degraded by FAAH in overnight reactions, demonstrating that Dictyostelium FAAH is capable of hydrolyzing NAE substrates with a variety of acyl chain lengths and levels of unsaturation. Substrate consumption rates were determined for six of the seven substrates. A consumption rate was not reported for NAE12:0 because there was no significant difference in the amount of the NAE during the 20 min time course. TABLE 3. Substrate consumption rate of Dictyostelium FAAH on NAE substrates at 300 µM substrate concentration and comparison of acyl chain length on FAAH reaction rates for three different species Dictyostelium FAAH displayed a preference for unsaturated NAE substrates, with consumption rates of 111.4, 83.4, and 112.2 nmol/min/mg for NAE20:4, NAE18:2, and NAE18:1, respectively. By comparison, saturated NAE substrates were hydrolyzed at less than half those rates at 39.9, 10.1, and 20.7 nmol/min/mg for NAE18:0, NAE16:0, and NAE14:0, respectively. The preference of Dictyostelium FAAH for unsaturated NAEs is consistent with results reported for the Arabidopsis and rat FAAH homologs. However, although anandamide is still a preferred NAE substrate for all three homologs, neither Dictyostelium FAAH nor Arabidopsis FAAH have as strong a preference for the arachidonoyl side chain as exhibited by the rat FAAH homolog. Although the presence of an unsaturated site in the acyl chain had a definitive impact on reaction velocity, there was no clear effect of acyl chain length on reaction velocity. The hydrolysis of NAE18:0 was higher than NAE16:0 and NAE14:0. However, NAE14:0 had a higher reaction velocity than NAE16:0. Previous reports have shown that rat FAAH slightly prefers shorter acyl chain substrates, whereas Arabidopsis FAAH had a higher reaction velocity on NAE16:0 than NAE14:0, suggesting the opposite. DISCUSSION Previous work by our group had identified two amidase signature sequence genes in the D. discoideum genome, which were named Dd1 and Dd2. Initial cloning and expression of these genes as recombinant proteins in E. coli had revealed that of the two proteins only Dd2 was capable of hydrolyzing anandamide. Despite significant sequence variation from other FAAH homologs, the conservation of the serine-serine-lysine triad demonstrated to be important for NAE hydrolysis was conserved, leading to its identification as Dictyostelium FAAH. Further phylogenetic characterization of Dd1 and Dd2 with known FAAH sequences revealed that, although Dd2 was indeed a FAAH homolog being most closely related to Arabidopsis FAAH, Dd1 clustered among other eukaryotic amidotransferases. The presence of a functional FAAH in D. discoideum led to the hypothesis that the natural substrates of FAAH, NAEs, are also present in D. discoideum. To verify this, we further characterized FAAH to identify inhibitors of FAAH, which should elevate NAE levels in D. discoideum and aid in identifying NAEs before attempting targeted lipidomic analyses of D. discoideum lipid extracts. Inhibitor studies were carried out in vitro to verify if known FAAH inhibitors were effective on Dictyostelium FAAH and to identify inhibitors that could potentially allow for the modulation of NAE levels in vivo. Although the first-generation substrate-based inhibitors ATFMK and MAFP inhibited Dictyostelium FAAH, they were slightly less effective than on mammalian FAAH homologs. The serine protease inhibitor PMSF was also capable of inhibiting Dictyostelium FAAH but with a K I of several orders of magnitude higher than mammalian FAAH homologs. These results are similar to results observed in inhibitor studies of Arabidopsis FAAH. Of the four highly specific mammalian FAAH inhibitors tested, only CAY10435 inhibited Dictyostelium FAAH, although through a noncompetitive mechanism as opposed to the competitive mechanism in which it inhibits mammalian FAAH homologs. Targeted lipidomic analyses of D. discoideum lipid extracts identified several NAEs as native to D. discoideum that have been reported to be present in a variety of plant species, human tissues, and the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila. Although the short-chain saturated NAEs NAE12:0 and NAE14:0 are typically associated with plants where, functionally, NAE12:0 has been shown to competitively inhibit lipoxygenase activity and manipulate oxylipin metabolism, NAE16:0, NAE18:0, NAE18:1, and NAE18:2 are widespread in plants, animals, and T. thermophila. In conjunction with a similar NAE profile, substrate kinetic studies revealed that Dictyostelium FAAH, like other FAAH homologs, hydrolyzes a broad spectrum of NAE substrates. The principal difference in substrate kinetics is that Dictyostelium FAAH hydrolyzes NAE20:4 at a similar rate to other NAEs, whereas mammalian homologs hydrolyze NAE20:4 at a 3-fold elevated rate compared with other NAE substrates. This could be due to the need for mammals to tightly regulate NAE20:4 due to its binding to the cannabinoid receptors, which have yet to be identified in plants and lower eukaryotes. With a similar NAE profile and FAAH activity, this raises the possibility that many of the NAE-signaling pathways present in D. discoideum may be conserved in higher eukaryotic organisms. The characterization of Dictyostelium FAAH, the identification of native NAEs, and the ability to modulate their levels in vivo provides an opportunity to use D. discoideum as a model system in which to study NAE-mediated signaling. The use of D. discoideum as a model system has many advantages. D. discoideum is already an extensively studied protozoan in developmental biology due to its unusual life cycle that sees it switch from a unicellular grazer to a multicellular slug upon starvation and has been used as a model in other areas, including the study of mitochondrial and neurological diseases, pathogen-host interactions, and chemotaxis. Due to its well-characterized nature, genetic and biochemical techniques in D. discoideum are already well developed, including gene knockout by homologous recombination, RNAi-mediated knockdowns, and genetic overexpression. Finally, many of the roles linked to NAEs in higher eukaryotes, such as the elevated levels of NAE14:0 in the presence of fungal xylanase in plants, the anti-inflammatory effects linked to NAE16:0, the role of NAE18:0 as an immunomodulator and apoptosis-inducer, and NAE18:1 as a regulator of food intake, are subsets of larger research areas already being modeled in D. discoideum. We have demonstrated that the slime mold D. discoideum possesses a similar NAE profile and a FAAH that acts on a similarly broad set of NAE substrates as those found in higher eukaryotic organisms. Furthermore, we have demonstrated the ability to modulate the levels of NAEs in vivo. Given its genetic tractability and broad use as a model organism to study many cellular processes, we propose that D. discoideum would be a suitable model in which to study NAE-mediated signaling. Given the large number of human physiological conditions associated with NAE-mediated signaling, the elucidation of these pathways in D. discoideum could have much broader implications on human health. Supplementary Material Supplemental Figure 1: Click here to view. 