 Global stimulation of Dictyostelium with different chemoattractants elicits multiple transient signaling responses, including synthesis of cAMP and cGMP, actin polymerization, activation of kinases ERK2, TORC2, and phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase, and Ras-GTP accumulation. Mechanisms that down-regulate these responses are poorly understood. Here we examine transient activation of TORC2 in response to chemically distinct chemoattractants, cAMP and folate, and suggest that TORC2 is regulated by adaptive, desensitizing responses to stimulatory ligands that are independent of downstream, feedback, or feedforward circuits. Cells with acquired insensitivity to either folate or cAMP remain fully responsive to TORC2 activation if stimulated with the other ligand. Thus TORC2 responses to cAMP or folate are not cross-inhibitory. Using a series of signaling mutants, we show that folate and cAMP activate TORC2 through an identical GEF/Ras pathway but separate receptors and G protein couplings. Because the common GEF/Ras pathway also remains fully responsive to one chemoattractant after desensitization to the other, GEF/Ras must act downstream and independent of adaptation to persistent ligand stimulation. When initial chemoattractant concentrations are immediately diluted, cells rapidly regain full responsiveness. We suggest that ligand adaptation functions in upstream inhibitory pathways that involve chemoattractant-specific receptor/G protein complexes and regulate multiple response pathways. INTRODUCTION The seven-transmembrane receptors activate multiple downstream signaling cascades via heterotrimeric G protein–dependent and –independent pathways in all Eukarya. When activated, however, these receptors often elicit only transient responses. Downstream pathways are rapidly deactivated, and cells may become insensitive to the stimulating ligand concentration. Cells remain unresponsive if the stimulus is maintained persistently but regain sensitivity as ligand concentrations decline. Sensory adaptation to a persistent stimulus is essential to discern input directionality and enable detection of diverse stimuli within a mixture of varying amplitudes. More broadly, such responses enable homeostatic balance to rapid hormonal perturbations. Loss of sensitivity to chemoattractants is essential during many phases of the Dictyostelium life cycle. Dictyostelium grow as single-celled organisms and use folate as a nutrient-sensing chemoattractant during growth. On depletion of food sources, however, Dictyostelium are induced to enter multicellular development. During early development, Dictyostelium secrete cAMP, which functions as a chemoattractant. Cells respond to the extracellular cAMP signal by moving inward toward the source of cAMP synthesis and secreting additional cAMP. Thus cells coalesce at signaling centers and aggregate, but the cAMP signal is also relayed outward to recruit and synchronize additional cells. Still, Dictyostelium respond only transiently to a cAMP stimulus and then enter an insensitive phase characterized by arrested cellular movement and attenuated cAMP synthesis. Once the extracellular cAMP is degraded by secreted phosphodiesterase, cells regain sensitivity to cAMP and reinitiate a cycle of sensitization/desensitization, which ensures inward directional movement toward the center of cAMP synthesis but an outwardly relayed cAMP signal. Many molecular pathways in Dictyostelium respond transiently to cAMP receptor stimulation. These include activation of adenylyl and guanylyl cyclases, actin polymerization, activation of ERK2 kinase and phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase, ion influx, and Ras GDP-GTP cycling. However, the mechanisms that regulate the multiple deactivating pathways are very poorly understood. Here we dissect the regulation of the TOR kinase complex 2, which also exhibits activating/deactivating responses to cAMP. TORC2 phosphorylates a C-terminal HM regulatory motif within two target substrates of Dictyostelium, AGC kinases PKBR1 and AKT. Relative in vivo TORC2 kinase activity can thus be quantified by immunoblot assay using a specific phospho-motif antibody. Stimulation of Dictyostelium with the chemoattractants cAMP and folate leads to very rapid but transient activation of TORC2. TORC2 phosphorylation of AKT and PKBR1 is independent of the lipid kinase PI3K ; however, data from several groups indicate a dependence on RasC activation. By treating cells with cAMP and/or folate in various combinations, we show that cells that developed insensitivity to one chemoattractant can still activate TORC2 in response to the other ligand. TORC2 responses to cAMP or folate thus are not cross-inhibited. Furthermore, using a series of signaling mutants, we show that folate and cAMP responses require the identical GEF/RasC pathway but separate upstream receptor/G protein couplings. This common GEF/Ras pathway is also insensitive to cross-inhibition; cells that have become desensitized to RasC activation by one chemoattractant remain responsive to the other ligand. Whereas downstream TORC2 kinase deactivation may be regulated by a negative feedback loop or a delayed inhibitory feedforward pathway centered on modulating RasC-GTP levels, our data indicate that acquired insensitivity to persistent chemoattractant stimulation must function independently of a common GEF/RasC pathway and more likely occurs via an upstream inhibitory pathway. We suggest that desensitization to continuous chemoattractant stimulation involves an adaptive response mediated by the chemoattractant-specific receptor/G protein complexes, thus insulating the cAMP and folate pathways and preventing their cross-adaptation. RESULTS Transient TORC2 activation by chemoattractants cAMP and folate During development, Dictyostelium secrete cAMP with highly regulated periodicities. These cAMP pulses elicit corresponding periodic responses in a series of downstream pathways, including ERK2 phosphorylation, adenylyl and guanylyl cyclase activation, and cell shape change. Because TORC2 phosphorylation of the AKT and PKBR1 kinases of Dictyostelium is also cAMP stimulated, we were interested to determine whether TORC2 kinase activity also oscillated during development. Cells were differentiated in shaking culture and allowed to establish endogenous cAMP oscillations. Cell aliquots were assayed by immunoblot using antibodies specific to either the phospho-form of ERK2 or to the TORC2 phosphorylated C-terminal sequence identical in both AKT and PKBR1. Phospho-ERK2 showed characteristic maxima at ∼6-min intervals, which parallels endogenous extracellular cAMP signaling ; TORC2 phosphorylation of PKBR1 and AKT followed similar temporal kinetics to that of phospho-ERK2. We also looked at relative TORC2 phosphorylation levels of PKBR1 during normal develop on solid substrata in the absence of exogenous cAMP stimulation. TORC2 phosphorylation of PKBR1 is maximal at 5–15 h of development, approximating times of maximal in vivo cAMP signaling. FIGURE 1: Chemoattractant-mediated TORC2 phosphorylation of AKT and PKBR1. Spontaneous oscillations of AKT, PKBR1, and ERK2 phosphorylation in Dictyostelium. Cells were pulsed with a 75 nM final concentration of cAMP every 6 min for 6 h. Cells were washed,... Because TORC2 is also activated by the chemoattractant folate, we sought to determine a developmental stage at which cells were responsive to both stimuli and to then assess the contributing effects of the different chemoattractants. Cells were stimulated at different times of development with exogenous saturating levels of either cAMP or folate and TORC2 activity assayed. The cells showed nearly identical response to cAMP at all stages examined. Quiescent cells had only low levels of TORC2 phosphorylation of PKBR1 and AKT, but phosphorylation levels rose rapidly but transiently and declined rapidly to basal levels. Thus the TORC2 pathway activation is quick but transitory, indicating a slightly delayed, antagonistic regulatory response to cAMP. Folate-stimulated phosphorylation of PKBR1/AKT by TORC2 showed similar activating and inhibiting regulatory profiles in undifferentiated cells. TORC2 phosphorylation of AKT and PKBR1 was very rapid, but dephosphorylation was equally rapid. However, unlike with cAMP, only undifferentiated cells were maximally responsive to folate; folate response diminished significantly as differentiation proceeded. Nonetheless, the data indicate a stage at which cells are equally responsive to cAMP and folate for TORC2 activation. When cells from the same culture are stimulated with either cAMP or folate, they elicit very similar responses for TORC2 phosphorylation of PKBR1 and AKT and for phosphorylation of the previously identified PKBR1/AKT substrates PHAPS, GacQ, and SHAPS. Of interest, folate stimulation also elicited a weak secondary but reproducible activation of TORC2 at ∼120 s that was not observed with cAMP. Because folate is able to activate adenylyl cyclase, we postulated that the reactivation of TORC2 might result from a secondary cellular response to cAMP. To test this directly, we studied TORC2 response to folate in aca -null cells that lack adenylyl cyclase A. Although wild-type cells are able to mount a secondary TORC2 activation response to folate, the aca -null cells did not. These data indicate that the secondary TORC2 response is cAMP dependent, but, more significantly, suggest that cells deactivated to folate may still be responsive to cAMP. FIGURE 2: Secondary activation of TORC2 phosphorylation of AKT and PKBR1 after folate stimulation is caused by increases in cAMP. WT and aca -null cells were stimulated with 50 μM folate, and TORC2 phosphorylation of AKT and PKBR1 was assayed by immunoblot... Loss of cellular response to cAMP and folate The rapid kinetics of activation/deactivation of TORC2 can occur via several mechanistic pathways. TORC2 activation could induce a negative feedback signal that directly suppresses TORC2. In addition, ligand stimulation could elicit a fast, TORC2-activating response but a more slowly functioning inhibitory signal. Furthermore, cellular response to an initial ligand concentration may only be transitory; cells may then develop insensitivity to a persistent, nonvarying stimulus. To analyze the potential for this latter response, we first determined cAMP concentration sensitivity for TORC2 phosphorylation of PKBR1 and AKT. These stimulation data closely match the G protein–dependent, high-affinity binding sites for cAMP receptor CAR1. Next cells were stimulated with various concentrations of cAMP, allowed to deactivate, and then restimulated with a saturating dose of cAMP. Samples were assayed for PKBR1 and AKT phosphorylation 30 s after the initial stimulus and after the secondary stimulus. Data show that the secondary response to saturating cAMP is inversely proportional to the initial cAMP stimulus. These data are consistent with cells becoming insensitive to a persistent, nonvarying cAMP stimulus. FIGURE 3: Adaptation of TORC2 activation to cAMP and folate. cAMP dose–response activation of AKT and PKBR1. Cells were treated with various concentrations of cAMP and samples collected after 30 s. TORC2 phosphorylation of AKT and PKBR1 was assayed... Because Dictyostelium secrete a cAMP PDE, it is possible that the deactivating responses observed result from ligand clearing, as we previously showed for ERK2 regulation, and not simply from ligand insensitivity. To examine this potential effect on TORC2 activity, we stimulated cells with saturating levels of cAMP in the presence or absence of dithiothreitol, an inhibitor of the secreted cAMP PDE of Dictyostelium. DTT preserved input cAMP levels, and we observed no differences in phosphorylation of PKBR1 and AKT between the treated and untreated cell populations. Cells remained adapted for 10 min. Thus the rapid decline in PKBR1/AKT phosphorylation is not the result of fluctuations in extracellular cAMP levels. We also determined the dose–response effects of folate on TORC2 phosphorylation of PKBR1 and AKT. These dose-response data are similar to those for the cellular G protein–dependent, high-affinity binding state for folate. The initial and secondary responses of TORC2 to folate exhibited a desensitizing behavior similar to that observed for cAMP and indicate that inhibitory signal strength for both cAMP and folate is proportional to the stimuli concentration; folate is not subject to significant degradation or modification during this brief time course. Cellular responses to cAMP and folate are not cross-inhibitory Because cAMP and folate appear to elicit similar responses to TORC2 signaling, we sought to use related assays to determine components that were common or distinct between the two pathways. We stimulated cells with a saturating dose of cAMP, allowed cells to adapt, and restimulated them with either additional cAMP or a saturating dose of folate. Cells remained unresponsive to the secondary cAMP stimulus but were fully responsive to folate. As a response control, naive cells were also stimulated with saturating folate; these showed identical response to cells previously treated with cAMP. Thus, although cAMP-treated cells became insensitive to cAMP, they were fully responsive to stimulation by folate. FIGURE 4: TORC2 phosphorylation of AKT and PKBR1 does not cross-adapt to different chemoattractants. Cells stimulated with saturating doses of cAMP remain responsive to folate. Cells were stimulated with 10 μM cAMP and then stimulated with either 10... In a reciprocal experiment, folate-stimulated cells could not be reactivated with an additional folate stimulus but were responsive for TORC2 activation by saturating cAMP. These data indicate that the inhibitory pathways for cAMP and folate are ligand specific and do not elicit cross-regulation. Thus the inhibitory targets must lie upstream of TORC2-mediated phosphorylation. To further examine the potential for cross-inhibition, we modified our approach by using subsaturating doses of both cAMP and folate. Here, we would predict that cAMP-stimulated cells would be partially responsive to a secondary stimulation with the same subsaturating dose of cAMP but again would be fully responsive to a subsaturating dose of folate. Indeed, that was observed. Similarly, folate-stimulated cells were partially responsive to a secondary subsaturating dose of folate but were fully responsive to subsaturating doses of cAMP. Chemoattractants cAMP and folate use a common GEF/Ras pathway but distinct receptor/G protein couplings Because cells do not exhibit cross-inhibition to cAMP and folate, we were interested to determine components in the activation pathways that were unique to the individual stimuli and thus may participate in adaptive response. We used previously characterized cells that are deficient for a variety of signaling proteins. Cells were stimulated with either cAMP or folate and characterized for TORC2 phosphorylation of PKBR1 and AKT. cAMP stimulation exhibited absolute dependence on cAMP receptor CAR1, the single Gβ, and Gα2. These are well-characterized components that define cAMP signaling for several other responses. None of the other Gα proteins studied was required for cAMP-mediated activation of TORC2 or affected kinase inactivation. FIGURE 5: cAMP and folate use different receptors and G protein couplings but the same GEF/Ras pathway to mediate AKT and PKBR1 phosphorylation. Strains deficient for different signaling components were stimulated with 50 μM folate in starvation buffer... The folate receptor has not been identified, but TORC2 response to folate requires the single Gβ and Gα4, components of the known folate cascade. Neither CAR1 nor Gα2 is essential for folate signaling. We also examined cells lacking RasC or its specific activating protein, GefA, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor. These proteins are suggested to function highly proximal to receptor/G protein complexes and were shown to participate in TORC2 signal response. We further demonstrate the requirement of both GefA and RasC for TORC2 activation by folate and cAMP in the same cell. We suggest that overlapping signaling circuits for cAMP and folate mediate the activation of a common RasC/TORC2 pathway. FIGURE 6: RasC activation does not cross-adapt to different chemoattractants. Cells stimulated with saturating doses of cAMP remain responsive to folate. FLAG-RasC–expressing cells were stimulated with 10 μM cAMP and then stimulated with either... RasC responses to cAMP and folate are not cross-inhibitory Because both cAMP and folate require RasC to elicit TORC2 signaling, we sought to determine whether this pathway was also insensitive to cross-inhibition by the different chemoattractants. RasC-GTP levels rapidly increase in response to a cAMP stimulus and return to basal levels within 60 s. We therefore stimulated cells with saturating cAMP and, after RasC-GTP down-regulation, secondarily stimulated with either additional cAMP or with a saturating dose of folate. Relative RasC activation was monitored in cells expressing FLAG-RasC, normalizing RasC-GTP levels, determined by interaction-specific affinity, to that of total RasC in α-FLAG immunoblot assays. Whereas RasC is initially activated rapidly by cAMP, cells were unresponsive to a secondary cAMP stimulus; however, RasC-GTP rapidly reaccumulated in response to folate. In a reciprocal experiment, folate-stimulated cells could also not be reactivated for RasC-GTP signaling by an additional folate stimulus but were fully responsive for RasC-GTP activation by cAMP. These data indicate that the inhibitory pathways for cAMP and folate are ligand specific, do not cross-regulate RasC/TORC2 signaling, and may require distinct receptor/G protein couplings. Folate and cAMP responses are nonadditive The data indicate that neither the RasC nor TORC2 pathways are cross-inhibited by folate and cAMP. Potentially, there may be sequestered or compartmentalized RasC/TORC2 linkages that respond uniquely to either folate or cAMP but not to both. Thus direct inhibition of a cAMP-specific RasC/TORC2 pathway may have no effect on folate activation of a completely independent RasC/TORC2 circuit. A corollary to this predicts that such multiple RasC/TORC2 pathways would each be activated independently of the other and thus must collectively exhibit an additive activation response when both chemoattractant ligands are applied simultaneously. To address this mechanistically, we examined whether cells responded differently to saturating doses of cAMP and folate, alone or in combination. Cells were stimulated with either cAMP or folate or with both and assayed for TORC2 phosphorylation of PKBR1 and AKT. Only small comparative differences are seen among the various assays. Cells were not hyperactivated by combining folate and cAMP in a single stimulus. Similarly, maximal RasC activation is observed regardless of whether cells are treated with folate and cAMP, singularly or in combination. These data indicate that the folate and cAMP stimulatory pathways are functionally independent but converge on a common downstream circuit comprising RasC/TORC2 components. FIGURE 7: TORC2 and RasC responses to folate and cAMP are nonadditive. AKT and PKBR1 phosphorylations are nonadditive in response to a mixture of saturated cAMP and folate. Cells were stimulated either with 10 μM cAMP plus 50 μM folate or 10... Rapid cellular resensitization to cAMP and folate Because TORC2 activity oscillates in response to endogenous cAMP fluctuations during normal Dictyostelium development, TORC2 must be subject to both desensitizing and resensitizing regulation. We suggest that re-response must require ligand clearance. To follow the kinetics for resensitization in culture, we mimicked ligand degradation by instantaneous dilution of cellular samples by 10-fold. Cells were stimulated with subsaturating 100 nM cAMP, allowed to deactivate, and diluted 10-fold into fresh buffer, immediately reducing cAMP levels from 100 to 10 nM. The diluted cells were either left untreated or restimulated at various times with 100 nM cAMP and then assayed for TORC2 reactivation. The untreated cells showed no TORC2 reactivation. The diluted cells were initially unresponsive to secondary stimulation but showed weak activation within 15 s and half-maximal reactivation within ∼30 s. Thus once cAMP concentrations decline, cells undergo extremely rapid resensitization. FIGURE 8: Very rapid deadaptation of TORC2 to cAMP and folate. Cells become rapidly reresponsive to cAMP. Cells were stimulated with 100 nM cAMP, and TORC2 phosphorylation of AKT and PKBR1 was assayed by immunoblot at the times indicated. At... Similar results are seen with folate; after stimulation with 70 μM folate, cells were diluted 10-fold into fresh buffer, immediately reducing folate levels to 7 μM. The diluted cells were either left untreated or restimulated at various times with 70 μM folate and then assayed for TORC2 reactivation. Resensitization to folate may be more rapid than with cAMP, with half-maximal reactivation at <30 s. DISCUSSION During aggregation, Dictyostelium encounter oscillatory waves of cAMP that emanate and propagate outward from centers of cellular aggregation. As the cAMP wave approaches, Dictyostelium cells orient toward and migrate “up” the cAMP gradient and continue to respond to increasing cAMP concentrations until ligand binding reaches saturation. Simultaneously, cells secrete additional cAMP, which relays the oscillatory cAMP wave and recruits additional outlying cells. As the cells move through the concentration peak, however, the perceived cAMP gradient becomes spatially inverted, and cells deactivate most cAMP-regulated responses and become insensitive to further cAMP stimulation. Deactivation ensures that the propagated cAMP wave is relayed outward and also that cells do not alter their inward directional movement by reorienting toward the reversed cAMP gradient. With time, the extracellular cAMP signal is hydrolyzed by secreted PDE, and cells regain responsiveness to the next oncoming wave of cAMP. Many intracellular signaling pathways in Dictyostelium undergo activated/deactivated cycling in response to cAMP oscillation. These include ion flux, protein and lipid kinase regulation, cAMP and cGMP synthesis, and actin polymerization. Their coordinated regulations are required for both chemotactic movement and cAMP signal relay. Response down-regulation is essential for chemotactic aggregation during development, but many of these pathways also show similar on-off regulatory responses to the chemoattractant folate, a bacterial byproduct, during growth phase. We dissected the sensitivity of Dictyostelium TORC2 kinase activation to the chemically distinct chemoattractants folate and cAMP. When cells are continually exposed to a nonvarying stimulus, the immediate response to either ligand is transient. The TORC2 substrates AKT and PKBR1 are rapidly phosphorylated and almost equally rapidly dephosphorylated. TORC2 can be reactivated in response to a secondary stimulus of the same ligand but only if the initial stimulus is subsaturating. Nonetheless, the secondary activation of TORC2 is never maximal but is inversely proportional to the initial activation. Proposed mechanisms for chemoattractant regulation of TORC2 must integrate inhibition, persistence, and differential sensitivity to varying ligand concentrations within the chemical gradient. Using a series of specific Dictyostelium signaling mutants, we determined that folate and cAMP activate TORC2 in the same cell, but through interaction with separate receptors and different G protein complexes. Nonetheless, both chemoattractants use an identical GefA/RasC pathway to mediate TORC2 activation. TORC2 may be deactivated through depletion of RasC-GTP levels via negative feedback loops or incoherent feedforward circuits. TORC2-activated AKT/PKBR1 phosphorylates ScaA, a GefA scaffolding protein, and phosphorylated Sca is suggested to suppress GefA stimulation of RasC-GTP. Alternatively, receptor activation may generate rapid activation of GefA and RasC-GTP production but a delayed RasGAP signal, which more slowly returns RasC to its GDP-bound basal state. FIGURE 9: RasC/TORC2 regulation by chemokine signaling. cAMP binds receptor CAR1 and induces dissociation of its coupled heterotrimeric G protein complex Gα2/βγ. Folate binds its receptor and dissociates its coupled heterotrimeric G... Nonetheless, we showed that cells that are unable to respond to one chemoattractant can fully activate TORC2 when stimulated with the other ligand. Accordingly, neither RasC nor its GEF or GAP regulators are targets for persistent ligand-mediated down-regulation. We therefore propose that downstream inhibitory effects mediated via GefA or rasGAP must be transient and subject to reversion to an initial basal state. Thus ligand response inhibition would occur upstream of RasC through an independent adaptive pathway involving desensitization of ligand-specific receptor/G protein complexes. In sensory and hormonal networks, adaptation or stimulus desensitization expands the range of signal strength detection. In these G protein–coupled receptor systems, desensitization may be mediated by receptor phosphorylation and interaction with arrestin. The mechanistic targets for adaptation in Dictyostelium, however, are not clear. We suggest that inhibitory signaling must function upstream of RasC regulation and involve specific receptor/G protein complexes. However, the rapidity of TORC2 adaptive response in Dictyostelium limits the potential involvement of receptor modification. Phosphorylation of cytosolic serines in the C-terminus of CAR1 can be detected within 10 s of cAMP stimulation, but phosphorylation half-time requires ∼2 and >10 min to reach a plateau. In addition, dephosphorylation of CAR1 is significantly delayed in comparison to deadaptive kinetics for TORC2. Furthermore, cells that only express nonphosphorylatable CAR1 variants exhibit WT TORC2 adaptive responses. Although the folate receptor has not been identified and studied biochemically, the data seem to preclude receptor modification as a defining motif for adaptive regulation. The temporal kinetics for cAMP-stimulated Gα2/Gβγ dissociation is very rapid and anticipates RasC-GTP accumulation and TORC2 activation. 6 ). The kinetics for Gα2/Gβγ reassociation and TORC2 deadaption upon removal of cAMP are also very similar. Although comparable studies on Gα4 do not exist, the activation of TORC2 appears very tightly coordinated with that of G proteins. Nonetheless, Gα2/Gβγ is constitutively dissociated in the presence of persistent cAMP stimulation, whereas TORC2 is continuously down-regulated under identical conditions. Thus the Gα2/Gβγ assembly state is not sufficient to determine TORC2 activity; adaptation must function independently. It is generally considered that released Gβγ is the activation module for heterotrimeric G protein signaling in Dictyostelium. These data primarily derive from genetically based experiments, however, rather than from direct biochemical interactive proof. Thus a role for Gα in cAMP or folate signaling cannot be excluded. Indeed, data suggest both positive and inhibitory roles for Gα in Dictyostelium. Potentially, dissociated Gα and/or Gβγ convey an adaptive signal. For Gα, this might involve modification, sequestration, or the regulation of a specific regulator of G protein signaling, as suggested in other systems. It is also interesting that Gα2 is rapidly phosphorylated upon cAMP stimulation. Gβ function may be regulated by modification or phosducin-mediated assembly with Gγ. Regardless, G protein alterations that mediate adaptation must be rapidly reversible upon ligand removal and only target ligand-dissociated Gα/Gβγ subunits without affecting the additional Gα/Gβγ complexes. We also suggest that adaptive mechanisms that regulate RasC-GTP cycling and TORC2 activity may have broad effect on cellular response and globally regulate other rapid cAMP- and folate-stimulated processes, including guanylyl cyclase and PI3K activity. Indeed, guanylyl cyclase responses to folate and cAMP are also not cross-inhibitory. It is less apparent whether the more slowly responding or G protein–independent cAMP-regulated pathways are similarly affected. The time scale for RasC-GTP cycling and TORC2 deadaptation is significantly more rapid than that previously observed for adenylyl cyclase and other processes. Although we propose that adaptive mechanisms must function upstream, B ), our data do not exclude the transitory roles for negative feedback loops or feedforward circuits that inhibit the downstream excitable RasC network. Although both upstream and downstream events may act in concert, any downstream inhibitory effects must be transitory, allowing the excitable RasC network to rapidly respond to heterologous ligand stimulation. This posits another signaling mechanism that resets the initial basal state. Several models have been proposed to explain how chemotaxing cells can strongly polarize their intracellular components within extremely shallow extracellular chemokine gradients. Most incorporate a local activation pathway that is proportional to ligand stimulation, and a global, diffusible inhibitory circuit that is equally active at all loci in the cell. Our data suggest additional pathways that may intersect with such proposals and support a mechanism for insulating cAMP and folate pathways to prevent cross-inhibition. MATERIALS AND METHODS Dictyostelium strains Dictyostelium were grown and differentiated in shaking culture as previously described. Spontaneous oscillations were in shaking culture. Log-phase cells were developed on preboiled black filters and cells removed for assay at different developmental times. Mutant strains used in this study are for genes Gα2, Gα3, Gα4, Gα5, Gα7, Gα8, Gα9, CAR1, Gβ, ACA, gefA, and rasC and were previously described. ERK2, AKT, and PKBR1 phosphorylation cAMP and folate stimulations were previously described. Phosphorylation immunoblot assays of ERK2, AKT and PKBR1 were previously described. Antibodies were anti–phospho-PDK2/HM site ; anti–phospho-AKT substrate Akt substrate antibody); anti–phospho-ERK2 ; and anti-actin. RasC-GTP assay RasC-GTP levels were monitored using previously described and optimized methods. Briefly, Ras-GTP was isolated from cells by interaction with a purified glutathione S -transferase–Ras-binding domain component. Specific RasC activation was monitored in cells expressing FLAG-RasC, normalizing RasC-GTP levels to that of total RasC. Supplementary Material Supplemental Materials: Click here to view. 