 During aggregation of Dictyostelium discoideum, nondissipating, symmetrical, outwardly moving waves of cAMP direct cells towards aggregation centers. It has been assumed that the spatial and temporal characteristics of the front and back of each cAMP wave regulate both chemokinesis and chemotaxis. However, during the period preceding aggregation, cells acquire not only the capacity to chemotax in a spatial gradient of cAMP, but also in a spatial gradient of Ca 2+. The null mutant of the putative IplA Ca 2+ channel gene, iplA −, undergoes normal chemotaxis in spatial gradients of cAMP and normal chemokinetic responses to increasing temporal gradients of cAMP, both generated in vitro. However, iplA − cells lose the capacity to undergo chemotaxis in response to a spatial gradient of Ca 2+, suggesting that IplA is either the Ca 2+ chemotaxis receptor or an essential component of the Ca 2+ chemotaxis regulatory pathway. In response to natural chemotactic waves generated by wild-type cells, the chemokinetic response of iplA − cells to the temporal dynamics of the cAMP wave is intact, but the capacity to reorient in the direction of the aggregation center at the onset of each wave is lost. These results suggest that transient Ca 2+ gradients formed between cells at the onset of each natural cAMP wave augment reorientation towards the aggregation center. If this hypothesis proves correct, it will provide a more complex contextual framework for interpreting D. discoideum chemotaxis. Key words: cAMP chemotaxis, Microfluidic chamber, Ca 2+ binding, Inositol trisphosphate receptor, Mechanoreceptor Introduction Extracellular cations play essential roles in cell polarity, motility and chemotaxis. For that reason, they must be present at optimum concentrations in the natural environment. For the soil amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum to achieve maximum velocity either the extracellular concentration of Ca 2+ must reach 10 mM or the concentration of K + reach 40 mM. Moreover, for D. discoideum amoebae to orient in a spatial gradient of the chemoattractant cAMP, either Ca 2+ must reach 5 mM, or K + or Na + reach 15 mM. In addition to its role in facilitating motility and chemotactic orientation, Ca 2+ also acts as a chemoattractant. When developing cells attain chemotactic responsiveness to spatial gradients of extracellular cAMP, they also attain chemotactic responsiveness to spatial gradients of extracellular Ca 2+. Deletion of the gene for the putative sodium/hydrogen exchanger Nhe1 resulted in the loss of K + as a facilitator of polarity and motility, and the loss of Na + or K + as a facilitator of chemotactic orientation in a spatial gradient of cAMP. Deletion of Nhe1, however, did not affect Ca 2+ facilitation of these behaviors. These results indicated that one or more plasma membrane proteins other than Nhe1 was involved in the facilitation of motility and chemotaxis by Ca 2+. To identify these membrane proteins, we first searched for, but did not find in D. discoideum, an ortholog of CaR, a bona fide G-protein-coupled Ca 2+ receptor involved in motility and chemotaxis in higher animal cells. We therefore turned our attention to inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor-like protein A, a membrane protein in D. discoideum with homology to the inositol trisphosphate receptors of higher eukaryotes. These six transmembrane proteins function as homotetrameric Ca 2+ channels, possessing a long cytoplasmic N-terminal region with a binding site for Ins P 3 and other regulatory proteins, and a shorter C-terminal region with putative binding sites for additional regulatory proteins. Ins P 3 Rs are usually located in the membrane of endoplasmic reticulum and vesicles, but are also found at low levels in the plasma membrane. In the endoplasmic reticulum, they play roles in Ca 2+ homeostasis. Deletion of the iplA gene in D. discoideum has been shown to block Ca 2+ influx across the plasma membrane in response to a global cAMP signal. Mutant iplA − cells, however, were found to undergo chemotaxis in a spatial gradient of cAMP released from a micropipette, leading to the conclusion that Ca 2+ influx stimulated by cAMP was not necessary for cAMP chemotaxis. It was subsequently discovered that iplA − cells lost shear-induced motility. Together, these results suggested that IplA was a strong candidate for a cell surface molecule or a molecule in the signal transduction pathway that mediated the facilitating effects of extracellular Ca 2+ on motility and cAMP chemotaxis, and/or Ca 2+ chemotaxis. Here, we provide evidence that IplA plays selective roles in the extracellular effects of Ca 2+ on cell behavior. It is necessary for Ca 2+ facilitation of increased velocity, but not for the increases caused by the alternative cation K +. More interestingly, IplA is essential for chemotaxis in a spatial gradient of Ca 2+, but not for chemotaxis in a spatial gradient of cAMP. It is also not essential for the chemokinetic responses to temporal waves of cAMP that mimic the temporal dynamics of natural cAMP waves. Given that iplA − cells chemotax normally in spatial gradients of cAMP generated in vitro and exhibit normal chemokinetic responses to temporal waves of cAMP generated in vitro, we fully expected iplA − cells to behave normally to natural waves of cAMP generated in an aggregation territory. This was based on the assumption that the complete behavior of amoebae in natural aggregation territory could be explained by their behavior in spatial and temporal gradients of cAMP. Instead, we found that although iplA − cells undergo a normal chemokinetic surge in velocity in response to the increasing phase of each naturally relayed cAMP wave in wild-type aggregation territories, they lose the ability to reorient towards the aggregation center at the onset of the front of each wave. These results support a hypothesis, previously entertained, that transient Ca 2+ gradients might be generated between cells at the onset of the front of each natural relayed cAMP wave that augment orientation towards the center of an aggregation territory, the source of each wave. If this hypothesis proves to be true, it would provide a more complex context for interpreting mutations that affect natural chemotaxis. Results IplA localization In D. discoideum, IplA, a presumed Ca 2+ channel, contains six transmembrane domains. The loop that includes the membrane spanning regions 5 and 6 has been shown in human IplAs to include the Ca 2+ transport domain. Models generated for the human IplA ortholog suggest that the N- and C-terminal regions are probably cytoplasmic, whether in the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum or the plasma membrane. To assess the localization of IplA, we generated the mutant strain iplA − complemented with a plasmid in which wild-type iplA + was linked to GFP, iplA − /iplA + -GFP. The iplA + -GFP construct was under the regulation of the actin promoter. In living iplA − /iplA + -GFP cells, IplA–GFP localized in vesicles throughout the cytoplasm. These vesicles also abutted the plasma membrane. When brightness was enhanced to assess plasma membrane localization, the increased brightness of the associated vesicles precluded visualization of low plasma membrane fluorescence. To visualize membranes, we isolated plasmid membrane ghosts by Triton extraction according to the methods of Condeelis. Image enhancement revealed fluorescence in the plasma membranes. Membranes from iplA − cells analyzed similarly exhibited no autofluorescence. A control strain was generated in the iplA − background in which only the GFP gene was placed under the regulation of the actin promoter. Fluorescence of GFP in strain iplA − -GFP was diffuse throughout the cytoplasm of living cells and not associated with the plasma membrane. Together, these results indicate that IplA is localized primarily in vesicular membranes in the cytoplasm and suggest low levels in the plasma membrane. Fig. 1. IplA, a putative Ca 2+ channel, containing six transmembrane domains, is involved in Ca 2+ binding and is distributed at high levels in cytoplasmic vesicles and very low levels in the plasma membrane. A general model for IplA in a membrane, based on... Ca 2+ binding To test whether IplA plays a role in Ca 2+ binding at the cell surface, cells were treated with NaN 3 for 30 minutes, which inhibits Ca 2+ transport, and then incubated with 45 Ca 2+ for 5 minutes. In three separate experiments, iplA − cells exhibited respective decreases in Ca 2+ binding to 73, 61 and 64% that of control cells, suggesting that at least a portion of Ca 2+ binding to the plasma membrane is mediated by IplA. Behavioral assays To test for selective Ca 2+ -dependent defects in the iplA − mutant, we employed three chambers. The Sykes–Moore chamber is round with upper and lower glass walls, and a metal clamped rim with inlet and outlet ports. The ports are attached to pumps, allowing perfusion with buffer in order to assess basic cell motility in the absence of cAMP. This chamber can also be used to assess behavior in response to temporal waves of cAMP, generated by a pump system. These waves mimic the temporal dynamics of a series of natural cAMP waves, without establishing spatial gradients of cAMP. Fig. 2. Three different chambers were used to assess cell behavior. The Sykes–Moore chamber. The Zigmond gradient chamber. The microfluidic chamber. Chambers are described in the Results section. Shear force and the capacity to generate a... However, because the Sykes–Moore chamber is round, it generates randomly directed shear forces that can affect the behavior of cells by activating IplA, a putative mechanoreceptor. The Zigmond chamber consists of a bridge, which supports cells, bordered by two wells. If one well is filled with buffer alone and the other with buffer plus cAMP, a cAMP gradient is generated across the bridge and chemotaxis can then be assessed at the single cell level. If both wells are filled with the same buffer solution lacking cAMP, basic motile behavior can be assessed at low cell density in the absence of shear forces. Although the Zigmond chamber is effective in assessing chemotaxis in a spatial gradient of cAMP, it is ineffective in assessing Ca 2+ chemotaxis, given that Ca 2+ gradients rapidly dissipate because of the high diffusion rate of the cation. To test for Ca 2+ chemotaxis, we designed a microfluidic chamber that generates stable Ca 2+ gradients. Although this chamber can be used to assess chemotaxis in spatial gradients of Ca 2+ or cAMP, it produces strong shear forces, which can effect flow-directed movement. Behavior of iplA − cells in the absence of cAMP As we previously reported for parental Ax2 cells, increasing the concentration of Ca 2+ in Tricine buffer from 5 to 10 mM, in the absence of cAMP, resulted in dramatic increases in the three measured cell motility parameters: instantaneous velocity, the proportion of cells with instantaneous velocities of ≥9 μm/minute and positive flow. All of these increases proved statistically significant. And as previously reported, increasing the Ca 2+ concentration in TB from 0 to 5 mM in the absence of cAMP resulted in an increase in the directional persistence of translocating cells that was statistically significant. Mutant iplA − cells did not show increases in velocity parameters comparable with the increases in wild-type cells when the Ca 2+ concentration in TB was increased to 10 mM. Mutant iplA − also did not undergo an increase in directional persistence when the Ca 2+ concentration was increased from 0 to 5 mM, although they did undergo the increase when the Ca 2+ concentration was increased to 10 mM. The defects in responsiveness of iplA − cells to 10 mM Ca 2+ were discernible in computer-generated perimeter tracks. The tracks of iplA − cells were on average more contracted than those of Ax2 cells. No major differences in cell shape were evident. Fig. 3. Mutant iplA − cells exhibit selective defects in the facilitation of velocity by Ca 2+. The behavior of mutant iplA − cells was compared with that of parental Ax2 and complemented iplA − /iplA + cells in a Sykes–Moore chamber... If IplA plays a selective role in the cationic facilitation of cell motility by Ca 2+ in the absence of cAMP, then cells of the null mutant iplA − and its parent strain Ax2 should exhibit no behavioral differences from wild-type cells when translocating in TB containing 40 mM K +, the facilitating concentration of this monovalent cation in the absence of added Ca 2+. This prediction is predicated on the discovery that K +, but not Ca 2+, facilitation is mediated by Nhe1. When perfused with a 40 mM K + solution in a Sykes–Moore chamber, all motility parameters were similar in iplA − and wild-type cells, supporting the conclusion that in the absence of cAMP, K + facilitation is mediated by Nhe1, not IplA and that Ca 2+ facilitation is mediated by IplA, not Nhe1. Motility and chemotactic orientation in a spatial gradient of cAMP As we previously reported for parental Ax2 cells, increasing the concentration of Ca 2+ in TB to 10 mM in a spatial gradient of cAMP caused an increase in the three motility parameters, instantaneous velocity, percentage of cells with instantaneous velocities of ≥9 μm/minute, and positive flow. Increasing the concentration from 0 to 5 mM caused an increase in directional persistence. In the case of iplA − cells in a spatial gradient of cAMP, there were less pronounced increases in the velocity parameters. Directional persistence, however, increased at 5 mM, as it did in Ax2 cells. The differences between iplA − and Ax2 cells were either less pronounced or negligible in a spatial gradient of cAMP than in the absence of cAMP. Only the differences in instantaneous velocity and percentage of cells with instantaneous velocities of ≥9 μm/minute were significant. These results are consistent with previous observations, especially on lateral pseudopodium formation and turning, indicating that a spatial gradient of cAMP enhances the effect of Ca 2+. Fig. 4. Mutant iplA − cells exhibit selective defects in Ca 2+ facilitation of velocity, but undergo normal chemotaxis in a spatial gradient of cAMP. Studies were performed in spatial gradients of cAMP generated in TB containing different Ca 2+ concentrations... As previously reported, when Ca 2+ was not added to a spatial gradient of cAMP generated in TB, Ax2 cells still underwent chemotaxis, but with a reduced chemotactic index of 0.34±0.35 and a percentage positive chemotaxis value of 80%. Also, as previously reported, Ax2 cells attained maximum chemotactic orientation when the Ca 2+ concentration was raised to 5 mM. Although relatively mobile, iplA − cells exhibited negligible chemotactic orientation in a spatial gradient of cAMP at 0 mM Ca 2+, but exhibited maximum chemotactic orientation, similar to that of Ax2 cells, when the concentration of Ca 2+ was raised to 5 mM. The relatively high efficiency of chemotaxis by iplA − cells in a spatial gradient of cAMP generated in TB containing 10 mM Ca 2+ was evident in representative perimeter tracks. These results support the earlier observations by Traynor et al.. They also indicate that as is the case for Ax2 cells, chemotactic orientation of iplA − cells in a nonfacilitating concentration of K + or Na + requires 5 mM Ca 2+, and this latter requirement is independent of IplA. If IplA functions specifically in the facilitation of maximum velocity, then the iplA − and Ax2 cells should exhibit similar maximum motility and chemotactic orientation in a spatial gradient of cAMP generated in TB containing 40 mM K +. When a spatial gradient of cAMP was generated in TB containing 40 mM K + with no added Ca 2+, the motility and chemotaxis parameters of iplA − cells were similar for Ax2 and iplA − cells. Responses to temporal gradients of cAMP In a naturally aggregating population of D. discoideum cells the pulses of cAMP released from cells at an aggregation center are relayed through the population as outwardly moving, nondissipating, symmetrical waves. In the front of each wave, an amoeba experiences an increasing temporal as well as an increasing spatial gradient of cAMP and in the back of each wave, it experiences a decreasing temporal as well as a decreasing spatial gradient of cAMP. At the peak and in the back of each wave, amoebae undergo a decrease polarity and directionality, and a dramatic decrease in velocity. At the onset of the front of next relayed wave, an amoeba reorients towards the aggregation center, and then moves in a rapid and persistent fashion towards the aggregation center, in what appears to be a relatively semi-blind fashion in response to the increasing temporal gradient of cAMP, which serves as chemokinetic signal. To test whether iplA − cells were capable of assessing the temporal dynamics of a wave, we challenged them with a series of four temporal waves generated in buffered salt solution with K + as the facilitating cation. The waves were generated in the absence of an established spatial gradient in a Sykes–Moore chamber attached to a pump system. Mutant iplA − cells underwent a transient increase in velocity in the increasing phase, and a decrease at the peak and in the decreasing phase, of a majority of the temporal cAMP waves, in a manner similar to that of parental Ax2 cells. Ten additional Ax2 and 10 additional iplA − cells responded in a similar fashion. Therefore, chemokinetic responsiveness to the increasing phases of cAMP waves generated in vitro, as well as chemotactic orientation in a spatial gradient of cAMP generated in vitro, are intact in iplA − cells. Fig. 5. Mutant iplA − cells undergo increases in instantaneous velocity in the increasing phase of a series of temporal waves of cAMP generated in a Sykes–Moor chamber. The temporal waves of cAMP approximate the temporal dynamics... Ca 2+ chemotaxis is lost in iplA − cells To test for Ca 2+ chemotaxis, a microfluidic chamber was employed in which stable Ca 2+ gradients were established. We first compared the behavior of Ax2 and iplA − cells in the chamber in uniform 10 mM Ca 2+. The parameter ‘rightward directionality’, movement in the direction of flow, was computed as the net distance traveled rightward divided by the total distance traveled. An RD of +1.00 represents absolute rightward directionality, an RD of 0.00 represents random directionality, and an increasing positive RD, from +0.01 to +0.99, reflects increasing rightward directionality. At a global concentration of 10 mM Ca 2+, in the absence of a Ca 2+ gradient, the mean instantaneous velocity of iplA − cells was 6.0±2.6 μm/minute, compared with 10.9±5.3 μm/minute for Ax2 cells, a reduction of 45%. The proportion of iplA − cells with instantaneous velocities ≥9 μm/minute was also well below that of Ax2 cells. The RD of Ax2 cells was +0.59±0.34, whereas the RD of iplA − cells was close to 0.00. The percentage of Ax2 cells exhibiting rightward movement was 87%, whereas that of iplA − cells was close to 50%, demonstrating that the direction of iplA − cells under strong flow was random. The loss of flow-induced directional movement and submaximal velocity by iplA − cells was apparent in a comparison of their perimeter tracks with those of Ax2. Similar results for iplA − cells were obtained at 20 and 30 mM Ca 2+. These defects were consistent with those previously reported using very different assays. Fig. 6. Mutant iplA − cells lose the capacity to undergo chemotaxis in a spatial gradient of Ca 2+ generated in a microfluidic chamber. Computing rightward directionality. x, net distance a cell moves to the right, the direction of flow; y, total... We then compared the behavior of iplA − and Ax2 cells in spatial gradients of cAMP generated in the microfluidic chamber. As previously demonstrated, although Ax2 cells translocated in the direction of flow in the absence of a cAMP gradient, they translocated in the direction of increasing cAMP in a spatial gradient of cAMP, with almost no bias to the right due to the direction of flow. Mutant iplA − cells moved up spatial gradients of cAMP with the same directionality as Ax2 cells. The chemotactic indices of Ax2 and iplA − cells in cAMP gradients in the microfluidic chamber were +0.35±0.35 and +0.30±0.30, respectively, and the percentage positive chemotaxis 90 and 84%, respectively. These results reinforce those obtained with the Zigmond chamber and micropipette assays, demonstrating again that chemotaxis in a spatial gradient of cAMP is intact in iplA − cells. We next tested whether iplA − cells underwent chemotaxis in Ca 2+ gradients generated in the microfluidic chamber. Parental Ax2 cells had a chemotactic index of +0.20±0.25, percent cells with a positive chemotactic index of 86% and an instantaneous velocity of 10.5±2.9 μm/minute, values very close to those we reported previously. The RD of Ax2 cells in a Ca 2+ gradient was +0.25±0.38, showing rightward bias. The bias can be recognized in representative perimeter tracks of Ax2 cells in a Ca 2+ gradient. In marked contrast, the chemotactic index of iplA − cells in similar Ca 2+ gradients was +0.01±0.29, a value indicating the loss of Ca 2+ chemotaxis. The percentage iplA − cells with a positive chemotactic index was 49%, close to 50%, the value for directional randomness. The differences between Ax2 and iplA − cells were statistically significant. We further tested a variety of Ca 2+ gradients varying in shape and concentration range, but observed no Ca 2+ chemotaxis. The RD of iplA − cells was −0.04±0.33, very close to 0.00, indicating again the loss of flow-induced directionality. These results demonstrate that although iplA − cells have fully retained the capacity to undergo positive chemotaxis in a spatial gradient of cAMP, they have lost the capacity to undergo chemotaxis in a spatial gradient of Ca 2+. The directional movement of Ax2 cells with a rightward bias in a spatial gradient of Ca 2+ and the random movement of iplA − cells with no rightward bias are reflected in a comparison of representative perimeter tracks. Complementation of iplA − rescues defective phenotype To test for complementation, we generated strain iplA − / iplA + -GFP, in which iplA + was under the regulation of the actin promoter in a nonintegrating plasmid. The three velocity parameters, instantaneous velocity, the proportion of cells with instantaneous velocities of ≥9 μm/cell, and positive flow, returned to wild-type levels in 10 mM Ca 2+ in the absence of cAMP and the chemotactic and mechanoreception defects were also rescued. The rescued levels were indistinguishable statistically from that of the wild-type parent strain, Ax2. These results demonstrate that the defects of iplA − cells were the direct result of the deletion of iplA + and not a second site mutation. Chemotaxis of iplA − cells in natural Ax2 aggregation territories If chemotaxis in a natural aggregation territory is regulated solely by the spatial and temporal dynamics of relayed waves of cAMP, as we have previously argued, then iplA − cells should undergo normal chemotaxis in natural chemotactic waves generated by wild-type cells. This prediction is predicated on their normal responses to spatial and temporal gradients of cAMP assayed in vitro. To test this prediction, we analyzed the behavior of vitally stained minority iplA − cells seeded in majority wild-type cell aggregation territories. Under these conditions, minority mutant cells are challenged with natural waves relayed by majority wild-type cells. Mutant iplA − cells were stained with DiI during growth, mixed with unlabeled Ax2 cells at a ratio of 1:9 and the mixture of cells allowed to undergo aggregation on a plastic surface in buffered salt solution, in which K + was the facilitating cation. In the carpet of mixed cells established on the plastic surface, precocious cells, which act as aggregation centers, release pulses of cAMP and these signals are then relayed through the population as nondissipating outwardly moving waves. The relayed waves can be deduced from the behavior of majority, unlabeled Ax2 cells, which undergo transient increases in velocity towards the aggregation center in the front of each wave, and decreases at the peak and in the back of each wave. The behavior of minority iplA − cells in relayed waves could then be assessed through comparison with the behavior of Ax2 cells located within a 30 μm radius, which were responding to the same relayed waves. As revealed in time plots of instantaneous velocity, Ax2 cells surged towards the aggregation center in the deduced front of each successive wave for approximately 2.5 minutes. The time interval between waves was approximately 7 minute. Neighboring mutant iplA − cells surged in a similar fashion in the front of the same successive waves. There was, however, a defect in iplA − cells discerned in centroid tracks. Whereas Ax2 cells made relatively constant net progress towards the aggregation center in the front of each successive wave, iplA − cells surged relatively in random directions in the front of waves, thus making less net progress towards the aggregation center. The iplA − cells making the most progress towards the aggregation center was used for comparison in experiment 1 and experiment 2. Similar results were obtained in three independent experiments. Fig. 7. Mutant iplA − cells do not reorient in the front of natural waves generated by parental Ax2 cells. To assess how iplA − cells respond to outwardly moving, nondissipating relayed waves of chemoattractant, DiI-labeled iplA − cells and... To quantify the apparent defect in orientation, we measured the angle, in degrees, between the direction of the wave and the net direction of translocation of individual majority wild-type cells and minority mutant iplA − cells in the front of each of four to five successive cAMP waves generated by the majority Ax2 cells in natural aggregation territories. Net direction directly towards the aggregation center would be 0°, net direction directly away from the aggregation center would be 180°, and net random direction would be 90°. Models of a net angle of translocation of 30° and 90° are presented in Fig. ​ Fig.8A 8A and ​ and8B, 8B, respectively. Although the mean angle of direction of the majority wild-type cells was 33±12°, that of minority iplA − cells was 101±22°, the latter close to the measure of randomness. These results demonstrate that even though iplA − cells can chemotax up a spatial gradient of cAMP generated in vitro, and even though they correctly surge in the increasing phase of temporal waves generated in vitro, they are impaired in their capacity to reorient correctly and move in the front of each natural cAMP wave in a directed fashion towards the source of a natural, relayed waves. Fig. 8. Measurements of defective reorientation in the front of natural chemotactic waves. Mutant iplA − cells and parental Ax2 cells were mixed at a 1:9 ratio and allowed to aggregate. Orientation angles were computed in the front of each... Discussion Following cloning of the first Ins P 3 R over 20 years ago from the mouse cerebellum, numerous inositol trisphosphate receptor genes have been identified and grouped into a family of transient receptor potential channels. Although most commonly found in the endoplasmic reticulum, Ins P 3 Rs have also been found associated with the plasma membrane, but at far lower density. The possible role of Ins P 3 Rs in Ca 2+ chemotaxis had never before been considered or tested. The role of IplA in Ca 2+ -facilitated motility and cAMP chemotaxis By mutational analysis we previously demonstrated that in buffer lacking added Ca 2+, the facilitation of motility by K + and the requirement of K + or Na + for chemotactic orientation in a spatial gradient of cAMP are regulated by Nhe1, a putative monovalent cation/hydrogen exchanger in the plasma membrane of D. discoideum. The alternative cationic facilitation of these behaviors by Ca 2+ in the null mutant nhe1 −, however, was completely intact, leading us to conclude that Nhe1 mediates monovalent cation effects on behavior, and that one or more other surface molecules mediate alternative Ca 2+ effects. In the present study we found that IplA plays a role in the Ca 2+ facilitation of velocity in buffer and in a spatial gradient of cAMP, but it plays no role in the Ca 2+ or K + requirement for chemotactic orientation in a spatial gradient of cAMP. We also found that IplA plays no role in the chemokinetic responsiveness of cells to increasing temporal gradients of cAMP generated in vitro. Our previous and present results, therefore, demonstrate that although all of the K + or Na + effects on basic behavior and cAMP chemotaxis are mediated by Nhe1, only selective Ca 2+ effects on basic behavior are mediated by IplA. These results indicate that one or more molecules other than IplA play a role in the Ca 2+ requirement for chemotactic orientation, a response that involves both the capacity to sense the direction of a cAMP gradient and suppression of lateral pseudopodium formation and turning. The localization of IplA Our analysis of living cells expressing IplA–GFP revealed that fluorescence was primarily cytoplasmic and vesicular. The generation of plasma membrane ghosts revealed very low level staining. Because the preparation of ghosts involved treatment of cells with Triton X-100, a detergent that can disrupt lipids and possibly result in the contamination of plasma membranes with vesicular membranes, we can only tentatively conclude that IplA might be localized in the plasma membrane. But other observations add support to a cell surface role for IplA. Results by Traynor et al. suggested that IplA was involved in extracellular Ca 2+ uptake and therefore might function as a Ca 2+ channel at the surface of the cell. Uptake, however, could also be mediated through the intracellular regulation of Ca 2+ stores. Schaloske et al. have presented evidence that the main role of IplA could be in intracellular homeostasis. Shanley et al. subsequently demonstrated that iplA − cells underwent electrotaxis, which depends on regulated Ca 2+ influx, indicating that IplA is not the cell surface Ca 2+ influx channel for electrotaxis. However, the mechanoreception defect in iplA − cells lends support to a possible role of IplA at the plasma membrane. Mutant iplA − cells lose the orientation response in the direction of fluid flow and cannot attain shear-induced maximum velocity, suggesting that it functions as a mechanoreceptor at the surface of the cell. However, these results can be just as cogently explained by a role for IplA in a signal transduction pathway downstream of an unidentified mechanoreceptor. Our observation that there is a reduction in Ca 2+ binding at the surface of iplA − cells are consistent with cell surface localization, but could just as well reflect an indirect decrease in another plasma membrane Ca 2+ -binding protein that depends upon IplA for membrane localization. Therefore, although there is no definitive proof that IplA is a surface receptor, the possibility remains viable. IplA is necessary for Ca 2+ chemotaxis Perhaps the most interesting defect of the iplA − mutant is the loss of Ca 2+ chemotaxis. We generated a variety of Ca 2+ gradients in microfluidic chambers with different shapes and different concentration ranges, but iplA − chemotaxis was never observed. These results suggest that either IplA functions at the cell surface as a receptor for Ca 2+ chemotaxis, or another, unidentified molecule in the plasma membrane acts as the Ca 2+ chemotaxis receptor and transduction of the signal produced by an intracellular Ca 2+ gradient through this unidentified receptor depends on IplA, either at the cell surface or intracellularly. If IplA proves to be the bona fide surface receptor for Ca 2+ chemotaxis, it must be coupled to relevant signal transduction pathways in order to elicit directed movement up a spatial gradient of Ca 2+. Given the similarities between cell behavior during chemotaxis in a spatial gradient of Ca 2+ and behavior in a spatial gradient of cAMP, one would expect downstream convergence of the Ca 2+ and cAMP signal transduction pathways. Coupling of the receptors to the G-protein complex might represent an upstream point of convergence. Because IplA is an inositol trisphosphosphate receptor-like protein and phospholipase C is activated to form Ins P 3 when cAMP receptors are stimulated by a global cAMP signal, IplA might function downstream of a similar Ca 2+ -induced system. Hence, convergence of the cAMP and Ca 2+ pathways might occur downstream of that interaction. The possible convergence of the signal transduction pathways of the chemotactic response to spatial gradients of cAMP and Ca 2+, and, hence, the sharing of downstream components of a common signal transduction pathway, could explain, in part, why the two chemotactic systems are acquired at roughly the same time in the developmental program of D. discoideum. IplA is required for chemotaxis in a natural wave In vitro analyses performed here and previously revealed that chemotaxis up a spatial gradient of cAMP is intact in the iplA − mutant. Additional analyses performed here revealed that the chemokinetic response to the increasing phase of a temporal camp wave generated in vitro was also intact. We previously argued that these in vitro assays tested the full complement of responses to the spatial and temporal dynamics of a naturally relayed cAMP wave. We therefore fully expected iplA − cells to function normally during natural aggregation, based on the assumption that the cAMP wave represented the exclusive natural chemotactic signal. However, the response of minority iplA − cells seeded in a natural aggregation territory of majority parental wild-type Ax2 cells was highly aberrant. Although iplA − cells exhibited increases in velocity that correlated with the velocity surges of neighboring majority Ax2 cells in the front of consecutive natural cAMP waves relayed by the majority wild-type cell populations, they did not reorient towards the aggregation center at the onset of each new wave, as was the case for neighboring parental wild-type cells. A new model for chemotaxis Because Bonner and colleagues first demonstrated that the chemotactic agent in natural D. discoideum aggregation territories was cAMP, and Tomchik and Devreotes then provided fixed images of cAMP waves, it has been assumed that cAMP is the sole chemoattractant during natural aggregation. Upon discovering that D. discoideum amoebae also underwent chemotaxis in Ca 2+ gradients, and that cAMP and Ca 2+ chemotaxis were acquired at similar times in the developmental program, we suggested that Ca 2+ chemotaxis also plays a role in natural aggregation, although at the time of that suggestion, we had no evidence that it indeed played such a role. Because global stimulation by cAMP causes a rapid uptake and then release of Ca 2+ by aggregation-competent cells, we considered the possibility that this represents a process that takes place at the onset of each natural wave, leading to the establishment of a transient Ca 2+ gradient between cells. In turn, a rapid chemotactic response of cells at the onset of a natural wave to such a transient Ca 2+ gradient might mediate or augment reorientation towards the aggregation center. Because Ca 2+ has so high a diffusion rate, the possibility of a relayed Ca 2+ wave cannot be entertained. This hypothesis would explain our observation that iplA − cells surge in response to the increasing temporal gradient in the front of each natural cAMP wave, but have trouble reorienting in the direction of the aggregation center. This hypothesis warrants further investigation. If it proves correct, it would alter our view of natural D. discoideum chemotaxis, and provide an expanded contextual framework for interpreting motility and chemotaxis mutants. Materials and Methods Strain maintenance, growth and development The parental Dictyostelium discoideum Ax2 strain and the iplA − mutant, HM1038 and subcloned. Cells were reconstituted from frozen stocks every 2 weeks supplemented with 10 μg/ml of blasticidin S. The ip lA − /iplA + -GFP derivative was grown in both 10 μg/ml blasticidin S and 20 μg/ml of G418. Aggregation-competent cells were obtained according to methods previously described Generating iplA − / iplA + -GFP cells Total RNA was extracted using Trizol and RT-PCR performed using the Long Range RT-PCR kit according to manufacturer's instructions. The 9534 bp iplA cDNA was amplified using the Roche Long Template PCR Kit according to manufacturer's instructions. The primers used were Kpn forward and iplA KPN reverse. Underlines indicate restriction sites. The ligated plasmid was transformed into DH5α max efficiency Escherichia coli. The amplified plasmid was then isolated using the Rapid Plasmid Purification Kit. The Gateway recombination cloning system was used for tagging the N-terminus of the iplA cDNA with GFP. PCR was performed with the pTOPO-XL-iplA plasmid as template, using the primers 5′- CACC ATGGAAGAGAAAAATGTTAATTTGAAAACC-3′ and 5′- CGTTCGTT GCCGGCTTATTTTTGTTGTTGTTTTAAATCACTAACTTGTTGTC-3′. The resulting cDNA fragment was purified using the Qiagen PCR Purification Kit and digested with Nae I to generate a blunt end. The digested fragments were dephosphorylated using calf intestine phosphatase and the fragments purified in a TAE gel. The resulting iplA cDNA was ligated into the plasmid pENTR-D at a 1:2 ratio and the ligation construct transformed into TOP10-competent cells. To derive the N-terminal GFP- iplA fusion, the D. discoideum extrachromosomal plasmid pDM351, obtained from the Dictybase stock center, was used for recombination with the plasmid pENTR-D-iplA. pDM351 carries pENTR-D-specific recombination sites, an actin15-driven N-terminal GFP expression cassette and a neomycin resistance cassette for positive selection. To perform recombination, equal amounts of pENTR-D-iplA and pDM351 were incubated overnight in the presence of Gateway-LR Clonase. The reaction was terminated by addition of protein kinase K according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were transformed into TOP10-competent cells and positive clones were identified by colony PCR. The N-terminal fusion of GFP to iplA + in pDM351-iplA was confirmed by sequencing. The plasmid pDM351-iplA + was transformed into iplA − cells as described previously. Positive cells from growth plates were sorted by fluorescent-activated cell sorting. 45 Ca 2+ binding Aggregation-competent cells were washed in Tricine buffer and incubated for 1 hour in TB containing 10 mM Ca 2+. Cells were then washed in TB + 10 mM Ca 2+ and 6×10 6 cells incubated in 5 mM NaN 3 in TB. After 30 minutes, 1 μCi 45 CaCl 2 was added, the cells were incubated for 5 minutes on ice and pelleted, and the pellet resuspended in 100 μl TB. The suspension was then transferred immediately to 10 ml Ultima Gold liquid scintillation cocktail and dissolved overnight. Parental control and iplA − cells were treated in parallel and measured in duplicate. Samples were counted using a liquid scintillation counter. Background counts were assessed by counting an aliquot of cells that had been incubated in the absence of 45 Ca 2+. The protein content of the samples was measured using the NanoDrop. The percentage reduction in binding by mutant cells was assessed by comparing binding to wild-type cells in each experiment. GFP localization by direct detection For direct detection of GFP fluorescence, iplA − / iplA + -GFP cells were grown in low fluorescence axenic medium. Cells were then developed to aggregation stage, washed as previously described and dispersed on a coverslip in 10 mM Ca 2+. Images of live cells were gathered with a Bio-Rad Radiance 2100MP laser scanning system attached to a TE2000E microscope using a Nikon 60× PLAN APO 1.2 immersion objective. GFP was excited at 488 nm with an argon laser at 10% power. Images of live cells were collected in a single optical plane 1.4 μm above the substratum by accumulated scans over an 8-second period. Simultaneously, a different interference contrast image was also collected for each accumulated fluorescence image. All images were processed using Adobe Photoshop™ software. To test for localization at the plasma membrane, Triton-X-100-extracted plasma membrane ghosts were generated by the method of Condeelis. Briefly, iplA − /iplA + -GFP or iplA − cells were developed on nitrocellulose filters. Aggregation-competent cells were washed in 20 mM Na + /K + phosphate buffer. Cells were incubated for 2 minutes in 50 μg/ml of concavalin A and resuspended in ice-cold Tris-EDTA buffer pH 7.6. Cells were immediately lysed in an ice-cold solution containing 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM Tris and 0.2% Triton X-100, pH 7.6. Unlysed cells were removed by centrifugation at 480 g. The supernatant was then centrifuged at 2000 g and the denser pellet removed. The pellet of plasma membrane ghosts was washed in Tris-EDTA buffer. Ghosts were resuspended and visualized using a Bio-Rad Radiance 2100MP laser scanning system attached to a TE2000E microscope using Nikon Plan Fluor 20× objective. GFP was excited with an argon laser line at 488 nm. All images were processed using Adobe Photoshop™ software. DIAS analysis of behavior Cell images were digitally acquired using iStopMotion software and converted to QuickTime™ format for analysis with two-dimensional DIAS software as previously described. Instantaneous velocity, percentage cells ≥9 μm/minute, directional persistence, chemotactic index and percentage positive chemotaxis were computed from centroid positions. Instantaneous velocity was computed at 4-second intervals between each consecutive pair over a 2-minute period by centroids methods, previously described in detail. The mean instantaneous velocity was computed from the averages of over 20 cells, each individually analyzed. The parameter percentage cells ≥9 μm/minute was computed as the proportion of cells in a population moving with average instantaneous velocity greater than or equal to 9 μm/minute. The percentage was computed for over 20 cells, each individually analyzed. The positive flow parameter was computed by overlapping perimeter outlines of two consecutive cell images, calculating the area in the second of the two images that did not overlap the first, and expressing that non-overlapping area as a percentage of the area of the first image. This was performed at 4-second intervals over a 10-minute period for each cell, and the mean computed from the data of over 20 cells. Directional persistence was computed as the net distance between the first and last centroid of a centroid track divided by the summed distances between consecutive centroid positions of the track. The centroids were computed for each of over 20 cells at 4-second intervals over a 10-minute period. The chemotactic index was computed as the net distance traveled in the direction of the cAMP source divided by the total distance traveled. The mean CI was then computed from the data of over 20 cells. A CI of -1.00 indicated direct movement down the gradient, +1.00 indicated direct movement up the gradient, 0.00 indicated random movement, and +0.01 to +0.99 indicated increasing levels of positive chemotaxis. The rightward directionality parameter is defined in the results section. The percentage positive chemotaxis parameter was measured as the proportion of cells in a population with a chemotactic index greater than 0.00. Mixing experiments for natural aggregation To analyze the behavior of iplA − cells in wild-type aggregation territories, mutant cells were labeled with the vital dye DiI, mixed with a majority of unlabeled Ax2 cells, and motion was analyzed during aggregation according to methods described in detail elsewhere. Briefly, iplA − cells were labeled by incubation in HL-5 containing 0.05 mM DiI for 24 hours in the dark. Control Ax2 cells were treated similarly, but in the absence of DiI. HL-5 was then removed from labeled iplA − cells and unlabeled vegetative Ax2 cells by washing in buffered salt solution in which K + was the facilitating cation. The Ax2 and labeled iplA − cell populations were then mixed at a 9:1 ratio to yield 5×10 6 cells per 2 ml. This suspension was inoculated into a 35 mm Petri dish and the dish placed on the stage of a Nikon Eclipse TE-2000 microscope connected to a Bio-Rad Radiance 2100MP laser scanning confocal microscope. After 6 hours, image acquisition was begun using a green HeNe laser at 543 nm, a 10× objective and a 2.2 digital zoom. A signal-enhancing lens and an emission filter HQ 590/70 were included in the light path. Transmitted light images were continuously collected through a transmitted light detector at 543 nm. Cells were exposed to laser light every 30 seconds with a laser intensity of 19.7% for DiI excitation and 2.8% for the transmitted light. Transmitted and fluorescence images were collected through the photomultiplier tube with LaserSharp 2000 software and converted to a QuickTime™ format. Labeled iplA − cells and unlabeled Ax2 cells were outlined from the QuickTime™ movie and motion analyzed using 2D-DIAS as described above. Supplementary Material Supplementary Material: Click here to view. Acknowledgements We are grateful to Kristin Weigel and Vanja Stojkovic for help with the Ca 2+ -binding studies. Footnotes Funding This work was supported by the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, a National Resource originally established by the National Institutes of Health. Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months. Supplementary material available online at Article information J Cell Sci. 2012 Apr 1; 125: 1770–1783. doi: 10.1242/jcs.098301 PMCID: PMC3346828 PMID: 22375061 Daniel F. Lusche, Deborah Wessels, Amanda Scherer, Karla Daniels, Spencer Kuhl, and David R. Soll * W. M. Keck Dynamic Image Analysis Facility, Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA * Author for correspondence Accepted 2011 Dec 5. Copyright © 2012. Articles from Journal of Cell Science are provided here courtesy of Company of Biologists 