 Frizzled and Smoothened are homologous seven-transmembrane proteins functioning in the Wnt and Hedgehog signaling pathways, respectively. They harbor an extracellular cysteine-rich domain, a mobile evolutionary unit that has been found in a number of other metazoan proteins and Frizzled-like proteins in Dictyostelium. Domains distantly related to FZ-CRDs, in H edgehog-interacting proteins, f olate receptors and riboflavin-binding proteins, and N iemann-Pick Type C1 proteins, referred to as HFN-CRDs, exhibit similar structures and disulfide connectivity patterns compared with FZ-CRDs. We used computational analyses to expand the homologous set of FZ-CRDs and HFN-CRDs, providing a better understanding of their evolution and classification. First, FZ-CRD-containing proteins with various domain compositions were identified in several major eukaryotic lineages including plants and Chromalveolata, revealing a wider phylogenetic distribution of FZ-CRDs than previously recognized. Second, two new and distinct groups of highly divergent FZ-CRDs were found by sensitive similarity searches. One of them is present in the calcium channel component Mid1 in fungi and the uncharacterized FAM155 proteins in metazoans. Members of the other new FZ-CRD group occur in the metazoan-specific RECK proteins that are putative tumor suppressors acting as inhibitors of matrix metalloproteases. Finally, sequence and three-dimensional structural comparisons helped us uncover a divergent HFN-CRD in glypicans, which are important morphogen-binding heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Such a finding reinforces the evolutionary ties between the Wnt and Hedgehog signaling pathways and underscores the importance of gene duplications in creating essential signaling components in metazoan evolution. Keywords: frizzled, Hedgehog-interacting protein, FZ-CRD, HFN-CRD, Mid1, RECK, glypican Introduction Wnts and Hedgehogs are secreted morphogenetic proteins that play essential roles in various developmental processes and diseases. 1, 2 Wnts are cysteine-rich glycoproteins modified with palmitoyl groups. 3 The major cell surface receptors for Wnts are the seven-transmembrane Frizzled proteins belonging to the superfamily of G-protein-coupled receptors. 4 Wnt interacts with the soluble N-terminal cysteine-rich domain of Frizzled, which relays signals to downstream effectors inside the cell including Dishevelled to regulate a number of signaling events, e.g. β-catenin-dependent activation of target genes in the canonical Wnt pathway. Wnts and Frizzleds have been identified in all major groups of metazoans, including Porifera that is considered to be the sister group of all other metazoans. 5 Hedgehogs also undergo lipid modification with added palmitoyl groups. In addition, the functional N-terminal Hedge domain of hedgehog is freed from the Hint domain by proteolytic cleavage and is modified with a cholesterol group attached to its C-terminus. Hedgehogs are present in Cnidaria and most bilaterians, but are apparently absent from Porifera. 6 They are ligands of the transmembrane receptor Patched, which upon Hedgehog binding, releases the seven-transmembrane protein Smoothened to mediate downstream signaling events. 7 The Smoothened proteins are homologs of Frizzled receptors and also possess a related N-terminal cysteine-rich domain. The CRD in Frizzled and Smoothened is a mobile evolutionary unit that has been found in other metazoan proteins, such as secreted Frizzled-related proteins and certain receptor tyrosine kinases. 8, 9 Recently, several domains distantly related to Frizzled CRDs, revealed by structural comparisons and sensitive sequence similarity searches, have been reported in Hedgehog-interacting proteins, folate receptors and riboflavin-binding proteins, and Niemann-Pick type C1 proteins. 10 Here we employed in-depth sequence and structural analyses to further expand and characterize the diverse repertoire of domains related to Frizzled CRDs, providing new insights into their evolution and classification. Results and Discussion Two groups of Frizzled-related cysteine-rich domains—FZ-CRDs and HFN-CRDs Frizzled-like seven-transmembrane proteins have been identified in various metazoans 5, 11 and the amoebozoan Dictyostelium discoideum. 12 Domains closely related to Frizzled CRDs are also present in a number of other metazoan proteins with diverse domain compositions, including secreted Frizzled-related proteins, 13 receptor tyrosine kinases Ror 14 and MuSK, 15 carboxypeptidase Z, 16 membrane-associated serine protease Corin, 17 and a long isoform of collagen XVIII. 18 Transitive PSI-BLAST 19 searches indeed detected Frizzled-related CRDs in all these proteins. The majority of these domains possess 10 conserved cysteines that exhibit a general pattern of “C*C*CX 8 CX 6 C*CX 3 CX 6,7 C*C*C”. The number of residues between the seventh and eighth conserved cysteines is usually six, while receptor-tyrosine kinase-associated CRDs have seven residues between them. Structural studies of three CRDs, in mouse Frizzled, 8 mouse SFRP3, 8 and rat MuSK, 9 revealed a common fold mainly consisting of four core alpha-helices. In all these structures, the disulfide connectivity patterns among the 10 conserved cysteines are C1–C5, C2–C4, C3–C8, C6–C10, and C7–C9. We collectively refer to these domains as FZ-CRDs. Figure 1 Multiple sequence alignment of FZ-CRDs and HFN-CRDs. This alignment is divided into four upper sections of FZ-CRDs and four lower sections of HFN-CRDs. Known FZ-CRDs in metazoans are in the subalignment of “FZ-CRD–metazoan,” and... Previous structural comparisons and profile-profile-based similarity searches also revealed several domains distantly related to FZ-CRDs in several proteins including Hedgehog-interacting proteins, folate receptors and riboflavin-binding proteins, and Niemann-Pick disease Type C1 proteins. 10, 20 Transitive PSI-BLAST searches starting from the CRD in human HHIP found CRDs in HHIPs, FRBPs, and NPC1s with statistically significant scores, but did not find known FZ-CRDs. Conversely, transitive PSI-BLAST searches starting from FZ-CRDs did not identify any member in HHIPs, FRBPs, and NPC1s with statistically significant scores. These results suggest that the CRDs in HHIPs, FRBPs, and NPC1s are more closely related to each other than to FZ-CRDs. Therefore, we collectively refer to the CRDs in H HIPs, F RBPs, and N PC1s as HFN-CRDs. The grouping of HFN-CRDs is also supported by their cysteine patterns. HHIPs and FRBPs share 12 conserved, disulfide-bonded cysteines that adopt a general pattern of “C*C*CC*CX 8 CX 2,3 C*CX 3 CX 6 C*C*C”. NPC1s possess eight of these conserved cysteines, while lacking two disulfide bonds formed by C8–C12 and C9–C11 in HHIPs and FRBPs. The cysteine patterns and disulfide connectivity of HFN-CRDs are similar to those of FZ-CRDs. Compared with FZ-CRDs with 10 conserved cysteines, the most noticeable difference in HFN-CRDs is the addition of a “CC” motif after the second conserved cysteine. The two cysteines in this “CC” motif form disulfide bonds with the first and seventh cysteines in HFN-CRDs, respectively, as revealed by the CRD structures of NPC1 21 and a riboflavin-binding protein. 22 C1 and C7 in the motif of HFN-CRDs correspond to C1 and C5 in the motif of FZ-CRDs, which form a disulfide bond directly. Another subtle difference of cysteine patterns between HFN-CRDs and FZ-CRDs lies in the number of residues in between C6 and C7 in HFN-CRDs, corresponding to C4 and C5 in FZ-CRDs. While HFN-CRDs have a shorter stretch of residues between C6 and C7, C4 and C5 in FZ-CRDs generally have six residues in between. New members of FZ-CRDs in plants and protists FZ-CRDs have been previously reported only in metazoans and amoebozoans. Our sequence similarity searches expanded the repertoire of FZ-CRDs to include members from several other major eukaryotic lineages, such as green plants, stramenopiles, Alveolata, and the Heterolobosea species Naegleria gruberi. Newly identified FZ-CRD-containing proteins in plants and various protists exhibit diverse domain compositions. Figure 2 Domain structure diagrams for select proteins containing FZ-CRDs or HFN-CRDs. The diagrams were drawn approximately to scale. Two exceptions are the long mouse collagen alpha-1, in which the middle region with mainly collagen tripeptide... FZ-CRDs in land plants are highly divergent, as they cannot be linked to metazoan FZ-CRDs by PSI-BLAST searches. Instead, their distant sequence similarities to known FZ-CRDs were revealed by the more sensitive profile-profile-based HHpred method. 23 These land plant proteins co-occur with a leishmanolysin domain 24 with the signature “HEXXH” motif. The GPI-anchored leishmanolysin is the most abundant surface glycoprotein of Leishmania spp., 26 and leishmanolysin-domain-containing proteins have been identified in various eukaryotic lineages including metazoans, plants, and various protists. 27 These land plant proteins are also predicted to be GPI-anchored. 28, 29 Association of an FZ-CRD domain with a leishmanolysin domain appears to be unique in land plants. Interestingly, FZ-CRDs also co-occur with peptidase domains in some metazoan proteins, such as the Type II plasma membrane protein Corin and the extracellular protein carboxypeptidase Z. FZ-CRDs could facilitate peptidase functions by contributing to substrate binding or interactions with other proteins. FZ-CRDs associated with the GPCR family of seven-transmembrane proteins have been identified in Metazoa and Amoebozoa, 12 two major lineages previously classified in the Unikonta supergroup of eukaryotes. 30 On the other hand, we did not find FZ-CRD-containing GPCR proteins from Bikonta lineages. Therefore, FZ-CRD-containing GPCRs might have originated in the last common ancestor of Opisthokonta and Amoebozoa. We found two divergent FZ-CRD-containing proteins from the amoebozoan D. discoideum that are not associated with seven-transmembrane GPCRs, but instead contain other putative extracellular domains. HHpred 23 search suggests that one of them contains an ependymin-like domain, as it found the Pfam domain Ependymin with a probability score of 99.91%. HHpred probability score provides the estimation of the likelihood that the hit is homologous to the query based on combined profile similarities of amino acids and secondary structures in the framework of a hidden Markov model. Ependymin is an extracellular protein abundant in fish cerebrospinal fluid 31 and has been previously found only in metazoans. 32 The other FZ-CRD-containing D. discoideum protein is predicted to be a GPI-anchored protein and has an uncharacterized N-terminal region with mainly predicted beta-strands. HHpred searches revealed distant similarity between this region and a domain of unknown function DUF3129 and a chitin-binding domain. Lineage-specific expansions and losses were observed for FZ-CRD-containing proteins in nonmetazoans. Most noticeably, several amoebozoans have multiple copies of FZ-CRD-containing proteins, most of which are associated with GPCRs. Several stramenopiles species, such as Phytophthora infestans and Albugo laibachii, possess more than one FZ-CRD-containing proteins. Two FZ-CRDs have been identified in the green alga Micromonas sp. RCC299, while they appear to be lacking in the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Only one FZ-CRD copy seems to be present in the land plant Arabidopsis thaliana and the apicomplexan Plasmodium facalcium. The Heterolobosea species N. gruberi, on the other hand, possesses multiple FZ-CRD-containing proteins, including a short protein with a single FZ-CRD and a predicted transmembrane segment and several large proteins with more than 1000 amino acid residues. These large proteins have many EGF-like repeats and a C-terminal REJ module, previously found in cell surface proteins such as PKD1. 33, 34 Like metazoan FZ-CRDs, FZ-CRDs in nonmetazoan proteins are most likely located in the extracellular space, based on frequent occurrences of predicted N-terminal signal peptides, predicted TMs, other extracellular domains, and C-terminal hydrophobic segments that are often predicted as GPI anchor-modified sites. Functions of FZ-CRD-containing proteins in nonmetazoans remain unknown. They could mediate protein-protein interactions, similar to the known metazoan FZ-CRDs in Frizzled receptors and SFRPs that interact with Wnts. Since Wnts are only found in metazoans, the interaction partners of nonmetazoan FZ-CRDs remain to be discovered. Some of these FZ-CRDs may also be capable of binding small molecule ligands such as lipids, based on their distant similarity to HFN-CRDs with ligand-binding capabilities such as FRBPs and NPC1s. 10 The diverse domain compositions of nonmetazoan FZ-CRD-containing proteins indicate that these FZ-CRDs could have evolved differing functions, e.g. through interactions with different molecules. Two divergent new groups of FZ-CRDs We identified two new groups of divergent FZ-CRDs present in the fungal protein Mid1 and the metazoan protein RECK, respectively. While transitive PSI-BLAST did not link these two groups to known FZ-CRDs, sensitive profile-profile searches using HHpred supported their homologous relationships with good statistical scores. These inferred homologous relationships are also supported by 10 conserved cysteines. As revealed by CLANS 35, members of these two new FZ-CRDs form two clusters well separated from other FZ-CRD groups, suggesting that they have undergone significant sequence divergence compared with known FZ-CRDs. Figure 3 Sequence clustering diagram of FZ-CRDs and HFN-CRDs. This diagram is generated by the CLANS program on a nonredundant set of FZ-CRDs and HFN-CRDs. Protein domains are represented as dots inside triangular shapes, and the connections... A divergent FZ-CRD in Mid1 proteins A divergent FZ-CRD was found in the fungal protein Mid1, a stretch-activated calcium channel component. Mid1 forms a complex with the transmembrane calcium channel Cch1, both shown to be required for calcium influx and mating in fungi. 36 – 38 Most of the fungal Mid1 sequences have a predicted N-terminal signal peptide. Some of them also possess a hydrophobic segment at the very C-terminal end, suggesting that they are GPI-anchored proteins. Indeed, about half of fungal Mid1 sequences were predicted to be GPI-anchored proteins by the GPI-SOM sever. 28 The cysteine-rich domain is located near the C-terminus of Mid1 and is essential for its function 39. Sequence similarity searches also identified putative metazoan orthologs of Mid1, including those from insects, chordates, and several basal metazoan groups. Human has two copies of putative Mid1 orthologs named FAM155A and FAM155B respectively, both of which do not have known function. Mid1-like sequences have limited distribution outside fungi and metazoans, with members identified from land pants, green algae, stramenopiles, and an EST sequence from the putative Excavata species Malawimonas jakobiformis. Mid1 may have appeared early in the evolution of eukaryotes, but have undergone independent gene losses in many lineages outside Opisthokonta. A lineage-specific gene loss event is evidenced in the group of land plants, as no Mid1-like proteins were found in flowering plants, although they are present in “lower” land plants such as Bryophyta, Pinophyta, and Cycadophyta. Functions of Mid1-like proteins in nonfungal species remain to be investigated. A divergent FZ-CRD domain in the metazoan RECK proteins A second group of previously unidentified FZ-CRDs occurs in RECK proteins. The human glycoprotein RECK was identified in a screen of putative suppressors of tumor invasion. 40 Presence of an N-terminal signal peptide and a C-terminal hydrophobic segment suggests that RECK is GPI-anchored to the plasma membrane 40. RECK plays an essential role in development, and it can suppress tumor invasion and metastasis by acting as inhibitors of several matrix metalloproteases that break down extracellular matrix. 41, 42 Several cysteine-rich domains or motifs have been reported in RECK, including five N-terminal repeats of a module with six cysteines, three Kazal domains, and two putative EGF-like domains 40. Kazal domain was originally identified as a serine protease inhibitor. The second and third Kazal domains in RECK proteins were shown to be able to inhibit the matrix metalloprotease MMP9. 43 Frequently occurring in extracellular proteins, some Kazal domains may possess other functions. For example, Kazal domains in follistatin are involved in binding and inhibiting the TGF-β family proteins such as activin. 44 They are also present in complement proteins C6 and C7 and play roles in interactions with other complement proteins. 45 HHpred results also suggested a VWC N-terminal subdomain and a VWC C-terminal subdomain sandwiching the three Kazal domains in RECK. The VWC modules frequently occur in extracellular proteins, such as the Chordin family proteins, and are involved in binding bone marrow proteins. 46 Regions in RECK with distant sequence similarities to two EGF-like domains 40 and a TILa domain were also suggested by HHpred. The newly identified FZ-CRD domain in RECK lies in the middle region after the five N-terminal repeats and before the Kazal domains and the other domains. A subtle cysteine pattern variation in RECK FZ-CRDs lies in the number of residues between the third and fourth conserved cysteines: RECK FZ-CRDs have nine residues while most of other FZ-CRDs and HFN-CRDs have eight residues. RECK proteins were only identified in metazoans, including basal groups such as Porifera, Cnidaria, and Placozoa. RECK thus could be a metazoan invention that coincides with the occurrence of extracellular matrix and multicellularity. The presence of multiple domains in RECK suggests that it could interact with different extracellular proteins and have a diverse array of functions. Divergent evolution of known HFN-CRD families As described above, HFN-CRDs, occurring in HHIPs, FRBPs, and NPC1s, are distantly related to FZ-CRDs and have a similar, yet unique cysteine pattern compared with that of FZ-CRDs. Separation of HFN-CRDs from FZ-CRDs is also reflected in the sequence clustering result generated by CLANS. We investigate phylogenetic relationships of proteins in each of the three known HFN-CRD families. HFN-CRDs in HHIPs and HHIP-like proteins Human HHIP is a GPI-anchored protein with an N-terminal HFN-CRD, a beta-propeller domain, and two C-terminal EGF domains. 20, 47 Two HHIP-like proteins also exist in the human genome. HHIPL1 and HHIPL2 possess the HFN-CRD domain and the beta-propeller domain, but lack the EGF domains. HHIP-like proteins with a beta-propeller domain were also found in land plants and some stramenopiles species. In addition, our similarity searches also revealed other HHIP-like proteins that do not possess beta-propeller domains. HFN-CRDs in most of these HHIPs and HHIP-like proteins exhibit a cysteine pattern of “C*C*CC*CX 8 CX 2 C*CX 3 CX 6 C*C*C”. A phylogenetic tree reconstruction using the MOLPHY program 48 revealed that HHIPs and HHIP-like proteins with beta-propeller domains form a well-supported clade. The phylogenetic tree also suggests that HHIPs could originate from a chordate-specific duplication of HHIP-like proteins, an event likely coupled with the addition of two C-terminal EGF-like domains in HHIPs. Group 1 HHIP-like proteins with beta-propeller domains appear to be absent in insects and fungi, suggesting that they have been lost in these lineages. HHIP-like proteins without beta-propeller domains form four major groups. Group 2 proteins, containing one HFN-CRD and sometimes a C-terminal predicted transmembrane segment, are from species of green plants, stramenopiles, and Alveolata. Group 3 consists of proteins from choanoflagellates, basal metazoan groups Cnidaria and Placozoa, and some deuterostomes such as Hemichordata and the amphioxus Branchiostoma floridae. Group 3 proteins are apparently lost in the vertebrate lineage. They are mostly single-domain proteins, and some members also possess a predicted transmembrane segment. Group 4 proteins are all from N. gruberi, likely resulted from gene expansion events. Group 5 proteins have a patchy phylogenetic distribution, with species from diverse sources such as Leishmania, choanoflagellates, and stramenopiles. HFN-CRDs in FRBPs Most of HFN-CRDs in FRBPs follow the cysteine pattern of “C*C*CC*CX 8 CX 3 C*CX 3 CX 6 C* C*C”, with three residues in between the sixth and seventh conserved cysteines, instead of two residues in HHIPs and HHIP-like proteins. HFN-CRDs in FRBPs are mainly found in metazoans. Phylogenetic tree reconstruction suggested three major groups of FRBPs. Group 1 consists of metazoan proteins that include the experimentally studied mammalian folate receptors. Noticeably, gene duplications have resulted in multiple folate receptors in mammals, including four copies in the human genome. Gene duplication events of Group 1 FRBPs also occurred in several other deuterostomes such as Ciona intestinalis and B. floridae. On the other hand, Group 1 FRBP proteins have a limited distribution in ecdysozoans, as they appear to be absent from insects. Group 2 FRBPs consist of metazoan proteins that include the avian riboflavin-binding proteins 22, 49 and the highly divergent mammalian retibindin proteins that are expressed in retina and with unknown function. 50 Group 3 FRBPs contain a couple of divergent proteins from lower organisms such as green algae, stramenopiles, and Rhizaria, as well as three sequences from B. floridae. Interestingly, these proteins, except the one from green algae, have circularly permuted HFN-CRDs. HFN-CRDs in NPC1s The membrane-bound protein NPC1 is a key player in regulating subcellular cholesterol transportation from the lysosome to the plasma membrane and the endoplasmic reticulum. Mutations of the human NPC1 gene have been associated with Niemann-Pick Type C disease. NPC1 has an N-terminal HFN-CRD domain responsible for binding cholesterol, and a Patched-like 12-transmembrane domain that serves to transport cholesterol molecules across the lysosomal membrane. Although four cysteines in the general HFN-CRD pattern are substituted by noncysteine residues in NPC1 CRDs, they have evolved several extra disulfide bonds compared with other HFN-CRDs. NPC1 CRDs have a wider distribution in eukaryotes than the CRDs in HHIPs and FRBPs, with proteins and/or ESTs detected in metazoans, fungi, plants, and protists from various lineages such as Amoebozoa, Alveolata, stramenopiles, Heterolobosea, and Jakobida. Such a wide distribution suggests that NPC1 CRD plays an important role in cholesterol regulation in most eukaryotes. We observed that some species, such as those of the Plasmodium genus, seem to be lacking of NPC1 CRDs, but still possess proteins with Patched-like transmembrane domains. Phylogenetic analysis revealed two major groups of proteins with an NPC1 CRD. Group 1 proteins, usually with more than 1000 amino acid residues, contain an NPC1 CRD fused with a Patched-like transmembrane domain. The majority of Group 1 proteins are from metazoans, fungi, and green plants. Lineage-specific gene duplications were observed in vertebrates, insects, and nematodes. Human has an NPC1 paralog called NPC1L1 that plays a special role in intestinal uptake of cholesterol. 51, 52 Group 2 proteins, containing only an NPC1 CRD and without a Patched-like domain, are from protists such as Heterolobosea, stramenopiles, and Alveolata. Patched-like proteins without NPC1 CRDs are also present in these organisms. It is thus likely that two separate genes, encoding an NPC1 CRD and a Patched-like domain respectively, existed in the ancestor of eukaryotes, and their fusion has occurred in some lineages such as Opisthokonta and green plants. It should be noted that some stramenopiles species contain both Group 1 and Group 2 proteins. They could have acquired Group 1 proteins via ancient endosymbiotic event. 53 A novel HFN-CRD in glypicans Glypicans are a family of heparan sulfate proteoglycans, proteins modified with heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycan chains. They are attached to the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane by a C-terminal GPI anchor and play important roles in regulating the distribution and signaling of various morphogens including Hedgehog, Wnt, FGF, and BMP. 54, 55 Drosophila and human have two and six copies of glypicans, respectively. Human glypican-3 is expressed in hepatocellular carcinomas and promotes their growth by stimulating Wnt signaling. 56 Different glypicans in Drosophila and mammals have been found to either inhibit or stimulate Hedgehog signaling. 57, 58 A glypican molecule consists of an N-terminal globular core region and a C-terminal tail that is modified with HS GAGs. While HS GAGs may be responsible for binding of certain morphogens like FGF, 55 the core region of Drosophila glypican Dally-like has been shown to be essential for Hedgehog signaling. 58 Recently the structure of the core region of Drosophila Dlp was reported. 59 It consists of mainly alpha helices with an overall cylinder-like shape and can be roughly divided into three portions 59. A more recent structure of the core region of human glypican-1 was obtained that shares a similar fold 60. However, the evolutionary origin of glypicans remains unclear despite the elucidation of glypican core structures. Structural and sequence comparisons by computational tools such as DaliLite and HHpred revealed that the N-lobe of Dlp bears similarities to HFN-CRDs and FZ-CRDs, suggesting that glypicans are evolutionarily related to them. A DaliLite structural comparison revealed distant structural similarity of Dlp to an NPC1 HFN-CRD structure and an FZ-CRD structure. Such Dali Z -scores fall in the “grey area” of homology. 61 These structures exhibit a core of four alpha helices arranged in the same topology. Noticeably, several disulfide bond-forming cysteine pairs are shared in these structures, consistent with the sequence alignment. The sequence similarity is also manifested in the HHpred search result using the human glypican-1 as the query, which identified the FZ-CRD domain as a marginal hit with several conserved cysteines aligned consistently with the DaliLite alignment. Figure 4 Structural diagrams of HFN-CRD and FZ-CRD domains. N- and C-termini are labeled for the CRDs. Four core alpha helices in these CRDs are labeled H1, H2, H3, and H4, respectively. Sidechains of conserved cysteines, most of which form disulfide bonds in... Glypicans possess 14 conserved cysteines. Two of them form a disulfide bond in the C-lobe, while the remaining 12 cysteines all reside in the N-lobe and exhibit a pattern highly similar to that of HFN-CRDs from HHIPs. Like known HFN-CRDs, glypicans contain an extra “CC” motif compared with FZ-CRDs with 10 conserved cysteines. In the structure of Dlp, the N-terminal segment before the “CC” motif is disordered, and the sidechains of the two cysteines in the “CC” motif are partially disordered too. Still, the second cysteine in the “CC” motif is spatially close to, and likely forms a disulfide bond with the seventh conserved cysteine in the general pattern of HFN-CRDs, the same way as seen in the NPC1 CRD structure. The more recent structure of human glypican-1 60 indeed revealed that the cysteines in the substructure missing in Dlp exhibit the same disulfide connectivity as NPC1 CRD, following the general pattern of HFN-CRDs. Therefore, we classify the glypican N-lobe as an HFN-CRD. The structural core of the HFN-CRD in glypicans likely evolved two long insertions 4 ) between the first and second core alpha helices, and between the third and fourth core alpha helices, respectively. These long insertions mainly consist of alpha helices that together form the M- and C-lobes. Such long insertions to the glypican HFN-CRD domain probably hindered the detection of its sequence and structural similarities to other HFN-CRDs and FZ-CRDs. A site important for mediating Hedgehog signaling has been mapped to the C-lobe by mutagenesis studies, 59 suggesting that the insertion events are important to develop new functional sites. Wnt interaction site in glypicans has not been mapped. One hypothesis generated based on homology is that the N-lobe of glypican, like some other HFN-CRDs such as FRBPs and NPC1s, retains the ability to bind small molecules, and thus interacts with Wnts by binding to their lipid moieties. Glypicans are only found in metazoans. Therefore, they could have evolved from a gene duplication of an HFN-CRD in the last common ancestor of metazoans. The inferred homology between glypicans and other HFN-CRDs illustrates the importance of gene duplications in creating molecular components in the transition from unicellular eukaryotes to multicellular animals. Other notable components likely resulted from gene duplication events in the Hedgehog signaling pathway included Smoothened and Patched and Dispatched. Glypicans constitute a major class of HPSGs and function in many cellular processes including modulation of various extracellular signals, such as Wnt and Hedgehog. 54, 62 The discovery of an HFN-CRD in glypicans suggests diversified functions of the FZ-CRD/HFN-CRD module in the Wnt and Hedgehog pathways, which harbor several components with this module such as Frizzled, Smoothened, and HHIP. While the FZ-CRD in Frizzled has been found to be involved in the interactions with Wnt ligands, the functions of the FZ-CRD/HFN-CRD module in Smoothened, HHIP, and glypican molecules remain to be elucidated. Materials and Methods Sequence similarity searches PSI-BLAST 19 iterations were conducted to search for homologs of Frizzled CRDs starting from three domains with known structures ids: 1ijy, 1ijx, and 3hkl ) against the NCBI nonredundant protein database. To perform transitive searches, PSI-BLAST hits were grouped by BLASTCLUST set to 1, length coverage threshold set to 0.5, and no requirement of length coverage on both sequences ), and a representative sequence from each group was used to initiate new PSI-BLAST searches. Such an iterative procedure was repeated until convergence. This procedure was also used for transitive PSI-BLAST searches for the Mid1 family ), Frizzled-like CRDs in RECK proteins, the glypican family ), and CRDs in Hedgehog-interacting proteins, range: 20–220). HHpred 23 was used for profile-profile-based similarity searches to identify distant homologous relationships of FZ-CRDs and HFN-CRDs. To further investigate the distribution of FZ-CRDs and HFN-CRDs in lower organisms where protein records might be lacking, TBLASTN was used to search against nonhuman, nonmouse EST database in NCBI. Domain architecture analysis HMMER3 25 and HHpred were used to detect known Pfam domains in FZ-CRD and HFN-CRD-containing proteins with default parameter settings. Phobius 64 was used to predict transmembrane segments and membrane topology. N-terminal signal peptides were predicted by Phobius and SignalP 3.0. 65 GPI-SOM 28 and FragAnchor 29 were used for GPI anchor signal prediction. Sequence alignment, clustering, and phylogenetic reconstruction The multiple sequence alignment for select members of FZ-CRDs and HFN-CRDs was made by PROMALS3D 66 and improved by manual adjustment. Multiple sequence alignments for eight FZ-CRD and HFN-CRD groups were made by MAFFT 67 with some manual adjustment and shown in Supporting Information Figures S1–S8. For sequence clustering analysis, highly similar domains were filtered by CD-HIT 68 at the sequence identity cutoff of 90%. CLANS 35 was used to cluster and visualize the remaining nonredundant domains based on pairwise BLAST P values. CLANS is a tool for graph visualization of all-against-all similarities for a set of sequences. Sequences are represented as vertices in a CLANS graph. The length of an edge between two sequences is correlated with their similarity, which can be set as the logarithm of the BLAST hit P value between them. The sequences are first randomly placed in a two-dimensional or three-dimensional space. The vertices are then moved iteratively, based on the attractive forces designed to be proportional to the sequence similarities and a small repulsive force that serves to prevent collapse of sequences into one point. 35 Such a process can be run to equilibrium where movements of the vertices are negligible. For clustering and visualization of FZ-CRDs and HFN-CRDs, the movement process was run to equilibrium in a two-dimensional representation. The BLAST P value cutoff was set to 1e-4 to show the connections between the sequences in the final graph. The MOLPHY package 48 was used for phylogenetic reconstruction for three known HFN-CRD groups. The JTT amino acid substitution model 69 was used in MOLPHY. The local estimates of bootstrap percentages were obtained by the RELL method 70. 