 Proper regulation of the actin cytoskeleton is essential for cell function and ultimately for survival. Tight control of actin dynamics is required for many cellular processes, including differentiation, proliferation, adhesion, chemotaxis, endocytosis, exocytosis, and multicellular development. Here we describe a putative p21-activated protein kinase, PakD, that regulates the actin cytoskeleton in Dictyostelium discoideum. We found that cells lacking pakD are unable to aggregate and thus unable to develop. Compared to the wild type, cells lacking PakD have decreased membrane extensions, suggesting defective regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. pakD − cells show poor chemotaxis toward cyclic AMP but normal chemotaxis toward folate, suggesting that PakD mediates some but not all chemotaxis responses. pakD − cells have decreased polarity when placed in a cAMP gradient, indicating that the chemotactic defects of the pakD − cells may be due to an impaired cytoskeletal response to cAMP. In addition, while wild-type cells polymerize actin in response to global stimulation by cAMP, pakD − cells exhibit F-actin depolymerization under the same conditions. Taken together, the results suggest that PakD is part of a pathway coordinating F-actin organization during development. INTRODUCTION The actin cytoskeleton is a highly dynamic network of filaments that give mechanical strength and morphology to a cell by serving as a mediator between extracellular molecules and the intracellular machinery. It plays a critical role in numerous cellular processes, including cytokinesis, motility, adhesion, and endocytosis, by reorganizing in response to extracellular and intracellular signaling. Given its extensive and complex role, tight control of the actin cytoskeleton is essential. Accordingly, the network of proteins involved in the maintenance and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton is vast. One family of proteins involved in regulating the actin cytoskeleton is the p21-activated protein kinases. PAKs are serine/threonine kinases that are believed to work downstream of Rac and Cdc42. In addition to their C-terminal kinase domain, PAKs share an N-terminal CRIB domain that binds Cdc42 and Rac. PAKs are found throughout the eukaryotic lineage. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae PAKs, STE20 and Cla4, are integral in controlling polarized cell growth, presumably by regulating the actin cytoskeleton. The Caenorhabditis elegans PAKs, MAX-2 and PAK-1, are required for motility during axon guidance. Mammalian PAK1 is crucial to membrane protrusion and cell spreading, two actin-based processes. In Dictyostelium discoideum, three PAKs, PakA to PakC, have been studied. All of the Dictyostelium PAKs appear to be involved in regulating the actin cytoskeleton. PakA controls efficient cytokinesis, suppression of lateral pseudopods, retraction of the cell posterior, and assembly of myosin II. PakB has been shown to phosphorylate MyoD and to be involved in pinocytosis, phagocytosis, and cytokinesis. PakC is required for proper polarization and chemotaxis. Here we describe the characterization of a fourth Dictyostelium PAK, PakD. PakD belongs to the PakA subfamily of kinases. In addition to a p21-binding domain, PakD contains putative diacylglycerol binding and CH domains. In this report, we demonstrate a role for PakD in aggregation and cyclic AMP -mediated actin organization. We provide evidence that PakD is a positive regulator of starvation-induced and cAMP-induced cytoskeletal changes and is required for development, regulation of membrane extensions, efficient chemotaxis to cAMP, cell polarization in response to cAMP, and cAMP-stimulated actin polymerization. MATERIALS AND METHODS Generation of a pakD deletion mutant and a pakD -overexpressing mutant. To generate a pakD deletion mutant, we generated a gene disruption construct using PCR according to the method of Kuwayama et al.. All PCR was performed using the Expand PCR high-fidelity system according to the manufacturer's directions. The pakD DNA fragment was amplified with oligonucleotide primers 1 and 4. The 5′ region of the gene was amplified with primers 1 and 2, and the 3′ region was amplified with primer 3 and primer 4. The Bsr marker cassette DNA fragment was amplified with primer 5 and primer 6. Amplification of the full-length region of pakD was performed on 10 ng genomic DNA with 5 pmol of primers 1 and 4. Amplification of the Bsr cassette was performed on 0.1 ng plasmid DNA with 5 pmol of primers 5 and 6. The purified full-length region of pakD was used for the amplification of the 5′ or 3′ region of pakD with 5 pmol of primers 1 and 2 or primers 3 and 4, respectively. Fusion PCR was performed using the purified 5′- pakD, 3′- pakD, and Bsr cassette DNA fragments and primers 1 and 4. The final product was gel purified and was transformed into Dictyostelium Ax2 cells by following the procedure of Shaulsky et al.. To generate an overexpression mutant, the pakD gene was placed behind the constitutively active actin 15 promoter using the Gateway system and was transformed into Ax2 cells or pakD − cells as described above. Cell culture. Wild-type Dictyostelium discoideum Ax2 cells were grown in HL5 medium at 22°C in shaking culture as described previously. pakD − cells were grown in HL5 medium supplemented with 10 μg/ml blasticidin. pakD -overexpressing cells were grown in HL5 medium supplemented with 10 μg/ml G418. pakD − cells overexpressing pakD were grown in HL5 medium supplemented with 10 μg/ml blasticidin and 10 μg/ml G418. For development, 1 × 10 7 cells in mid-log phase were washed with PBM, plated onto filter pads or agar, and incubated at 22°C. Reverse transcription-PCR analysis. Total RNA was isolated from cells starved on filter pads at the times indicated in the figures by using the RNeasy minikit according to the manufacturer's protocol and was used as the template for the synthesis of cDNA using GoScript reverse transcriptase and an oligo primer. PCR amplification was performed using GoTaq Green Master Mix. The upstream primer for carA was 5′-GGATTGGTGTAAGTTTCACTGG-3′, and the downstream primer was 5′-CCATATCGGAACTACATTGCAC-3′. The upstream primer for IG7 was 5′-TTACATTTATTAGACCCGAAACCAAGCG-3′, and the downstream primer was 5′-TTCCCTTTAGACCTATGGACCTTAGCG-3′. The PCR products were separated on a 2% agarose gel and were visualized with ethidium bromide. Duplicate reactions were performed without reverse transcriptase to control for DNA contamination in the RNA preparation. Low-cell-density assay. Recombinant CMF was prepared as described previously. Cells were starved at 22°C for 16 h in a submerged monolayer culture at densities of 224 × 10 3, 112 × 10 3, 56 × 10 3, 28 × 10 3, 14 × 10 3, and 7 × 10 3 cells/cm 2 in PBM alone or in PBM containing 10 ng/ml recombinant CMF. Images were taken with a 10× objective on a Nikon TE 200 Eclipse inverted microscope using the MetaMorph image system. Chemotaxis assays. Under-agarose chemotaxis assays were performed as described by Woznica and Knecht, with the following modifications. For cAMP chemotaxis, 1 × 10 7 cells were starved on filter pads as described above for 5 h. Cells were collected and were resuspended in 1 ml PBM. A 100-μl sample of cells was used in the assay. For folate chemotaxis, vegetative cells were collected and were resuspended to 1 × 10 6 cells/ml in SM medium, and 100 μl was used in the assay. Images of cells migrating under agarose toward 10 μM cAMP or 1 mM folate were taken every 30 s for 20 min on an inverted Nikon TE 200 Eclipse microscope using a MetaMorph image system. Cells were tracked with ImageJ software. Actin staining. For imaging in the absence of a cAMP gradient, cells were washed twice with PBM and were starved on an 8-well chambered slide for 5 h. Cells were fixed, washed with PBS, permeabilized, and washed with PBS again. Cells were stained with 8 U/ml rhodamine phalloidin for 1 h in the dark. After a PBS wash, SlowFade Gold mounting solution was added, and a coverslip was then placed on the slide. Images were taken with a Leica confocal microscope using a 100× objective lens. Cell circularity was measured with ImageJ software. For cell imaging in the presence of a cAMP gradient, a cAMP gradient was established as described by Woznica and Knecht, with the following modifications. Briefly, PBM plus 0.75% agarose was poured into a 4-well Millicell EZ slide. After solidifying, the agarose was removed from half of each well. By use of a pipette tip, a small well was made 5 mm from the edge of the agarose. The well was then filled with 10 μM cAMP plus 20 mg/ml fluorescein isothiocyanate -dextran, and a gradient was allowed to develop. The establishment of the cAMP gradient was confirmed by measurement of the FITC-dextran gradient by fluorescence on an inverted Nikon TE 200 Eclipse microscope with a 10× objective and MetaMorph. Five-hour-starved cells were then placed on the slide at approximately 1 × 10 4 cells/cm 2 and were allowed to orient themselves for 1 h. Cells were then fixed in methanol for 10 min at −20°C, washed with PBS, permeabilized in 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS for 15 min, and washed with PBS again. Cells were then stained with 8 U/ml rhodamine phalloidin for 1 h in the dark. After a PBS wash, SlowFade Gold mounting solution was added, and a coverslip was then placed on the slide. Images were taken with a Leica confocal microscope using a 100× objective lens. Cell roundness was measured with ImageJ software. cAMP-induced actin polymerization assay. cAMP-induced F-actin formation was measured as described previously with slight alterations. A total of 1 × 10 7 cells were starved on filter pads for 5.5 h prior to the assay. Cells were then placed on filter pads containing 3 mM caffeine in PBM for 30 min. Cells were collected, washed twice in PBM–3 mM caffeine, and resuspended in 2 ml PBM–3 mM caffeine. A 100-μl sample of cells was used in the assay. The cells were fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde in PBS for 10 min at room temperature, before and after stimulation with 1 μM cAMP. Cells were washed twice in PBSN. After staining with 8 U/ml rhodamine phalloidin in the dark for 1 h at room temperature, cells were washed twice in ice-cold PBS containing 0.5% bovine serum albumin, resuspended to 1 × 10 6 cells/ml in cold PBS containing 0.5% BSA, and passed through a fluorescence-activated cell sorter. Cells were identified based on forward and side scatter, and their fluorescence was measured. The mean fluorescence value was determined for at least 10,000 cells after the background autofluorescence of unstained cells had been determined and subtracted. PakD immunoblotting and immunostaining. The synthetic peptide GCKKVYRKRSSN, corresponding to amino acids 436 to 447 of PakD, was used to immunize a rabbit at Biosynthesis, Inc.. Serum was collected 8 weeks after the second injection and was affinity purified using this peptide. For immunoblotting, 1 × 10 6 cells were collected and boiled for 3 min in SDS-PAGE sample buffer. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and were transferred to Hybond-P membranes by following the manufacturer's protocol. The blots were stained with an anti-PakD antibody at 1.5 μg/ml in SuperBlock T20 for 1 h, washed three times in SuperBlock T20 for 10 min each time, incubated with a horseradish peroxidase -conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody at 50 ng/ml in SuperBlock T20 for 45 min, again washed three times in SuperBlock T20 for 10 min each time, and visualized with an enhanced chemiluminescent substrate for HRP detection. For immunostaining, cells were washed twice with PBM and were starved on an 8-well chambered slide for 6 h. Cells were fixed for 15 min in methanol at −20°C, allowed to air dry, and permeabilized with PBSN. Cells were incubated with the anti-PakD antibodies at 1 μg/ml in PBSN for 1 h and were then washed twice with PBSN. The cells were then incubated with Alexa Fluor-conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibodies at 2 μg/ml in PBSN in the dark for 1 h, followed by two PBSN washes and 5 min of staining with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. SlowFade Gold mounting solution was added, and a coverslip was then placed on the slide. RESULTS PakD is required for aggregation. To determine whether PakD is involved in development, we disrupted the pakD gene in wild-type Ax2 cells by homologous recombination. The integration of the disruption construct into the pakD gene was confirmed by PCR, and the loss of PakD in the pakD − cells was determined by Western blotting using affinity-purified anti-PakD antibodies raised against a PakD peptide. The expression of pakD cDNA in pakD − cells restored the expression of PakD protein, at levels higher than those observed in wild-type cells. The influence of PakD on development was explored by observing phenotypic differences between wild-type cells, pakD − cells, and pakD − cells expressing pakD. When seeded onto a bacterial lawn and allowed to develop, wild-type cells fully completed the developmental cycle and form fruiting bodies. The pakD − cells did not aggregate and therefore formed no structures at all, even after 48 h of starvation. However, pakD expression was able to rescue the aggregation defect seen in the pakD − cells, insofar as mounds formed. Development did not proceed beyond this point. This suggests that not only is PakD required for aggregation, but its regulated expression is needed for development past the mound stage. FIG 1 PakD is required for aggregation. Wild-type Ax2, pakD −, and pakD − :: pakDOE cells were collected after 8 h of starvation, and their proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. PakD was identified by Western blotting with anti-PakD antibodies.... To better understand the developmental defects associated with PakD misexpression, aggregation was examined in more detail. As reported previously, wild-type cells starved in buffer were able to aggregate at densities as low as 28 × 10 3 cells/cm 2, and the addition of recombinant CMF allowed aggregation at 7 × 10 3 cells/cm 2. Loss of PakD blocked aggregation even at the highest cell density measured, and the addition of recombinant CMF had no apparent effect on aggregation for pakD − cells. Overexpression of pakD in pakD − cells not only rescued the defective aggregation but allowed aggregation at cell densities as low as 7 × 10 3 /cm 2, well below the minimal density required for wild-type cells to aggregate. Therefore, when starved, cells lacking PakD behave as though they are at a low cell density and are nonresponsive to conditioned medium. In contrast, cells overexpressing pakD behave as though they are at a high cell density. Taken together, these data suggest that PakD is required for aggregation and is a positive regulator of CMF sensing. TABLE 1 PakD regulates low-cell-density aggregation pakD − cells express the developmentally regulated gene carA, encoding cAR1. The developmental program of D. discoideum requires the expression of developmental genes such as carA, which encodes the cell surface receptor for cAMP, cAR1. The failure of pakD − cells to undergo development could be caused by a failure to initiate the developmental program—specifically, to express carA. To examine this possibility, carA expression was measured by RT-PCR in wild-type and pakD − cells both in the vegetative state and during early development. As seen in Fig. 2, wild-type cells express carA at high levels within 4 h after the onset of starvation and maintain its expression 8 h into development. pakD − cells also express carA within 4 h of the initiation of starvation, but at a lower level. However, by 8 h into development, carA expression is high. Because carA is expressed in pakD − cells, they are able to express proteins required for early development and aggregation. FIG 2 pakD − cells express the developmental gene carA. By use of an oligo primer, cDNA was created from RNA isolated from vegetative and starved wild-type and pakD − cells, and RT-PCR was performed with primers for carA. Simultaneous reactions... PakD is involved in cAMP chemotaxis. cAMP chemotaxis is required for efficient aggregation. To address the possibility that the failure of pakD − cells to aggregate may be due to poor cAMP chemotaxis, we performed under-agarose chemotaxis assays. In these assays, the ability of cells to migrate efficiently under agarose toward a chemoattractant is measured. Wild-type and pakD − cells were first starved and then assessed for chemotaxis toward cAMP. The efficiency of chemotaxis was determined by measuring the speed, directionality, and chemotactic index of the cells. Speed is measured as the total distance the cell traveled divided by time. In agreement with previous work, we found that the average speed of Ax2 cells was 6.8 μm/min. Interestingly, pakD − cells had a lower speed than wild-type cells, suggesting that pakD − cells have impaired motility in a cAMP gradient. Directionality is a measure of the deviation from a straight path, where 1 equals a straight line and zero represents a random walk, with the cell ending up back where it started. pakD − cells had a lower directionality value than wild-type cells, suggesting that pakD − cells have difficulty maintaining directed movement. The chemotactic index is a measure of how well a cell moves up a concentration gradient. It is defined as the cosine of the angle between the path that the cell took and a path directly up the cAMP concentration gradient. Thus, a value of 1 means that the cell moved straight up the gradient, whereas a value of zero means that the cell moved exactly perpendicular to the gradient. pakD − cells had a lower chemotactic index than wild-type cells, suggesting that pakD − cells are unable to move efficiently toward the source of cAMP. These results indicate that cells lacking PakD cannot properly respond to and move in a gradient of cAMP, suggesting that PakD is required for proper cAMP chemotaxis. FIG 3 PakD regulates chemotaxis toward cAMP. Time lapse images of 6-h-starved cells migrating under agarose toward 10 μM cAMP were taken. Individual cells were tracked with ImageJ software, and their speed, directionality, and chemotactic index... This defect could be specific to cAMP chemotaxis or could be due to a general defect in chemotaxis. To distinguish between these possibilities, we used the same assay to examine chemotaxis toward folate, which, while utilizing distinct cell surface receptors and signaling pathways, uses the same underlying mechanics of cell motility as cAMP chemotaxis. We found no significant difference in speed, directionality, or chemotactic index between Ax2 and pakD − cells. C ). Thus, PakD does not appear to be necessary for proper folate chemotaxis. Taken together, these data suggest that PakD is involved in chemotaxis to some but not all chemoattractants and thus is not involved in general chemotaxis. FIG 4 PakD does not regulate chemotaxis toward folate. Time lapse images of vegetative cells migrating under agarose toward folate were taken. Individual cells were tracked with ImageJ software, and their speed, directionality, and chemotactic index... PakD plays a role in cell polarization in response to cAMP. Chemotaxis toward cAMP requires that cells become polarized along the gradient. Thus, a possible explanation for defective cAMP chemotaxis in pakD − cells may be poor polarization in response to a cAMP gradient. To address this, starved wild-type and pakD − cells were placed in a cAMP gradient. After the cells were given time to sense the gradient, they were visualized by fixing and staining for F-actin. Cell polarity was quantified by calculating the ratio of an individual cell's minor axis to its major axis. A value of 1 indicates that a cell is a perfect circle and is not polarized. As a cell becomes more polarized, it becomes more elongated, and therefore, the ratio decreases. Wild-type cells became polarized effectively along the gradient. pakD − cells, however, were significantly less polar than wild-type cells. This suggests a role for PakD in establishing or maintaining cell polarity in response to a cAMP gradient. FIG 5 pakD − cells have polarity defects in a cAMP gradient. Cells were starved for 5 h and were then placed in a cAMP gradient with a maximum concentration of 10 μM. Cells were fixed and stained in order to visualize F-actin organization. Cell... PakD is involved in F-actin polymerization in response to cAMP. Cell polarization, and thus cAMP chemotaxis, requires proper F-actin polarization in response to cAMP. Since pakD − cells have poor cAMP chemotaxis and cell polarization, these mutants may be deficient in F-actin polymerization. To explore this possibility, the ability of pakD − cells to polymerize F-actin in response to cAMP was examined. As observed previously, cAMP stimulated a sharp peak of F-actin polymerization in wild-type cells after 5 s and a smaller, broader peak 40 to 60 s after stimulation. Interestingly, pakD − cells showed a decrease in F-actin polymerization upon cAMP stimulation. This decrease roughly mirrors the wild-type response, with troughs at 5 s and 30 s. This finding suggests that pakD is involved in regulating actin polymerization in response to cAMP. FIG 6 pakD − cells polymerize F-actin differently from wild-type cells. Six-hour-starved wild-type and pakD − cells were fixed and stained with rhodamine-phalloidin at the indicated times after stimulation with cAMP. Fluorescence... PakD is needed for actin organization. Given the abnormal cAMP-stimulated F-actin polymerization, pakD − cells may have defects in F-actin organization, as seen by filopodial and pseudopodial extensions. To quantify the filopods and pseudopods formed, we stained cells for F-actin and calculated the circularity of cells. Circularity is defined as 4π/perimeter 2. Thus, a cell that forms a perfect circle has a value of 1. A cell with an increased number of extensions has a drastically increased perimeter, which leads to decreased circularity. As seen in Fig. 7, 6-h-starved wild-type cells extended pseudopods and exhibited filopodia. In contrast, starved pakD − cells showed minimal extensions and thus had increased circularity. This finding suggests that the loss of PakD causes distinct changes in F-actin localization. FIG 7 Actin organization is altered in pakD − cells. Cells were starved for 5 h, fixed, and stained with rhodamine-phalloidin to visualize F-actin organization. Filopodia and membrane extensions were quantified with ImageJ software, and circularity,... PakD is localized to membrane extensions, pseudopods, and uropods. To address how PakD could possibly be influencing chemotaxis and actin dynamics, we examined the localization of PakD in fixed, starved cells by using affinity-purified anti-PakD antibodies. PakD staining was localized to two distinct areas within the cell: a spot near the nucleus and/or the edges of cell protrusions. As expected, pakD − cells showed very little staining. When wild-type cells were first starved and then placed in a cAMP gradient, PakD became localized to pseudopods and uropods. This suggests that PakD is localized in areas of the cell undergoing actin remodeling. FIG 8 PakD is localized to cell protrusions, pseudopods, and uropods. Six-hour-starved wild-type and pakD − cells in PBM or wild-type cells exposed to a cAMP gradient were fixed, labeled with anti-PakD antibodies, and imaged by confocal microscopy.... DISCUSSION To initiate development, individual Dictyostelium discoideum cells must aggregate using cAMP as a chemoattractant. This requires coordinated regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. However, even in the absence of cAMP, starvation induces cytoskeletal changes, namely, membrane ruffling and pseudopodial extensions. This change appears to prepare the cell for chemotaxis by activating cytoskeletal rearrangement so that when cells sense cAMP, they can extend a pseudopod toward the source of cAMP and thus initiate aggregation. Here we describe a putative protein kinase, PakD, that is required for these starvation-induced cytoskeletal changes and is thus involved in regulating the actin cytoskeleton upon starvation. Cells lacking PakD are unable to aggregate. Under-agarose chemotaxis assays suggest that the inability of the pakD − cells to aggregate may be due to their poor chemotaxis toward cAMP. Chemotaxis toward folate is normal in vegetative pakD − cells, suggesting a specific role for PakD in cAMP chemotaxis. Interestingly, chemotaxis toward cAMP is not abolished in pakD − cells; it is just inefficient, with decreased speed, directionality, chemotactic index, and polarity. Thus, cAMP signaling appears to be occurring in pakD − cells, since known cAMP signaling mutants completely abolish cAMP chemotaxis. This suggests that PakD is not involved in regulating cAMP signaling but may be involved in the ability of cAMP signaling to regulate the actin cytoskeleton. Efficient chemotaxis requires the ability to detect the chemoattractant gradient, establish a leading edge, and polarize the cell in order to generate forward cell movement. pakD − cells are unable to achieve appropriate cell speed or cell polarity in response to cAMP. Thus, these cells either do not sense the chemoattractant or cannot respond to the chemical signal. These defects can be caused by poor F-actin polymerization. F-actin polymerization occurs with specific temporal and spatial kinetics, enabling the cell to extend a pseudopod at the leading edge of a cell and thus migrate toward the chemoattractant. In response to cAMP, D. discoideum cells polymerize F-actin 5 s and 40 to 60 s after stimulation. This second F-actin polymerization peak is associated with pseudopod extension and is believed to optimize chemotaxis. Interestingly, pakD − cells show peaks of F-actin depolymerization at 5, 30, and 80 s after cAMP stimulation. In accordance with carA expression and the slight cAMP chemotaxis and cell polarization, the depolymerization response argues that pakD − cells are able to sense cAMP. This also suggests that PakD is a positive regulator of cAMP-stimulated F-actin polymerization. The fact that the loss of PakD causes active depolymerization suggests that there is a cAMP-stimulated actin depolymerizer and that PakD inhibits its activity. The ability of PakD to inhibit actin depolymerization and its localization could explain the polarity defects observed in pakD − cells. For PakD to influence actin, it needs to be localized where actin is modified. PakD is localized to pseudopods and uropods, areas of actin remodeling in chemotaxing cells. PakD is clearly absent from the lateral surfaces of a cell. Thus, as a wave of cAMP passes across a cell, the lateral surfaces, which lack PakD, will experience actin depolymerization. In contrast, the pseudopod and the uropod, which contain PakD, will be able to polymerize actin. With the polymerization of actin localized to the front and the back of the cell, the cell will become polarized. This is consistent with what is known about the actin-remodeling protein WASP. WASP is required for cell polarization, is localized to the pseudopod and uropod, and is required for actin polymerization at these sites, much like PakD. Since PakD is predicted to be a protein kinase, its localization may be due in part to the localization of its possible substrates. There are many known regulators of actin in D. discoideum, such as PldB, PaxB, cofilin 2, and severin. Some of these proteins are also known to be phosphoproteins, so it is possible that PakD may regulate one or more of these proteins by phosphorylation. PldB, PaxB, and CofC-1 are all localized to cell protrusions, which could make them accessible to PakD, supporting the possibility that they may be substrates. Actin-binding proteins and protein kinases interact and cooperatively regulate the actin cytoskeleton. To date, though, no one has demonstrated how a secreted signaling molecule may utilize these proteins to regulate the actin cytoskeleton during quorum sensing. In addition, we do not know how these proteins work together to control the actin cytoskeleton. Given the ease of biochemistry and genetics studies of Dictyostelium, we are poised to tease out the relationships of these proteins, offering insight into the mechanisms used by secreted factors to regulate the cytoskeleton and thus cell behavior. 