Ric-8 folding of G proteins better explains Ric-8 apparent amplification of G protein–coupled receptor signaling You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Ric-8 folding of G proteins better explains Ric-8 apparent amplification of G protein–coupled receptor signaling Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 20; 110: E3148. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A v.110; 2013 Aug 20 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Ric-8 folding of G proteins better explains Ric-8 apparent amplification of G protein–coupled receptor signaling Gregory G. Tall, Bharti R. Patel, and PuiYee Chan Additional article information In their PNAS article, Kataria et al. conclude that “… Dictyostelium resistant to inhibitors of cholinesterase 8, in contrast to mammalian Ric-8, does not play a role in the expression or folding of G proteins.” We contend that the experimental evidence presented to support this claim is not sufficient. Figure 5 A reported similar steady-state whole cell Gα2 levels in a ric-8 -null organism vs. a WT control. This experiment reveals no information about the functionality or folded state of Gα2 or any other Gα subunit in ric-8 -null Dictyostelia. In Ric-8A -null mouse embryonic stem cell whole cell lysates, we reported slight reductions of particular Gα subunits and dramatic reductions of others. However, Gαo and Gα13 were reduced dramatically in a subcellular membrane fraction prepared from Ric-8A -null cells because these G proteins were not folded properly during biosynthesis. The individual stabilities of misfolded Gα subunits differ depending on subtype. Gα subunit misfolded status in Ric-8 absence may not always be revealed by immunoblotting Gα subunits from whole cell lysates. More than 10 published reports have provided evidence that Ric-8 homologs in human cells, mice, Drosophila, Caenorhabditis elegans, Neurospora, and Spodoptera frugiperda influence the functional abundance of endogenous and recombinant G protein α subunits. If Dictyostelium Ric-8 is to be considered unique among all of these investigated Ric-8 homologs and lack any ability to participate in Dictyostelium G protein biosynthetic folding, more evidence must be provided to support this claim. The authors make the summary conclusion that the “relevant” function of mammalian and Dictyostelium Ric-8 proteins in G protein signaling is to act as amplifiers of G proteins that have been activated by G protein–coupled receptors. All of the results in which Kataria et al. observed clear G protein signaling aberrancies in ric-8 -null Dictyostelia might be explained if Ric-8 was acting as a signal amplifier, but these observations are explained equally as well if the expressed G proteins in ric-8 -null Dictyostelia had dysfunctional folds. More evidence is required to discriminate the chaperoning and putative signal amplification functions of Ric-8 proteins in all species. It is imprudent to discount the relevancy of either of these activities at this time. Footnotes The authors declare no conflict of interest. Article information Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 20; 110: E3148. Published online 2013 Jul 12. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1307476110 PMCID: PMC3752205 PMID: 23852733 Gregory G. Tall, 1 Bharti R. Patel, and PuiYee Chan Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, 14642 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: ude.retsehcoR.CMRU@llaT_yrogerG. Author contributions: G.G.T., B.R.P., and P.C. wrote the paper. PMC Copyright notice See the article " Dictyostelium Ric8 is a nonreceptor guanine exchange factor for heterotrimeric G proteins and is important for development and chemotaxis " in volume 110 on page 6424. See the reply " Reply to Tall et al.: Dictyostelium Ric8 does not have a chaperoning function during development and chemotaxis " in volume 110 on page E3149. Articles from Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America are provided here courtesy of National Academy of Sciences 