 The SCAR/WAVE complex drives the actin polymerisation that underlies protrusion of the front of the cell and thus drives migration. However, it is not understood how the activity of SCAR/WAVE is regulated to generate the infinite range of cellular shape changes observed during cell motility. What are the relative roles of the subunits of the SCAR/WAVE complex? What signaling molecules do they interact with? And how does the complex integrate all this information in order to control the temporal and spatial polymerisation of actin during protrusion formation? Unfortunately, the interdependence of SCAR complex members has made genetic dissection hard. In our recent paper, 1 we describe stabilization of the Dictyostelium SCAR complex by a small fragment of Abi. Here we summarize the main findings and discuss how this approach can help reveal the inner workings of this impenetrable complex. Keywords: SCAR, WAVE, Abi, Arp 2/3, actin, pseudopod, chemotaxis, motility The SCAR/WAVE complex and its inputs The highly conserved SCAR complex causes actin-based protrusion during cell migration in a diverse range of eukaryotes including the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, Drosophila melanogaster, and mammalian cells. 2 - 4 SCAR/WAVE is a WASP family member that induces actin nucleation via recruitment and activation of the Arp2/3 complex. 5, 6 In vivo, SCAR activity is regulated by its inclusion within a ~400 kDa regulatory complex consisting of PIR121, Nap1, HSPC300, and Abi. 7 - 9 This regulatory complex undoubtedly acts as a signaling hub, where competing inputs are integrated and coupled to the activation of SCAR. However, we still lack even a basic knowledge of what the complex interacts with, never mind how such possible interactions are interpreted and translated into actin polymerisation, motility, and chemotaxis. 10 Confusingly, WASP, which lacks the regulatory complex, can respond to many of the same inputs. 2 The different roles of SCAR complex members The recent resolution of the human SCAR complex crystal structure has greatly advanced our understanding of how these proteins interact with SCAR and one another. 11, 12 However, the relative contribution of the individual complex members to the activity of the whole remains poorly understood and still awaits elucidation. Thus far, it has been established that the SCAR complex interacts with its best-known activator, Rac, via PIR121. 11, 13 As highlighted in Figure 1, Abi has been implicated in the recruitment of the SCAR complex to signaling complexes containing Rac. 14 Furthermore, multiple, stimulus-responsive phosphorylation sites have also been identified across the different SCAR complex members. 15 Figure 1. The role of Abi within the SCAR complex. The SCAR complex is composed of PIR121, Nap1, HSPC300, SCAR, and Abi. The SCAR complex promotes activation of the Arp2/3 complex (magenta... In vivo, SCAR is entirely dependent on its regulatory complex for stability, and in the absence of any one complex member, SCAR is rapidly degraded. 3, 16 Herein lies the problem that has confounded the study of the individual SCAR complex members: the inability to separate the function of the individual complex members from their requirement for complex stability. Numerous studies have endeavored to replace different SCAR complex members with mutant or truncated proteins in order to determine their function. 17, 18 However, all too often, the effect on complex stability has been ignored. Most of Abi is dispensable Previously, our lab has characterized the individual SCAR complex member gene disruptants in Dictyostelium discoideum. 16, 19 - 21 These mutants typically exhibit a scr A null phenotype due to the degradation of SCAR. We reasoned that if SCAR complex stability could be restored in the different SCAR complex member nulls, we could finally address the relative role of these proteins to the activity of the complex as a whole. In particular we sought to identify functional domains required for normal SCAR complex recruitment and activity. To achieve this, we set about generating a deletion series of the Dictyostelium PIR121, Nap1, and Abi with the objective of identifying minimal fragments of these proteins that could stabilize the complex. This would enable us to assign specific functions to the absent domains. Incremental truncation of both PIR121 and Nap1 failed to yield any fragments that could stabilize SCAR. Although not available at the time, the SCAR complex crystal structure subsequently revealed the highly convoluted conformation of both PIR121 and Nap1 within the complex, which undoubtedly underlies the failure of this approach in theses cases. In contrast, in our recent paper we demonstrated that we could successfully delete 239 of the 332 amino acids comprising Abi and retain both SCAR and SCAR complex stability in the Dictyostelium abi A null. 1 Surprisingly, we found that none of this sequence was necessary for robust recruitment of the SCAR complex to the tips of pseudopodia. The suppressed rate of pseudopod formation in the abi A null was also restored, implying that the majority of Abi sequence is not required for SCAR complex activation either. Although the N-terminus of Abi was specifically involved in regulating the SCAR complex during cytokinesis, apparently negatively, we could find no phenotype associated with a loss of the C-terminal polyproline tail. What is the true role of Abi within the SCAR complex? As summarized in Figure 1, it was concluded that SCAR complex localization and activity do not depend on any signals that are transduced through Abi. 1 Instead, we suggest that Abi serves to modulate the activity of SCAR, particularly during events such as cytokinesis. Despite low detailed amino acid identity, a C-terminal polyproline tail is a consistent feature of almost all Abi homologs, which implies that the polyproline domain does have a universal role in the regulation of the SCAR complex. We propose it acts as a non-essential signal integrator that tunes the activity of the SCAR complex after it has been activated by alternate pathways. Such a role is consistent with the evolutionary recent acquisition of a C-terminal SH3 domain found in metazoan Abi homologs. Even though this domain has been implicated in the regulation of the mammalian SCAR complex, it is not required for SCAR complex recruitment during actin-based protrusion. 14, 22 The attainment of multicellularity in metazoa has been accompanied with a huge increase in regulatory complexity, and cells within a tissue have very different requirements of the SCAR complex in comparison to free-living amoeba. For example, unlike amoebae that are constantly on the move, metazoan cells within a tissue presumably suppress SCAR complex activity until it is required during carefully choreographed events. We propose that Abi is the obvious candidate for the application of these additional layers of control. Future directions and conclusions Although deletion series analysis allowed us to explore the role of Abi within the SCAR complex, this has proved too crude a method to similarly investigate the function of the other complex members such as PIR121 and Nap1. We believe a subtler approach will be required to mutate these complex members while preserving complex stability. For instance, our lab has recently successfully used phosphomimetic mutation to study the activation of SCAR. 23 Few phosphosites have been identified within PIR121 and Nap1. PIR121 and Nap1 are also both so large that systematic alanine scanning mutagenesis is a daunting prospect. However, given the fragility of the SCAR complex, it may prove the only available option. The intricacy of the SCAR complex continues to block investigation from every angle, and as a result we have barely scratched the surface of how these proteins collectively function. Despite the difficulty, we believe that genetic approaches could still offer the key to unlocking the secrets of the SCAR complex. Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed. Notes Davidson AJ, Ura S, Thomason PA, Kalna G, Insall RH. Abi is required for modulation and stability of the SCAR/WAVE complex, but not localization or activity Eukaryot Cell 2013 12 1509 doi: 10.1128/EC.00116-13. Article information Commun Integr Biol. 2013 Nov; 6: e27033. Published online 2013 Nov 13. doi: 10.4161/cib.27033 PMCID: PMC3984289 PMID: 24753786 Andrew J Davidson * and Robert H Insall * The Beatson Institute for Cancer Research; Glasgow, UK * Correspondence to: Andrew J Davidson, Email: ku.ca.alg.nostaeb@nosdivaD.A and Robert H Insall, Email: ku.ca.alg.nostaeb@llasnI.R Received 2013 Oct 29; Accepted 2013 Nov 1. Copyright © 2013 Landes Bioscience This is an open-access article licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported License. The article may be redistributed, reproduced, and reused for non-commercial purposes, provided the original source is properly cited. See " Abi Is Required for Modulation and Stability but Not Localization or Activation of the SCAR/WAVE Complex " in Eukaryot Cell, volume 12 on page 1509. Articles from Communicative & Integrative Biology are provided here courtesy of Taylor & Francis 