 The Gene Ontology Normal Usage Tracking System is a community-based browser and usage guide for Gene Ontology terms and a community system for general GO annotation of proteins. GONUTS uses wiki technology to allow registered users to share and edit notes on the use of each term in GO, and to contribute annotations for specific genes of interest. By providing a site for generation of third-party documentation at the granularity of individual terms, GONUTS complements the official documentation of the Gene Ontology Consortium. To provide examples for community users, GONUTS displays the complete GO annotations from seven model organisms: Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Dictyostelium discoideum, Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, Danio rerio, Mus musculus and Arabidopsis thaliana. To support community annotation, GONUTS allows automated creation of gene pages for gene products in UniProt. GONUTS will improve the consistency of annotation efforts across genome projects, and should be useful in training new annotators and consumers in the production of GO annotations and the use of GO terms. GONUTS can be accessed at. The source code for generating the content of GONUTS is available upon request. GENE ONTOLOGY AND THE NEED FOR A GRANULAR USAGE GUIDE The Gene Ontology has become a standard for the consistent functional annotation of genes and gene products across all organisms. Well-established model organism databases devote considerable resources to providing high-quality GO annotation based on manual curation from the experimental literature. Annotation of genes from other organisms is often inferred on the basis of homology to one of the established model organisms. Two situations inspired us to build a general system to support community GO annotation. First, several well-established bacterial systems with extensive experimental literature were not well covered by GO annotations based on direct experimental evidence. Second, the wealth of new complete genome sequences includes many organisms where there is significant experimental literature, but the research communities are too small to support a model organism database. In some of these cases, the expertise in the experimental corpus is held by a small number of researchers focusing on specific biological problems. These experts could provide the most scientifically accurate and rich GO annotation and could provide useful input about the structure of the ontology itself, provided they familiarize themselves with the Gene Ontology. Typically these experts are only interested in a small number of genes and have little incentive to familiarize themselves with the intricacies of GO. Alternatively, researchers that are intimately familiar with GO have the potential to create many useful annotations, but typically do not have the necessary expertise to optimally annotate the wide variety of subject areas in the scientific literature. Either professional curators need to learn many new areas of biology, or experts need to become adequately acquainted with GO to provide quality annotations via community curation. Training of large numbers of community members in GO annotation would be aided by more detailed documentation of best practices and pitfalls of GO. The Gene Ontology is structured as a directed acyclic graph where documentation can be applied to an entire branch, or more optimally, at the level of individual terms. Building such detailed documentation is a Herculean task for any small group, such as the GO consortium. However, we reasoned that large-scale documentation could be incrementally built through community collaboration, especially if community members record the nuances they encounter while learning the annotation process. The nature of wiki-based systems allows revisions and corrections of false starts and errors in the learning process. A wiki provides an exceptional environment for this type of self-documenting system, as well as valuable resources such as revision history and a dedicated page for discussion. To capture detailed usage notes dealing with GO terms and to aid the annotation of specific genes by research experts, we constructed the Gene Ontology Normal Usage Tracking System, a wiki-based GO browser and community annotation system. GONUTS currently supports two main kinds of wiki-based content: pages to capture community usage notes for specific GO terms and editable pages displaying editable GO annotations for specific genes. GONUTS AS A GENE ONTOLOGY TERM BROWSER Figure 1 shows an example of a GONUTS page for a GO term. GO terms are represented by MediaWiki Category pages, which like biological ontologies, can be represented as DAGs. Each page contains information about the GO term from the publicly downloadable ontology files at. A set of PHP scripts updates these GO term pages once per week as described in the Supplementary Methods section. MediaWiki automatically generates links to the child terms as subcategories, and links to associated genes as category members. We modified the normal MediaWiki category-page display with a set of extensions that provide an AJAX-based expansion/contraction to allow viewing the descendants of each child term. Users also have the option to filter associated genes for terms that have a large number of members. Each page also includes a link to the term in AmiGO, the official web-based term browser of the GO consortium. GONUTS term pages also include a graphical representation of that ontology node from the EMBL-EBI. Clicking on the graphic takes the user to the EBI's QuickGO browser. The key component on each GO term page is the area for user-editable usage notes. MediaWiki pages allow for associated ‘Talk’ pages, which provide a place for discussion, commentary and questions for other users. In GONUTS, the ‘Talk’ pages for GO terms are seeded with links to the Sourceforge tracker for the GO consortium, which allows users to find prior-related discussions. Figure 1. A typical GO term page in GONUTS. Information about the GO term derived from the ontology files from the GO consortium, including id, definition, relationships, and parent terms. A ontology graph from the EBI. User-edited section for notes.... Users can search for GO terms or genes with GO annotations using GO id numbers or keywords in the normal MediaWiki search system. Although MediaWiki search does not currently allow wildcards, the search will find complete words in any order. Thus, terms related to cAMP-dependent protein kinases can be found using ‘cAMP protein kinase’ or ‘kinase protein cAMP’ in any order. To address the shortcomings of the native search, the ability to search GONUTS using Google has been added. USER-EDITABLE NOTES FOR EVERY GO TERM What sets GONUTS apart from other ontology browsers is the editable notes section on every term page. Browsing and searching for ontology terms or annotated genes is unrestricted, but registration is required for editing the notes. This is mainly to inhibit vandalism of the wiki; ‘wiki spam’ is a serious problem on many open wikis. We use a ‘vampire model’ for user registration on GONUTS: any registered user can create additional registered users without applying for permission from the central resource. These, in turn, can register their colleagues. This method of user creation removes the dependence on the involvement of administrators and allows the community to grow dynamically. Clicking the edit link to the right of the ‘Notes’ heading takes a logged-in user to a MediaWiki text entry page. Although editing the notes is not ‘What You See Is What You Get’, the standard MediaWiki markup is easy to learn and will be familiar to users of Wikipedia and many other wikis. Help pages about editing are available on GONUTS, Wikipedia and across the web. An important aspect of all wiki-based systems is that there is no requirement for users to learn any of the markup in order to contribute or edit content. The collaborative nature of wiki editing means that information can be added in plain text by one user and then formatted by another who is more familiar with the markup system. Moreover, even incomplete comments are potentially useful starting points for elaboration by other users. In order to maintain ease of use on the GO term pages, we have made a few modifications that make editing different from editing at Wikipedia. For example, we have simplified handling of references, which are important to the credibility of any community-edited text. A link is provided to insert a citation marker that accepts a PubMed ID number and retrieves the relevant reference information from PubMed's E-utilities. These are then collected in a references section that includes links to wiki pages for each publication. GENE PAGES When we first conceived GONUTS we wanted examples of high-quality annotations using specific GO terms, which community curators could use as role models for their own annotation. For this purpose, we included all of the GO annotations from a set of well-curated model organisms from the GO consortium's reference genomes project. Gene pages generated for the reference genomes include links to a details page in the submitting model organism database, and lists of all the GO annotations associated with that gene. The references field is converted into a citation, and a references section lists the references with links to PubMed and the citing database, as appropriate. As with the GO term pages, a Notes section is provided for user commentary. These notes about how the annotation of this gene was done by the source MOD informs the annotation of similar genes in other organisms. Although we initially envisioned GONUTS as an aid to annotation at other sites, such as EcoliWiki, we realized that there is demand for community annotation of gene function for many genomes that do not have well-established model organism databases. To meet this need we implemented an automated gene-page creator. Clicking on ‘Create new gene page’ in GONUTS takes the user to a form where the desired gene can be specified by any accession UniProt understands Submitting the form launches a script that creates a gene page for the protein of interest and preloads it with various types of information. At present we do not support user-created pages for genes encoding RNA products; this is planned for a later version. Figure 2 shows one of these user-created gene pages. The top section of the page is constructed using gene names, synonyms and accessions from UniProt. GO annotations from UniProt are automatically placed in a table in the lower section of the gene page. This table is editable using our TableEdit MediaWiki extension. Figure 2. A user-created GONUTS page for E. coli ihfB generated from its UniProt record. Community curation can involve providing information that supports or refutes existing annotations or entering new GO annotations. In the former case, contributing can be as simple as adding a NOT qualifier, a PubMed ID to a table row, or text to the comments field. When adding new annotations, we imagine that the user will have another copy of GONUTS, AmiGO, or their favorite ontology browser open in another web browser window to find appropriate GO terms. The user need only know the GO id when adding an annotation as the TableEdit extension will fill in the appropriate term name and ontology code. Pulldown menus allow the user to choose qualifiers and evidence codes, and a custom extension recognizes when with/from identifiers are needed. 