 The microsporidia are a group of obligate intracellular parasitic protists that have been implicated as both human and veterinary pathogens. The infectious process of these organisms is believed to be dependent upon the rapid influx of water into spores, presumably via aquaporins, transmembrane channels that facilitate osmosis. An AQP-like sequence of the microsporidium Encephalitozoon cuniculi, when cloned and expressed in oocytes of Xenopus laevis, rendered these oocytes highly permeable to water. No permeability to the solutes glycerol or urea was observed. Pre-treatment of EcAQP-expressing oocytes with HgCl 2 failed to inhibit their osmotic permeability, as predicted from EcAQP's lack of mercury-sensitive cysteine residues near the NPA motifs which line the AQP aqueous pore. EcAQP exhibits sequence identity to AQP A of Dictyostelium discoideum and human AQP 2. Further study of AQPs in microsporidia and their potential inhibitors may yield novel therapeutic agents for microsporidian infections. Keywords: Microsporidia, Aquaporin, Germination, Water permeability, Encephalitozoon, Xenopus oocytes 1. Introduction The phylum Microsporidia, a group of obligate intracellular parasitic protists, contains over 1200 species representing nearly 150 genera. Since the mid-1980s, these organisms have been increasingly implicated as agents of human disease, especially in their capacity as opportunistic parasites of AIDS patients and other immunosuppressed individuals. The most common clinical manifestation is chronic diarrhea and wasting due to enteric infection, but the spectrum of disease is wide and includes most organ systems. Albendazole and other benzimidazoles that bind tubulin, as well as fumagillin and its derivatives that inhibit methionine aminopeptidase type 2, have been identified as being useful agents for the treatment of microsporidiosis; however, effective and safe treatments do not yet exist for some of the microsporidian species that infect humans. Microsporidia produce an infectious, environmentally resistant spore, which is capable of extruding its internal polar filament and thereby inoculating its contents into a nearby host cell. The mechanism of spore germination has long been of interest to microsporidian researchers, and naturally it has been suggested that inhibition of this process would constitute an effective anti-microsporidian therapy. Germination stimuli are variable but are postulated to result in cleavage of the disaccharide trehalose into glucose and its metabolites, producing an increase in intrasporal pressure and osmotic swelling that leads to extrusion of the polar filament. Because water flux across the lipid bilayer is limited, it has been suggested that microsporidia may possess aquaporins, integral membrane channel proteins that facilitate osmosis. This suspicion was bolstered by the observation that germination of Brachiola algerae spores is inhibitable by mercury salts, which inhibit AQP function. Further evidence suggesting the presence of AQPs in microsporidia surfaced with the identification of a single AQP-like sequence within the genome of Encephalitozoon cuniculi, a human-pathogenic species. The present study was undertaken to functionally characterise the putative E. cuniculi AQP protein. Aquaporin function is typically assayed in RNA-injected Xenopus oocytes, where swelling occurs under osmotic stress due to expression of the exogenous AQP. Utilizing this assay, the osmotic permeability and solute conductivity of Ec AQP-injected oocytes were investigated. In addition, the Ec AQP amino acid sequence was compared to those of human, plant, fungal, and other protist parasite AQPs. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Parasites Encephalitozoon cuniculi was cultured in RK13 cells at 37 8C and 5% CO 2. Infected RK13 cells were maintained in continuous culture in minimum essential medium supplemented with 7% heat-inactivated FCS, 1% penicillin–streptomycin and 1% amphotericin B and subpassaged every week by trypsin-EDTA treatment. Spores were harvested from culture medium twice weekly. 2.2. Cloning and expression of EcAQP Genomic DNA was isolated from disrupted spores of E. cuniculi by SDS and proteinase K treatment and homogenization, followed by phenol–chloroform extraction, as previously described. Recognition sites for the restriction enzymes Xma I and Xba I were engineered onto the N- and C-termini, respectively, of Ec AQP, by PCR-amplification of genomic DNA. PCR was performed using Pfx DNA polymerase and 15 μM of each primer, 5′GACCC TCTAGA CTAAAAGCTGAGCTTGT ACAG3′ ); DNA was amplified for 35 cycles. The amplicon was cloned into the Xma I– Xba I multiple cloning site of the pGEMHE Xenopus expression vector by Xma I– Xba I digestion and mutual ligation of the amplicon and vector, yielding pGEMHE- Ec AQP. Escherichia coli strain DH5α was subsequently transformed by pGEMHE- Ec AQP; large-scale plasmid purification from ampicillin-screened colonies was accomplished by the HiSpeed Kit. Identity of pGEMHE- Ec AQP was confirmed by restriction digestion analysis and by sequencing. pGEMHE- Ec AQP was linearised downstream of the 3′ untranslated region by digestion with the restriction enzymes Sph I or Nhe I. cRNA was generated in vitro by the mMessage mMachine kit as per manufacturer's instructions using T7 RNA polymerase, nucleotide phosphate, 7-methyl-guanosine cap analog, and RNase-inhibitor. Xenopus laevis maintenance and surgical oocyte removal were performed as previously described. Defolliculated stages V and VI oocytes were injected with 55 ng in 37 nL of pGEMHE- Ec AQP mRNA or 37 nL water. Oocytes were incubated in isoosmotic ND96 buffer/pyruvate at 16 °C for 4–6 days, adding fresh buffer after 3 days. 2.3. Oocyte swelling assays Swelling assays were conducted at room temperature in plastic 96-well culture plates. For measurement of water permeability, oocytes were transferred to hypotonic source of ND96/pyruvate or, if indicated, pre-incubated for 5 min in isoosmotic ND96/pyruvate +0.1, 1, 10, 200 μM, or 1 mM HgCl 2 and then transferred to hypotonic ND96/pyruvate+HgCl 2. For measurement of solute conductivity, oocytes were transferred to ND96/pyruvate where 65 mM NaCl had been replaced with 130 mM glycerol or urea. Swelling was video-monitored every 3 s with a Zeiss SV11 dissecting microscope at 66×magnification, and a Retiga 1300 digital camera and IPLab software. Image analysis was accomplished with ImageJ software by converting images to binary and treating the oocyte as a growing sphere whose volume could be inferred from its cross-sectional area. Water permeability was calculated based on the first 60 s of the assay and according to the following equation: P f ={; V 0 and S are the initial volume and surface area of each individual oocyte, respectively; d/d t, the relative volume increase per unit time; V w, the molecular volume of water ; and osm in − out, the osmotic gradient between the inside and outside of the oocyte. Solute conductivity was inferred from d/d t. Water permeabilities and swelling rates were statistically compared with the Student's t -test. 2.4. Sequence analysis The BLAST program was used to search the databases for proteins similar to Ec AQP. The Biology Workbench was employed for Kyle–Doolittle hydropathy analysis, transmembrane segment prediction, CTREE phylogenetic construction, and multiple protein sequence alignment. 3. Results 3.1. Functional characterization of EcAQP Mean swelling rates of Ec AQP- and water-injected oocytes in hypotonic medium are plotted in Fig. 1 ; only 1 min of Ec AQP swelling is plotted due to bursting of some oocytes between 1 and 2 min. At 1 min, Ec AQP oocytes swelled on average 8.0±0.8%, compared with 1.8±0.2% for water-injected control oocytes; at 2 min, control oocytes had only swelled 3.4±0.35%. Endogenously expressed AQP 3 as well as osmosis across the lipid bilayer may account for swelling of control oocytes. The osmotic permeability, P f, of Ec AQP oocytes, 87 μm/s, differed significantly from that of controls. Osmotic permeability of HgCl 2 -treated and -untreated Ec AQP oocytes did not differ significantly for any of the tested HgCl 2 concentrations. Conductivities of Ec AQP oocytes to glycerol ·s −1 ) and urea ·s −1 ) did not differ significantly from those of control oocytes. Fig. 1 Ec AQP-injected Xenopus laevis oocyte swelling assay. After 1 min, Ec AQP-injected oocytes had swelled an average of 8.0 vs. 1.8% water-injected controls. Inset: Altered water permeability of Ec AQP-injected oocytes for all tested concentrations. Comparison of Ec AQP with existing proteins in the databases using BLAST revealed AQP A of Dictyostelium discoideum to be the most similar among named, characterised proteins; among human aquaporins, AQP2 was the closest match. In an unrooted phylogenetic construction of Ec AQP, human AQPs 0–9, and AQPs from several parasitic protists, two plants, and a yeast, Ec AQP clusters neither with the orthodox AQPs, which conduct only water, nor with the water- and solute-conducting aquaglyceroporins. Instead it branches closely with two other protist AQPs, one of which is an orthodox AQP of Trypanosoma cruzi while the other is an aquaglyceroporin of Toxoplasma gondii, and with an orthodox AQP from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Alignment of Ec AQP with human AQP 1 demonstrates the presence within Ec AQP of the two NPA motifs believed to line the AQP aqueous pore, and the absence of the cysteine residue aligned with C189 of AQP 1, which is believed to confer mercury-sensitivity to AQP 1. Fig. 4 Alignment of Ec AQP, human AQPs 1, 2, and AQP A of Dictyostelium... 4. Discussion Hundreds of AQPs or putative AQPs have been identified, from each of the three domains of life. Aquaporins are thought to exist natively as a homotetramer, with each 26–34 kDa monomer forming its own pore. The expected molecular weight of the Ec AQP protein is approximately 26.8 kDa; thus it is within the range for an AQP monomer. An `hourglass model' has been posited for the shape of the monomer, in which six transmembrane domains surround the pore, formed in part by two NPA motifs. These characteristics are also predicted for Ec AQP. In addition, the BLAST similarity searches strongly suggest that Ec AQP is a member of the AQP protein family. The significantly increased permeability of Ec AQP-injected Xenopus oocytes as compared to controls provides further evidence that the AQP-like gene within the E. cuniculi genome is indeed an aquaporin. Aquaporins of selected other protistan parasites have measured P f s of 32, 40, and 276 μm/s. The Ec AQP P f is similar to those of human AQPs 3, 2, and 5, which are considered to be in the high range for human aquaporins. However, because of differing levels of expression attributable to, among other factors, different amounts of cRNA injected by each investigator, and their varying translational and post-translational processing efficiencies, these comparisons are not strictly quantitative. Aquaporins are divided into two phylogenetically and functionally distinct groups : the classic, or orthodox AQPs, which are permeable to water, and the aquaglyceroporins, which are also permeable to glycerol and other small solutes. Neither the presence nor absence of solute conductivity by Ec AQP can be predicted based on the phylogeny in Fig. 3, as it clusters with neither group among the human AQPs, and branches closely with non-human AQPs of both types. However, its lack of solute conductivity, 3×10 −4 d·s −1, not significant relative to water-injected controls, and approximately an order of magnitude lower than the reported swelling rates of ~2×10 −3 d·s −1 for the T. gondii and P. falciparum aquaglyceroporins, is perhaps not surprising in light of the fact that Ec AQP shares highest identity among the human AQPs with orthodox AQP 2. Ec AQP also branches closely with a yeast AQP, which is consistent with recent data on the fungal origins of the phylum Microsporidia. Fig. 3 An unrooted phylogenetic tree of aquaporins including Ec AQP. This is based on CTREE alignment of protein sequences of Ec AQP, closest BLAST... Mercury-inhibition of osmotic permeability is a hallmark of many aquaporins and the observation that germination of spores of the microsporidian B. algerae was inhibited by treatment with mercury salts was interpreted as circumstantial evidence for microsporidian AQPs. It is also possible, however, that the inhibitory effect of mercury on germination observed by Frixione et al. is attributable to modification of other cysteine-containing micro-sporidian proteins. For example, Hayman et al. identified two Encephalitozoon intestinalis spore proteins with N-terminal cysteine-rich motifs, whose functions are as yet unknown. General cytotoxic effects of mercury may also be partially or wholly responsible for the observed inhibition of germination. Pre-treatment of Ec AQP-expressing oocytes with HgCl 2 did not inhibit swelling. Nonetheless, this does not preclude the classification of Ec AQP as an AQP, as several AQPs have documented mercury-insensitivity, e.g. the prototypical mercurial-insensitive AQP 4. Cysteine residue 189, which is close in primary sequence to the second of the NPA motifs which have been postulated to line the aqueous pore, has been shown by site-directed mutagenesis to be the mercury-sensitive residue of AQP 1 and site-directed mutagenesis to cysteine of any of four amino acids near the first NPA motif or one amino acid near the second NPA was found to confer mercury-sensitivity to AQP4 of Rattus norvegicus. Alignment of Ec AQP and AQP 1 amino acid sequences demonstrates that the Ec AQP amino acid near the second NPA corresponding to the C189 of AQP 1 is glycine, as well as a lack of any cysteine residues in the immediate vicinity of the first NPA motif. The absence of these cysteines may explain the apparent mercury-insensitivity of Ec AQP. Among human AQPs, the mercurial-insensitive AQP 4 is the second-closest match to Ec AQP according to BLAST analysis. In the future, it may be interesting to examine whether mercury-sensitivity could be conferred upon Ec AQP by site-directed mutagenesis of G203 to a cysteine residue. In conclusion, we believe that the functional swelling assay in Xenopus oocytes and amino acid sequence analysis provide evidence that the putative AQP-like sequence identified in the E. cuniculi genome may indeed be considered an AQP. As the germination of microsporidian spores is believed to depend on the rapid influx of water, it is hoped that further study of microsporidian AQPs and potential inhibitors of these proteins ) may yield novel therapeutic agents for human infections with these opportunistic pathogens. Acknowledgements This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health and the Department of Defense. Article information Int J Parasitol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 May 3. Published in final edited form as: Int J Parasitol. 2006 Jan; 36: 57–62. Published online 2005 Sep 19. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2005.08.013 PMCID: PMC3086640 NIHMSID: NIHMS209941 PMID: 16197948 Kaya Ghosh, a, b Clint D. Cappiello, a, c Sean M. McBride, d James L. Occi, b Ann Cali, b Peter M. Takvorian, b Thomas V. McDonald, d and Louis M. Weiss a, e, * Kaya Ghosh a Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA b Department of Biological Sciences, 101 Warren Street, Smith Hall, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA Find articles by Kaya Ghosh Clint D. Cappiello a Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA c Department of Biology, The College of New Jersey, P.O. Box 7718, Ewing, NJ 08628, USA Find articles by Clint D. Cappiello Sean M. McBride d Section of Molecular Cardiology, Departments of Medicine and Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA Find articles by Sean M. McBride James L. Occi b Department of Biological Sciences, 101 Warren Street, Smith Hall, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA Find articles by James L. Occi Ann Cali b Department of Biological Sciences, 101 Warren Street, Smith Hall, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA Find articles by Ann Cali Peter M. Takvorian b Department of Biological Sciences, 101 Warren Street, Smith Hall, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA Find articles by Peter M. Takvorian Thomas V. McDonald d Section of Molecular Cardiology, Departments of Medicine and Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA Find articles by Thomas V. McDonald Louis M. Weiss a Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA e Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA Find articles by Louis M. Weiss a Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA b Department of Biological Sciences, 101 Warren Street, Smith Hall, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA c Department of Biology, The College of New Jersey, P.O. Box 7718, Ewing, NJ 08628, USA d Section of Molecular Cardiology, Departments of Medicine and Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA e Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA * Corresponding author. Address: Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Yeshiva University, Rm F 504 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. Tel.: C1 718 430 2142; fax: C1 718 430 8543. ude.uy.mocea@ssiewml. PMC Copyright notice The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at Int J Parasitol 