 dictyBase, the model organism database for Dictyostelium discoideum, includes the complete genome sequence and expression data for this organism. Relevant literature is integrated into the database, and gene models and functional annotation are manually curated from experimental results and comparative multigenome analyses. dictyBase has recently expanded to include the genome sequences of three additional Dictyostelids, and has added new software tools to facilitate multigenome comparisons. The Dicty Stock Center, a strain and plasmid repository for Dictyostelium research has relocated to Northwestern University in 2009. This allowed us integrating all Dictyostelium resources to better serve the research community. In this chapter, we will describe how to navigate the website and highlight some of our newer improvements. Keywords: Dictyostelium discoideum, database, genomic sequence, multigenome, genome browser, Blast, gene page, functional annotation, strains, phenotypes 1. Introduction Established in 2003, dictyBase is the central repository of genome sequence data for Dictyostelium discoideum. It is the single portal to the most comprehensive, current, and highly curated database available online for this important model organism. The primary goals of dictyBase are to facilitate and promote the use of Dictyostelium as an experimental system, and to serve the needs of the Dictyostelium research community. Accuracy, usability, and service are our highest priorities. To accomplish these aims, dictyBase integrates the genome data with published research, provides research tools to analyze and retrieve data, and maintains a forum for collaboration within the research community, including an archived ListServ, a colleague database, and a history environment for which users can submit content. dictyBase houses the entire Dictyostelium genome, which consists of an approximately 34 Mbp nuclear genome, the 55-kb mitochondrial genome, the extrachromosomal ribosomal RNA genes, and over 163,000 EST sequences. Nearly 13,000 genes have been identified, and these serve as the central focus of dictyBase. Each gene has an individual gene page consisting of all relevant data and information pertaining to the gene and, if applicable, its protein product, including sequence, function, orthologs, phenotypes, literature references, and gene ontology terms. Automated processes were initially used to assign gene function, membership within a gene family, and GO terms, but experienced curators refine these preliminary assignments by examining experimental results from the literature. Most recently, curators have completed a manual review and where appropriate, refinement of all D. discoideum gene models. On an ongoing basis, curators focus on literature curation to improve functional annotation, add strains and mutant phenotypes, and associate gene ontology terms with gene products. dictyBase has undergone several rounds of upgrades to improve service and introduce new tools, and is now taking the initial steps toward becoming a genome portal for the Amoebozoa clade. Originally designed to house a single genome sequence, dictyBase has since expanded to accommodate additional Dictyostelid genomes, including Dictyostelium purpureum, Dictyostelium fasciculatum, and Polysphondylium pallidum. These additions prompted the development of a ‘unified’ BLAST server and an updated Genome Browser in which all four organisms are available for comparison. In addition, the Dicty Stock Center, a warehouse for Dictyostelium strains and plasmids, has relocated to Northwestern University in April 2009, providing a unique opportunity to completely integrate these two resources. In this chapter, we will elaborate on these points to give both the new and seasoned user insights on how to make optimal use of the abundant information in dictyBase. 2. dictyBase Access and Text Search dictyBase contains a wealth of data and information including genomic sequence data, gene annotations, technical protocols, literature, the Dicty Stock Center repository, and colleague profiles. All information can be accessed from the dictyBase front page, either through direct links and dropdowns, or through the search box. The front page contains announcements and news in the center. The left side contains direct links to pages of high interest, often added or changed in close discussion with our users. On the right side, the most recent Dictyostelium literature is displayed on a weekly basis. 2.1. The dictyBase top bar The blue top bar can be accessed from all dictyBase web pages, and contains seven categorized links to different sections of the database. These include websites for related genomes, educational resources and training protocols, tools, such as the BLAST server and the genome browser, the Stock Center pages, a download section, as well as forms for abstract submission and colleague entries. For a detailed listing see Table 1. Table 1 Linked Pages from the dictyBase Blue Top Bar. Links are available from all dictyBase pages, categorized into topics and organized as dropdown menus. In case of Download the top item directly links to the central download page. 2.2. General Search Nearly every dictyBase web page contains a simple search box in the upper right where any search term can be entered to search the entire database. See Table 2 for a complete list of searchable fields. Table 2 Searchable Items in General Search. The fields and pages searched when doing a general search via the search box found in the upper right corner of each dictyBase page. TIP: To widen the search, e.g. for gene families with the same name stem or if unsure of the gene name, or Gene ontology term, use the wildcard character. 2.3. Gene name search There is an extra button to restrict the search to gene names, for a faster return of the search output. For distinct gene names, the search output yields the specific gene page. However, if the gene name is a synonym of another gene, an intermediate screen appears displaying the search results. TIP: To open a gene page directly without going through search, type or paste a gene name or gene ID directly into the simple link ‘dictybase.org/gene/NAME/ID’. This works for primary gene names and identifiers. 3. Contents of dictyBase 3.1. Data and Annotations dictyBase is the central repository for information related to the species D. discoideum, and increasingly including other Dictyostelids. Data for Dictyostelium has been both imported from external resources, or actively and continuously annotated by curators at dictyBase. The data and annotations currently available at dictyBase are listed in Table 3. Table 3 D. discoideum Contents at dictyBase as of March 2011. 3.2. The Curated Model Each curated model is a curator reviewed gene model derived from careful inspection of an automated gene prediction. It may be an exact copy of the prediction or altered in one or several aspects, based on supporting evidence such as ESTs, RNAseq expression, or sequence similarity. Once a curated model has been created, it replaces the automated gene prediction as the sequence available from the gene page. A curated gene model is indicated by a green check mark and the supporting evidence is listed. An explanatory note may be added if needed. Fig. 1 Graphical gene display and curator statements on the Gene Page. The image also serves as a link to the Genome Browser and depicts a gene in the ‘Watson’ direction with the chromosomal coordinates on top.... As of June 2011, all gene predictions have been individually inspected and a curated model has been added where evidence allowed. This resulted in 11,987 curated models, which includes all gene models annotated for 33 genes with multiple transcripts and 650 curated pseudogenes. Annotated pseudogenes in dictyBase are genes that have significant homology to existing D. discoideum protein coding genes, as well as a confirmed frame shift and/or deletion. When a gene model was incorrectly predicted due to a frame shift in the genomic sequence and there was evidence that the genomic sequence was incorrect, e.g. from ESTs, curators added ‘artificial gaps’ in gene models to create the best possible open reading frame. Artificial gaps restored the correct protein sequence when the underlying genomic sequence had insertions, but in case of deletions it resulted in a loss of one or more amino acids. Extensive curator notes explain the situation, and in cases where the complete protein sequence could not be restored in the database, the correct sequence has been entered on the wiki page. Two examples of large groups of genes for which a curated model could not be determined are the transposable and retrotransposable elements where gene structure does not follow consensus exon/intron organization and there is little, if any, support available. TIP : Pseudogenes are indicated by addition of a “_ps” after the name, which in turn stems from the gene they are most similar to, for example pks4_ps. Transposable and retrotransposable elements contain a _TE or _RTE appendix, such as DDB_G0282919_TE, DDB_G0273327_RTE respectively. 3.3. Downloading Data dictyBase provides a central download page, linked from the top bar, from which users can obtain sequence data and continuously updated annotation files including gene ontology and mutant phenotypes, dictyBase ontologies, and protein domains. For a list of downloadable items see Table 4. Table 4 Downloads for D. discoideum and other Dictyostelid species. A. Downloads for D. discoideum. All downloadable files, which contain information that changes or expands regularly, are updated on a weekly or monthly basis. TIP: If you need to convert identifiers from one type to another, an ID Converter tool is available under Tools from the top bar. You may convert former DDB into current DDB identifiers, current DDB into DDB_G and UniProt identifiers, and any combination thereof. 3.4. Other dictyBase Pages In addition to the data and annotations, dictyBase contains many resources such as a Dictyostelium tutorial “Learn about Dictyostelium “, techniques, teaching protocols, nomenclature guidelines, pictures and videos, the dictyNews, the Dicty ListServ, links to Dicty laboratories, and information concerning the annual international Dictyostelium conference. These pages are accessible from the top bar under Explore and Community. About Us, Contact, and Help pages are available from links to the right of the dark blue top bar. 3.5. Community Annotations Each gene page in dictyBase links to a corresponding wiki page where all users have an account through which they may add information about the gene, including figures or photos. Curators recognize when new content has been added to the community wiki, and create a new link “View annotation for ” on the gene page. In addition, curators add a summary of the community annotation to the description field on the gene page, which enters the essence of the annotation into the database, thus making it searchable in dictyBase. Fig. 2 Community annotation display on the Gene Page. When a community annotation has been added to the wiki page for the gene, curators add a summary of that annotation in the description field, followed by the name of the submitter, date of annotation, and... 4. The dictyBase Gene Page Each gene in dictyBase has its own Gene Page, the central resource for all information about the Dictyostelium gene and its product. Figure 3 depicts a typical Gene Summary Page that is divided into sections described in detail in Subheadings 4.1-4.9. Most sections link to separate details pages, which are also accessible from browser tabs on top of the gene page. The page is also customizable, as sections can be collapsed by clicking on the “–“ button in the navigation tools on each dark blue horizontal bar. This information is stored in browser cookies and the section will remain collapsed on every subsequently visited gene page, until the section is opened again on any gene page. The small arrow button on navigation tools returns the display to the top of the page.. Fig. 3 The dictyBase Gene Page. Tabbed browsing. The tabs on top link to Detail Pages as depicted in Fig. 4. Page Navigation tools and link to Help. General Information including gene names and product. Genomic Information with coordinates and... Fig. 4 dictyBase Details Pages accessible from tabs on the Gene Page. Protein Information including protein domains and sequence. Complete Gene Ontology Info. List of Orthologs. Complete gene-related Strain and Phenotype info.. Complete list... TIP: Many sections are only available on a gene page if data exists for these sections, e.g., if there are annotations for gene ontology, or if there are phenotypes curated. If the section is not visible, no data is available! TIP: Each section has a button with a question mark to the far right next to the navigation tools on the dark blue horizontal bar, which links to a pop-up Help page. In addition, each tab at the top of the page has a link to Help pages. 4.1. General Information The General Information section on top contains the primary gene name, a name description, the unique gene ID, the gene product, any alternative gene or protein names, a short description, and links to the community annotation wiki page. Note the red link to an existing community annotation. TIP: To ensure finding the same gene page on the next visit, make a note of the unique and stable gene ID. In the very rare case that the gene ID becomes obsolete, you will be redirected to the new ID. 4.2. Genomic Information This section displays location, chromosome number, coordinates, and orientation of the gene, as well as a gene map that links to the Genome Browser. TIP: Gene Models in the Watson orientation are in red with the arrow pointing to the right, as the gene is located on the top DNA strand. Gene tracks in the Crick orientation are depicted in blue with an arrow pointing to the left 4.3. Gene Product Information The Gene Product Information section, displays and links to numerous data and tools. First, the curation status of a gene model, tells the user if the gene model has been curated, and what evidence was available to support the call. Next, there are protein length, molecular weight, and a link to the Protein Page on the left, and the exon coordinates are listed on the right. This section also provides access to BLAST, and in a dropdown the sequence one wishes to BLAST - protein, cDNA, or genomic sequence - can be preselected and auto-filled. The BLAST Server can also be accessed from a tab in the top bar of each gene page. In addition, the sequence of the gene can be accessed from here, by preselecting the sequence type and clicking the Get Fasta button, with the sequence opening in a new window. TIP: Many Details Pages such as Protein, Gene Ontology, Phenotypes, BLAST, or 