Reply to Tall et al.: Dictyostelium Ric8 does not have a chaperoning function during development and chemotaxis You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Reply to Tall et al.: Dictyostelium Ric8 does not have a chaperoning function during development and chemotaxis Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 20; 110: E3149. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A v.110; 2013 Aug 20 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Reply to Tall et al.: Dictyostelium Ric8 does not have a chaperoning function during development and chemotaxis Rama Kataria, Peter J. M. van Haastert, and Arjan Kortholt Additional article information In our recent paper, we conclude that Dictyostelium Ric8 is as a nonreceptor guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the Gα protein important for amplification of G protein–coupled receptor signaling. In their letter, Tall et al. dispute this conclusion and suggest that a function of Dictyostelium Ric8 in folding of the Gα protein might better explain the phenotype than its function as GEF. However, we show that WT and ric8 -null cells have similar steady-state expression levels of Gα. To test the functionality of the Gα2 protein, we analyzed the interaction between Gα2 and the cAR1 receptor. In vitro, this was measured as the inhibition of cAMP binding induced by full activation of Gα2 with nonhydrolysable GTPγS. The reduction in cAMP binding in ric8 null is similar to that in WT, indicating that a similar amount of Gα is functionally coupled to the receptor. Second, dissociation of Gα2βγ was monitored in vivo by measuring the cAMP-induced FRET change between the FRET pair Gα2-Cerulean and Gβ-Venus. The FRET signal before stimulation is similar in ric8 -null cells compared with WT cells, indicating the presence of similar amounts of Gα2βγ complex. Furthermore, we show that Ric8 is not essential for the initial dissociation of heterotrimeric G proteins and subsequent activation of Ras by uniform chemoattractant. Consistent with its function as GEF, recombinant Ric8 stimulates nucleotide exchange of Gα2 in vitro, and the in vivo FRET assays showed that prolonged dissociation of Gα2βγ on uniform cAMP stimulation requires Ric8. Together, we conclude in the paper that these results provide no evidence that Ric8 could play a role as chaperone for Gα2 folding but clearly show that Ric8 functions as a GEF and amplifier of Gα2 signaling. Recent studies have shown that mammalian Ric8-A may have different effects on individual Gα subunits; it acts as a a GEF for Gαq, Gαi1, and Gαo, whereas in the case of Gαi1, a chaperoning function has been proposed. In our research, we mainly focused on the role of Ric8 in regulating chemotaxis and development. Of the 12 identified Gα subunits in Dictyostelium, Gα2 is coupled to the cAR1 receptor and is essential for cAMP-mediated development and chemotaxis, whereas Gα4 is essential for mediating chemotaxis toward folate. In addition to Gα2 and Gα4, Dictyostelium Ric8 also binds to Gα1, Gα7, Gα9, and Gα12. Further research is necessary to determine the function of Ric8 for these Gα subunits: GEFs and signal amplifiers as for Gα2 or a chaperoning function to assist folding of these Gα subunits. Footnotes The authors declare no conflict of interest. Article information Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 20; 110: E3149. Published online 2013 Jul 12. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1309837110 PMCID: PMC3752240 PMID: 24137657 Rama Kataria, Peter J. M. van Haastert, and Arjan Kortholt 1 Department of Cell Biochemistry, University of Groningen, 9747 AG, Groningen, Netherlands 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: ln.gur@tlohtroK.A. Author contributions: R.K., P.J.M.v.H., and A.K. wrote the paper. PMC Copyright notice See the letter " Ric-8 folding of G proteins better explains Ric-8 apparent amplification of G protein–coupled receptor signaling " in volume 110 on page E3148. See " Dictyostelium Ric8 is a nonreceptor guanine exchange factor for heterotrimeric G proteins and is important for development and chemotaxis " in volume 110 on page 6424. Articles from Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America are provided here courtesy of National Academy of Sciences 