Allosteric Communication in the Dynein Motor Domain You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Allosteric Communication in the Dynein Motor Domain Cell. 2014 Nov 6; 159: 857–868. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Cell Author Manuscript HHS Public Access Allosteric Communication in the Dynein Motor Domain Gira Bhabha, Hui-Chun Cheng,, and Ronald D. Vale Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials Supp Movie S1. NIHMS648126-supplement-Supp_Movie_S1.mov GUID: 4B8E3425-9AC6-44AC-BBC0-79E6918B26C8 Supplement. NIHMS648126-supplement-Supplement.pdf GUID: B6EE785A-9BE6-4569-A914-ABABCDEEAD2C SUMMARY Dyneins power microtubule motility using ring-shaped, AAA-containing motor domains. Here, we report X-ray and electron microscopy structures of yeast dynein bound to different ATP analogs, which collectively provide insight into the roles of dynein’s two major ATPase sites, AAA1 and AAA3, in the conformational change mechanism. ATP binding to AAA1 triggers a cascade of conformational changes that propagate to all six AAA domains and cause a large movement of the “linker,” dynein’s mechanical element. In contrast to the role of AAA1 in driving motility, nucleotide transitions in AAA3 gate the transmission of conformational changes between AAA1 and the linker, suggesting that AAA3 acts as a regulatory switch. Further structural and mutational studies also uncover a role for the linker in regulating the catalytic cycle of AAA1. Together, these results reveal how dynein’s two major ATP-binding sites initiate and modulate conformational changes in the motor domain during motility. INTRODUCTION Myosin, kinesin and dynein, ATP-driven cytoskeletal motor proteins, power various forms of biological motility including muscle contraction, ciliary beating, intracellular cargo transport, and movements during cell division. Specific transitions in the motor ATPase cycles are coupled to the binding and dissociation from a polymer track and the execution of a “power stroke,” a conformational change that biases the movement of the motor in one direction along the polymer. Although they bind different cytoskeletal polymers, myosin and kinesin evolved from a common ancestor, similar to small GTPases, and share similarities in how they amplify small conformational changes in their active sites into larger structural changes that drive motility. Dynein is a member of the AAA family and thus evolved through an evolutionary lineage separate from that of kinesin and myosin. Each AAA domain in AAA ATPases is typically composed of a large α/β subdomain and small α-helical subdomain. Many AAA proteins self-assemble into homo-hexameric rings and use ATP energy to translocate polypeptide chains or nucleic acids into the central pore. Dynein is unusual in the AAA protein family; its six AAA modules are contained within a single, large polypeptide chain, and each module has evolved its own unique sequence and function. The first four AAA domains bind ATP, whereas AAA5 and AAA6 do not. ATP hydrolysis at AAA1 is required for dynein motility, and mutational studies indicate that it is the main hydrolytic site. AAA2 lacks key residues for nucleotide hydrolysis and appears to constitutively bind nucleotide. ATP hydrolysis at AAA3 plays an important role, given that a hydrolysis mutation in AAA3 reduces dynein motility and ATPase activity by >20-fold. ATP hydrolysis at AAA4 appears to have a more subtle role, as a AAA4 hydrolysis mutation only decreases the velocity of yeast dynein by ~20%. Although mutational analyses suggest important roles for both AAA1 and AAA3, single-molecule studies indicate that the binding of a single ATP molecule is sufficient for dynein to step along the microtubule. Thus, why blocking nucleotide hydrolysis at AAA3 so drastically impairs dynein motility has remained an unresolved question. Crystal structures for cytoplasmic dyneins have been obtained recently for yeast dynein in a nucleotide-free state and Dictyostelium discoideum dynein in an ADP-bound state. These structures revealed that the motor domain consists of six AAA modules organized into an asymmetric ring and three appendages that extend from the ring. Two appendages are antiparallel coiled coils called the “stalk” and the “buttress”. The stalk is longer and contains the microtubule-binding domain at its tip; the buttress interacts with the stalk near its base. The other appendage is a proposed mechanical element called the “linker,” which is a series of helical bundles that arch over one face of the ring. A transition of the linker from a bent to a straight conformation has been proposed to act as a power stroke that drives movement of an attached cargo toward the microtubule minus end. However, recent electron cryo-tomography studies at ~30–50 Å resolution of a dimeric axonemal dynein in intact flagella came to a different conclusion, that the power stroke may be driven by a rotational movement of the AAA ring with respect to the relatively stationary linker, rather than by a remodeling of the linker. In order to understand the sequence of conformational changes that take place during dynein’s catalytic cycle, it is necessary to obtain high-resolution snapshots of dynein in several different nucleotide-bound states. In this study, we solved a crystal structure of yeast dynein with an ATP analog and obtained 12 different electron microscopy data sets and 27 EM reconstructions of dynein in different nucleotide states. Our data show that ATP binding to AAA1 initiates a large conformational change in half of the ring, whereas ATP hydrolysis in AAA3 is important for propagating this conformational change to the remainder of the ring and enabling linker bending. Together with structure-function studies performed here and information from prior structures, we generated a model for the movements of AAA domains and the linker during dynein’s ATPase cycle. Our results also suggest that the linker, in addition to its previously postulated role as a mechanical element, acts allosterically to regulate the catalytic cycle at AAA1. RESULTS Crystal Structure of Yeast Dynein in the AMPPNP-Bound State Reveals Closure of AAA1 and AAA3 The motor domain from yeast dynein was previously crystallized in the absence of nucleotide. To obtain a conformation of the motor domain with a nucleotide triphosphate or triphosphate analog bound to AAA1, we blocked nucleotide hydrolysis by generating a mutation in the Walker B motif of AAA1. We obtained dynein crystals in the presence of AMPPNP, a nonhydrolyzable ATP analog, using a construct in which the MTBD and part of the stalk were replaced with lysozyme. The lysozyme fusion with the motor domain, which retained basal ATPase activity, facilitated crystallization by promoting the formation of crystal contacts. The structure, which contained two monomers per asymmetric unit, was determined by molecular replacement using the individual domains of the nucleotide-free yeast motor domain as search models and was refined to 3.54 Å resolution with an R work and R free of 23% and 26%, respectively. The two monomers in the asymmetric unit pack against one another via the nonlinker faces of their AAA rings and are almost identical to one another. Here, we describe the monomer structure by referring to molecule B in the asymmetric unit. Figure 1 Crystal Structure of Yeast Dynein Motor Domain in the AMPPNP-Bound State In the dynein-AMPPNP structure, the binding pockets of AAA1–4 are all occupied by nucleotide. Typically, in AAA proteins, residues from the Walker A, Walker B, Sensor 1 in the L domain, and Sensor 2 motifs from the s domain contact the nucleotide triphosphate. In addition, an arginine from the L domain of the neighboring subunit accelerates nucleotide hydrolysis by contacting the γ-phosphate. In our structure, the Walker A, Walker B, and Sensor 2 residues in AAA1, 3, and 4 contact the AMPPNP. The R finger from AAA5 is positioned close to the γ-phosphate of AMPPNP in AAA4. Although their electron density is less well defined, the AAA2 and AAA4 R fingers appear to be positioned much farther from the nucleotide γ-phosphate in AAA1 and AAA3. Thus, the AAA1/AAA2 interface is not fully closed, and the R finger not optimally positioned for catalysis in this AMPPNP crystal structure. A likely reason for this will be presented later when we discuss the position of the linker domain. A comparison of the nucleotide-binding pockets from our AMPPNP crystal structure with the yeast nucleotide-free structure showed that the gaps between AAA1L and AAA2L and between AAA3L and AAA4L are more closed in the AMPPNP versus the apo structure. The other AAAL interfaces, including AAA4 and AAA5, did not change substantially. As described for other AAA ATPases, the AAA1–2 and AAA3–4 closures involve rotations of the small domain toward large domains within AAA1 and AAA3. Most homohexameric AAA ATPase proteins have rigid interfaces between small and neighboring large domains. However, we found that AAA2L rotates ~14° away from AAA1s, whereas AAA4L rotates 17.3° toward AAA3s. In summary, our data show that AAA1 and AAA3, upon binding of AMPPNP, close their nucleotide pockets through a rotation of their small and large domains, as is true of other AAA proteins. In addition, and somewhat unique for a AAA protein, the large domain of AAA4 rotates toward the small domain of AAA3, thus closing the pocket further. Comparison of Dynein Motor Domain in Apo, AMPPNP, and ADP States We next examined overall domain motions that occur upon nucleotide binding by comparing our yeast AMPPNP structure with a prior yeast apo structure, aligning the AAA1L domains as a reference point. Overall, the AAA ring with AMPPNP becomes more planar compared with the apo structure. This conformational change involves a large, rigid-body movement of AAA2L/AAA2s/AAA3L and a smaller movement of AAA3s/AAA4L toward the linker. In contrast, AAA5, AAA6, and the C-terminal helix, which extends from AAA6s to AAA5s, all superimpose well in these two states, with an rmsd of 1.2 Å between main-chain atoms. These findings suggest that the AAA5/AAA6 side of the ring remains largely fixed in position between the apo- and AMPPNP-bound states of the motor domain, whereas the AAA1–AAA4 side of the ring undergoes pronounced conformational changes. Figure 2 Comparison of the Motor Domain Ring between Yeast apo, Yeast AMPPNP, and Dictyostelium ADP Crystal Structures ATP binding has been proposed to cause a bending of the linker domain, which has been hypothesized to generate a “pre-power state” of the motor. Somewhat surprisingly, we found that AMPPNP binding did not substantially alter the conformation of the linker compared with the apo state of yeast dynein and produced only a subtle shift of subdomains 1–2 of the linker toward AAA5. Furthermore, a similar set of contacts between linker subdomain 1 and AAA5L are observed in both the apo and AMPPNP structures. This result was also unexpected, as it was previously speculated that nucleotide binding might undock the linker from AAA5L. We next compared the AMPPNP yeast structure with the ADP crystal structure from Dictyostelium dynein, again aligning AAA1L as a reference point. AAA1 and AAA2 move toward one another in both AMPPNP and ADP structures, as compared with the yeast apo structure, resulting in an upward movement of AAA2–AAA4 toward the linker. The AAA5 and AAA6 large domains move toward one another in the Dictyostelium ADP structure compared with the nearly identical yeast apo and AMPPNP structures. The movement of AAA5L leaves subdomain 1 of the Dictyostelium linker “undocked” from the ring and positioned closer to AAA4. In summary, yeast apo, yeast AMPPNP, and Dictyostelium ADP exhibit distinct AAA domain arrangements, particularly with respect to the two halves of the ring. Yeast apo and AMPPNP structures differ dramatically in AAA1–AAA4 but are nearly identical in their AAA5–AAA6 domains. Yeast AMPPNP and Dictyostelium ADP display a similar overall conformation of their AAA1–3 domains and differ most significantly in their positions of AAA4–6. The linker exhibits a similar extended architecture and secondary structure in the apo, AMPPNP, and ADP structures. The Linker-AAA2 Interactions Regulate Microtubule-Stimulated ATPase Activity and Motility In our AMPPNP structure, two insert loops on AAA2L contact the linker. These two loops are relatively uncommon in the AAA family, only being found in dynein AAA2, NtrC/PspF, and the magnesium chelatase BchI. The AAA2 loops in our AMPPNP structure display similar, although not identical, contacts to those observed in the Dictyostelium ADP structure. The most notable difference is that the conserved R2384 from insert loop 2 makes an unfavorable contact with K1720 and R1723 in subdomain 3 of the linker, while this same arginine in the yeast AMPPPNP structure forms favorable ionic interactions with two highly conserved aspartic acids. Figure 3 The Linker-Ring Interaction and Its Role in Dynein ATPase Activity and Motility Kon et al. examined the role of insert loop 1 on ATPase activity by replacing it in its entirety with a polyglycine linker and did not examine insert loop 2. Here, we created a more subtle triple mutant of the three residues at the tip of loop 1 that contact the linker and a single mutant of a residue in loop 2 that forms a salt bridge with the linker. We assayed the effect of these mutations on microtubule-stimulated ATPase activity and single-molecule motility. We find that a triple mutant at the tip of loop 1 exhibited a normal basal ATPase activity but 3-fold lower maximal MT-stimulated ATPase activity. Mutation of the highly conserved arginine in loop 2 exhibited a reduced basal ATPase activity and 4-fold lower MT-stimulated ATPase activity. Thus, even a single amino acid change can dramatically perturb MT stimulation of the ATPase cycle. The insert loop 1 and 2 mutants moved processively along an MT but with a lower velocity, although the reduction was less than observed for the ATPase activity. These results show that residues in insert loops 1 and 2 that contact the linker influence the allosteric communication between the microtubule-binding domain and the AAA ring for controlling ATPase activity. Cryo-EM Structures of Dynein in the ADP-AlF 3 and ADP-Vanadate Bound States Our AMPPNP crystal structure revealed a large conformational change in one half of the AAA ring but did not show a notable conformational change of the linker domain, the proposed mechanical element. Previous single-particle EM studies of Dictyostelium dynein in the presence of ADP-vanadate found that the linker density was not visible in the ~25 Å 3D reconstruction, but based upon interpreting variance maps, the linker was suggested as being bent and positioned close to AAA3. The conformation of dynein in the presence of ADP-AlF 3 has not been examined previously for any dynein, and, because of its similarity to ADP-vanadate, we hypothesized that this analog also may capture dynein in the pre-power stroke state. Here, we obtained cryoelectron microscopy structures for dynein in the presence of ADP-AlF 3 or ADP-vanadate and used 3D classification to separate out conformational/compositional heterogeneity. The highest resolution ADP-AlF 3 dynein structure could be resolved to an average resolution of ~10.5 Å, as reported by Gold-standard FSC 0.143 criteria. Consistent with such resolution, tubular densities, indicative of helical secondary structure, could be seen in some areas of the map. However, other regions are likely at lower resolution because such tubular densities are not present. The map colored by local resolution provides information on which parts of the structure are better defined. The ADP-AlF 3 EM density could be fit very well with a model of the yeast dynein AMPPNP crystal structure as evidenced by the fact that AAA2–4 are rotated upward and inward compared with the apo structure, densities corresponding to the AAA2 insert loops are clearly visible making contacts to the linker, and the linker is extended and docked onto AAA5. Figure 4 Cryo-EM Structure of Dynein in the Presence of ADP-AlF 3 at an Average Resolution of ~10.5 Å It is somewhat surprising that ADP-AlF 3 did not produce a pre-power stroke conformation with a bent linker. To assess whether the lack of a linker conformational change in ADP-AlF 3 was due to the truncation of the stalk in the dynein construct used, we obtained 3D reconstructions of negative-stain EM data for a monomeric wild-type dynein with its full stalk and MTBD in the presence of ADP-AlF 3. These ~16–22 Å negative-stain EM maps of the full-stalk dynein revealed a similar conformation to that in the cryo-EM ADP-AlF 3 maps of truncated-stalk dynein filtered to the same resolution; in both cases, clear density connecting AAA2 and the linker can be seen, and this is not observed in reconstructions for apo dynein. The collective EM and X-ray data indicate that binding of AMPPNP and ADP-AlF 3 to yeast dynein results in a conformational change that shifts AAA2/AAA3/AAA4 upward and brings AAA2L in contact with the linker but does not cause a large conformational change in the linker. For the ADP-vanadate state, we found multiple positions of the linker using 3D classification, both by cryo-EM and negative-stain EM, indicating that the linker is in an equilibrium between different conformational states. One cryo-EM 3D class could be resolved to an average resolution of ~9 Å ; many tubular densities representing helices are visible in this map, although not all secondary structure elements are well defined. In contrast to the situation for our ADP-AlF 3 cryo-EM structure, the AMPPNP crystal structure did not dock well to the ADP-vanadate cryo-EM map. To define the ADP-vanadate state, we generated a model by simultaneously docking individual AAA large and small domains and linker subdomains as rigid bodies to the cryo-EM map. As the secondary structure was not unambiguously defined in our maps, we did not modify the positions of individual helices within these domains by flexible fitting, although such movements are very likely to occur. Figure 5 Cryo-EM Structure of Dynein in the Presence of ADP-Vanadate at an Average Resolution of ~9 Å The highest resolution ADP-vanadate model revealed significant conformational changes in the ring and the linker at the subdomain level. The linker exhibits a bent conformation, and the docked model shows that linker subdomain 1 is positioned in close proximity to the insert loop of AAA3 and likely contacts AAA2 as well. This result is consistent with predictions from prior studies of this nucleotide state with Dictyostelium and axonemal dynein, although prior cryo-EM studies could not directly resolve the linker density most likely due to conformational heterogeneity. Indeed, we can confirm conformational heterogeneity, as other 3D classes from the same data set, but at lower resolution, show the linker docked either onto AAA4 or unbent. The AAA ring shows a number of domain rearrangements, most notably in AAA2, AAA4, and AAA6, which have not been resolved before in the ADP-vanadate state. AAA2L rotates toward AAA1L as compared with the AMPPNP state, producing a more closed conformation of these two domains. AAA4L moves further upward compared with the AMPPNP structure, potentially creating an additional docking site for the linker seen in some 3D classes. AAA6 undergoes the largest displacement. AAA6L and AAA5L move toward each other, closing a large gap found in the apo and AMPPNP crystal structures. The shift of AAA5L may destabilize its docking with the linker, thus allowing the linker to sample alternate conformations. In summary, conformational changes of several AAA domains could be resolved in the ADP-vanadate compared with the AMPPNP structure, which collectively produce a more closed ring. ATP Hydrolysis Mutants Reveal Unique Roles for AAA1 and AAA3 The dramatic difference in linker conformations must arise from subtle differences in the AlF 3 and vanadate chemical structures, which cause them to mimic the γ-phosphate in different ways and/or potentially interact differently with AAA1 and AAA3. To explore this further, we determined the linker position in the presence of ATP, dynein’s natural substrate. We used 3D reconstructions from negative-stain EM data as an assay for linker bending, as the position of the linker can be unambiguously determined at low resolutions due to the large-scale conformational change. To allow ATP binding but not hydrolysis, we made Walker B mutations in either AAA1 or AAA3, or both. ATP is expected to be bound at the site of the Walker B E/Q mutation, whereas other sites may contain ATP, ADP, or any combinations of these nucleotides. The 3D reconstructions of the AAA1 E1849Q mutant in the presence of 5 mM ATP produced conformations that were very similar to those observed by cryo-EM with ADP-vanadate, yielding a 3D class with a bent linker and similar points of contact between the linker and AAA3. Additional 3D classes were observed in which the linker contacted different AAA domains in the ring, similar to Figure 5A and to the observation made for axonemal dynein in situ. We note that ATP addition to dynein without the Walker B mutation also resulted in a 3D class with a bent linker, revealing that the bent linker conformation can occur with the natural substrate and native binding site. This result also implies that a substantial proportion of dyneins have their AAA1 binding sites occupied with ATP or ADP-Pi in the absence of MTs. Bending of the linker was not observed in yeast dynein with 5 mM ADP, as expected from the Dictyostelium ADP crystal structure. Collectively, these results indicate that ATP binding to AAA1 can trigger a conformational change from a straight to a bent conformation. Figure 6 Blocking ATP Hydrolysis in AAA3 Prevents the Linker Conformational Change In contrast to results with wild-type dynein or the AAA1 E1849Q mutant, when ATP was incubated with the AAA3 hydrolysis mutant, we quite strikingly observed that the linker remained extended and positioned over AAA5 ; no 3D class of particles was observed with a bent linker conformation. We also tested a double Walker B mutant in both AAA1/AAA3 and similarly found that the linker remained extended and positioned above AAA5. Taken together, these results indicate that ATP binding to AAA1 can trigger a conformational change of the linker; however, when ATP also occupies AAA3, then this linker conformational change is essentially blocked. The model is consistent with FRET data on Dictyostelium dynein using donor and acceptor fluorescent proteins on AAA2 and the linker, which showed a large FRET signal change upon binding of ATP but little FRET change with a AAA3 Walker B mutant. The model may seem inconsistent with the fact that linker bending is triggered by ADP-vanadate but not ADP-AlF 3, even though both are often considered as mimics of an ADP-Pi or ATP transition state. However, we hypothesize that ADP- AlF 3 and AMPPNP bind at both AAA1 and AAA3 and mimic an ATP-like state, whereas ADP-vanadate binds and mimics an ATP-like state at AAA1 but cannot bind effectively at AAA3, leaving ADP alone, without the vanadate, occupying this site. This hypothesis is supported by the longstanding observation that vanadate-mediated photocleavage of the dynein polypeptide chain occurs primarily at AAA1. In addition, this is also consistent with functional differences, as assayed by single-molecule studies, which show that a dynein monomer dissociates faster from microtubules with ADP-vanadate than with ADP-AlF 3 or AMPPNP, which display similar rates. Finally, we tested whether the AAA2 R finger plays a role in the linker conformational change. Work in other AAA proteins has shown that the R finger from a neighboring subunit plays a role both in nucleotide hydrolysis as well as in inducing a conformational change. In dynein, a mutation in the AAA4 R finger was shown to produce a similar phenotype as the AAA3 hydrolysis mutant, reducing motility substantially. To test the role of the AAA2 R finger, we mutated it to alanine. The R2209A mutant statically bound but no longer moved on microtubules in the presence of ATP and showed dramatically reduced microtubule-stimulated ATPase activity. When examined by negative-stain EM in the presence of ATP, the bent linker was still observed in the R2209A mutant. This result suggests that the R finger is crucial for promoting AAA1 ATP hydrolysis but does not inhibit linker bending. DISCUSSION The large size and inherent flexibility of dynein make it challenging to address its structural mechanism using a single technique. Here, we combined X-ray crystallography and EM to gain insights into the domain motions that constitute the basis of allosteric communication in the dynein motor domain. Our AMPPNP-bound crystal structure provides the first high-resolution comparison of a dynein from the same species bound to different nucleotides. Cryo-EM data processed using 3D classification methods enabled visualization of AAA domain and linker movements in additional nucleotide states, and negative-stain EM allowed us to assay the distinct roles of AAA1 and AAA3 using several mutants. These data, in combination with biochemical studies and previous X-ray structures, allow us to generate a structural model for how nucleotide-dependent conformational changes propagate around the dynein AAA ring to produce motility. The Linker and AAA3 as Regulators of Dynein ATPase Activity Our structural data suggest that the linker, in addition to being a mechanical element, regulates dynein ATPase activity. When the linker is docked simultaneously on AAA5 and the AAA2 insert loops, the AAA1-AAA2 interface is prevented from fully closing, and in fact AAA2L is rotated away from AAA1L. As a result, the AAA2 R finger, which we show here is important for dynein motility and ATPase activity, is likely positioned too far away to promote efficient hydrolysis of ATP at AAA1. Upon AAA5 undocking and bending of the linker, our cryo-EM data suggest that AAA2L moves toward AAA1, likely resulting in a catalytically competent position of the AAA2 R finger. This result suggests that the linker position influences the conformation of AAA2, which is critical for ATP hydrolysis to occur at AAA1. This model is consistent with the absence of a phosphate burst at AAA1 when nucleotide hydrolysis is blocked at AAA3 and AAA4 by Walker B mutations, which we show here has the consequence of inhibiting linker undocking from AAA5. AAA1 is the primary catalytic site that drives dynein motility, and single-molecule studies indicate that a single ATP molecule can trigger a dynein step. However, blocking ATP hydrolysis at AAA3 severely impairs dynein motility. These data may seem conflicting: ATP hydrolysis at AAA3 is required for motility, but the single-molecule results imply that ATP turnover at AAA1 suffices for dynein stepping. This conflict can be reconciled if AAA3 serves a regulatory function rather than being integrally involved in the chemomechanical cycle. Our data suggest that ATP, or an ATP analog, bound at AAA3 blocks the conformational change initiated by ATP binding at AAA1 from propagating around the ring, rendering dynein in a “repressed” state. This result provides a structural explanation for the low ATPase activity of the AAA3 E2488Q mutant. We propose that once AAA3 is in an ADP conformation, dynein is then in an “active” state that can execute multiple rounds of ATP binding/hydrolysis at AAA1. Figure 7 A Model for Structural Changes during Dynein’s ATPase Cycle An important question arises from this study: what is the function of the “repressed” state with ATP loaded in AAA3? We speculate that this state serves as a switch for turning dynein off. If ATP hydrolysis at AAA3 is blocked for an extended period of time, dynein will be immotile but tightly bound to an MT. In a cellular context, a “repressed” dynein might tenaciously hold on to a microtubule at the cortex or a kinetochore. Alternatively, the ATP turnover at AAA3 could occur at a slow rate and thereby tune dynein’s speed and its affinity for MTs. Potentially dynein-associated proteins or posttranslational modifications could regulate the rate of ATP hydrolysis at AAA3. An example of AAA ATPase regulation by associated proteins has been documented for torsin, whose ATPase activity is strongly regulated by two protein cofactors. Interestingly, the nucleotide-binding pocket of the AAA3 site in cytoplasmic dynein 2, which is involved in intraflagellar transport, is substantially divergent and thus cytoplasmic dynein 2 may not use AAA3 to regulate its motility in the same way as cytoplasmic dynein 1. Further work will be needed to resolve how cytoplasmic dynein 1 uses AAA3 for its cell biological functions, but the present structural study, combined with previous functional studies, suggests that its nucleotide cycle might be used to regulate rather than drive dynein motility. Model for Conformational Changes during the ATPase Cycle X-ray structures and EM reconstructions now provide information on the positions of the AAA domains and the linker, which are collectively summarized in Figure 7 and Movie S1. These structures also allow us to formulate a model for the sequence of domain motions within the dynein motor during the ATPase cycle. We start the cycle with ADP at AAA3 because, as discussed above, our results show that this is a prerequisite state for a dynein ATPase cycle to occur at AAA1. ATP bound at AAA1 triggers a series of domain movements, which can be appreciated by examining the positions of the AAA domains around the ring. ATP binding to AAA1 closes the gap between AAA1L and AAA1s, triggering the movement of AAA2–4 toward the linker. With AAA3 in an ADP state, the ATP-induced conformational change at AAA1 propagates fully around the ring, resulting in the upward movement of AAA4L and the movements of AAA5L and AAA6L toward one another. These combined movements may be responsible for detaching linker subdomain 1 from its docking site on AAA5. With the linker no longer attached to AAA5, we postulate that the AAA2 insert loops can break their relatively few contacts with the linker ; no longer restrained by the linker, AAA2 can rotate further toward the nucleotide-bound AAA1. An upward displacement of the linker and partial closure of AAA1–2 is captured in one of the four Dictyostelium ADP structures. However, a more complete closure of AAA1–2 accompanies the bending of the linker. The bent linker is thought to constitute a pre-power stroke state. After nucleotide hydrolysis and phosphate release at AAA1, yielding an ADP state, the linker returns to its extended conformation. Linker straightening might act as power stroke to move the partner head of the dynein dimer toward the minus end of an MT. However, high-resolution stepping data show that the front dynein head can move forward without detaching the rear head, suggesting that there might be other mechanisms for biasing movement toward the MT minus end. Interestingly, a recent in situ EM study of a dimeric axonemal dynein at 30–50 Å resolution suggested that a power stroke is facilitated by rotation of the ring relative to a straight linker and stalk. We also observed a small angular shift of the stalk relative to the ring between the apo and AMPPNP states, which would be predicted to produce an ~4 nm displacement of the distal MTBD toward the MT minus end in a molecule with a full-length stalk. Thus, it is possible that more than one type of conformational change helps to bias the movement of dynein toward the microtubule minus end. Finally, after the power stroke of the linker, the motor must reset itself for another ATP hydrolysis cycle by releasing ADP from AAA1. This nucleotide-release step might require the re-docking of the linker to AAA5, as suggested by Schmidt et al., which could potentially provide the binding energy needed to pry AAA2 further apart from AAA1. The state in which ADP is released from AAA1 but bound to AAA3 has not been captured by EM or X-ray, but we model it speculatively in Figure 7 as being similar to the yeast apo structure. From this state, dynein can rebind ATP at AAA1 and begin another chemomechanical cycle. This model raises many questions that remain to be answered in future studies. The bending of the linker is a significant structural change of this helical domain, and an X-ray structure of this state will be required to understand the details of how and where this bending occurs. In addition, the model described above does not take into account how MT binding affects this cycle. Previous studies have suggested that a half-heptad shift in the elongated antiparallel coiled-coil stalk, which emerges from AAA4s and interacts with the buttress in AAA5s, controls the affinity of MT binding. Conversely, conformational changes in the stalk buttress driven by MT binding may regulate rates of ATP hydrolysis or ADP release at AAA1 by controlling linker undocking/docking at AAA5. Obtaining higher-resolution structures of the stalk in different conformational states, particularly the low-affinity MT-binding state, will be important for understanding how the dynein ring and the MTBD allosterically regulate one another. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Detailed experimental procedures are outlined in the Extended Experimental Procedures. Cloning, Protein Purification, and Activity Assays A DNA fragment encoding dynein motor domain was integrated in the yeast genome DNA. All constructs were made by homologous recombination in yeast. Constructs are listed in Table S2. Proteins were purified by IgG affinity and subsequent size-exclusion chromatography. ATPase assays were conducted using the EnzChek phosphate assay kit. GST-Halo-tagged dyneins were labeled with TMR, as previously described. Single-molecule motility on taxol-stabilized MTs was measured by total internal fluorescence microscopy. Crystallization and Structure Determination Diffraction-quality crystals grew with ~6 mg/ml of lysozyme-fused motor domain in the presence of ~4 mM AMPPNP in 4%–10% PEG 3350 and 200–300 mM NaAc at 22°C by the hanging drop vapor diffusion method. Diffraction data were collected at beamline 8.3.1 at Advanced Light Source in the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and merged from multiple data sets from multiple crystals to improve data quality and resolution. The initial structural solution was obtained by molecular replacement using separated fragments of yeast apo structure as search models. Iterative model building and refinement were conducted using the programs Coot and Phenix. Electron Microscopy and Image Processing Cryo-EM data were collected on a TF20 microscope using a phosphor scintillator based TemF816 8K × 8K CMOS camera or Polara microscope using a K2 Summit direct electron detector. Negative-stain EM data were collected on a TF20 microscope using a Tietz TemF416 4k × 4k CMOS camera. Technical details of image processing and particle-picking procedures are described in the Extended Experimental Procedures. Three-dimensional classification was done using RELION, as described in the Extended Experimental Procedures. Rigid body fitting of subdomains was done in UCSF Chimera, and figures were prepared using UCSF Chimera or PyMol. Supplementary Material Supp Movie S1 Click here to view. Supplement Click here to view. 