 Many protein-misfolding diseases are caused by proteins carrying prion-like domains. These proteins show sequence similarity to yeast prion proteins, which can interconvert between an intrinsically disordered and an aggregated prion state. The natural presence of prions in yeast has provided important insight into disease mechanisms and cellular proteostasis. However, little is known about prions in other organisms, and it is not yet clear whether the findings in yeast can be generalized. Using bioinformatics tools, we show that Dictyostelium discoideum has the highest content of prion-like proteins of all organisms investigated to date, suggesting that its proteome has a high overall aggregation propensity. To study mechanisms regulating these proteins, we analyze the behavior of several well-characterized prion-like proteins, such as an expanded version of human huntingtin exon 1 and the prion domain of the yeast prion protein Sup35, in D. discoideum. We find that these proteins remain soluble and are innocuous to D. discoideum, in contrast to other organisms, where they form cytotoxic cytosolic aggregates. However, when exposed to conditions that compromise molecular chaperones, these proteins aggregate and become cytotoxic. We show that the disaggregase Hsp101, a molecular chaperone of the Hsp100 family, dissolves heat-induced aggregates and promotes thermotolerance. Furthermore, prion-like proteins accumulate in the nucleus, where they are targeted by the ubiquitin–proteasome system. Our data suggest that D. discoideum has undergone specific adaptations that increase the proteostatic capacity of this organism and allow for an efficient regulation of its prion-like proteome. Cellular functionality depends on an intact proteome. To maintain the integrity of the proteome, it is subject to a delicate balance between protein synthesis, folding, and degradation, generally referred to as proteostasis. Even subtle changes can cause imbalances in the proteostasis network and interfere with cellular health and survival. Thus, as a protective measure, cells have evolved a powerful protein quality control system, comprising molecular chaperones and proteases, to keep protein structure and function under tight surveillance. One of the most important chaperones for proteome surveillance is Hsp70. Chaperones of the Hsp70 family constantly monitor the folding state of proteins and recognize and bind misfolded proteins with assistance from cochaperones of the Hsp40 family. Together, they can direct unfolded proteins for refolding by other chaperone systems, such as Hsp90, or, if refolding cannot be achieved, they can target misfolded proteins to the ubiquitin–proteasome system for degradation. Stress conditions, aging, and pathological conditions lead to an increase in protein misfolding, thus overwhelming the proteostatic capacity of a cell. As a consequence, misfolded proteins coalesce into aggregates, which exert increasingly cytotoxic effects. Typically, the misfolded proteins in these aggregates are arranged into extended β-sheet–rich fibers, unique structures that are also known as amyloids. Amyloids have specific physicochemical properties: they bind dyes such as Thioflavin-T or Congo Red with high affinity, they show a characteristic red–green birefringence in polarized light, and they show a strong resistance to denaturants, such as SDS. The crystal-like structure of amyloids also has functional implications, because it enables amyloids to grow by self-replication. Once formed, amyloids can promote the conversion of unincorporated copies of the same protein and their subsequent integration into existing amyloid fibrils. Amyloids are associated with a variety of human neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s, Huntington’s, and Parkinson’s disease. A hallmark of these diseases is the presence of amyloids either in nuclear inclusions, cytoplasmic inclusions, or extracellular aggregates. Amyloids have also been identified in lower eukaryotes such as the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, where they have been proposed to be pathological. This, however, is controversial, and others have suggested that S. cerevisiae may use amyloids to generate phenotypic diversity, thus allowing it to adapt to environmental stress. The presence of natural prions and the unmatched genetic accessibility of yeast have provided important insight into the ways in which the cellular proteostasis machinery regulates misfolded proteins and amyloids. However, little is known about proteostasis in other organisms, and it is not yet clear whether the findings made for yeast can be generalized for all eukaryotes. This is particularly important given that organisms have very different lifestyles and show large variability in the composition and complexity of their proteomes. Studies in S. cerevisiae have revealed that specific amino acid compositions promote the formation of amyloids. Asparagine - and glutamine -rich sequences in particular increase the tendency of a protein to form amyloid. Many yeast prion proteins carry domains of low sequence complexity that are enriched for Qs and Ns, but also for other polar amino acids, such as serines and glycines. Protein domains with such distinctive compositions are referred to as prion-like. Interestingly, prion-like sequence stretches are also present in aggregation-prone proteins that have been associated with human neurodegenerative diseases, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Moreover, homopolymeric glutamine sequences and, in particular, their expanded variants have also been shown to cause neurodegenerative diseases, such as Huntington’s disease or ataxia. This indicates that prion-like Q/N-rich proteins have a high aggregation potential and need to be kept under tight control. Based on findings in yeast, tools have been generated for the prediction of Q/N-rich prion-like proteins across entire proteomes. Using these tools, several organisms were identified whose proteomes harbored an unusually high number of sequence runs consisting entirely of Ns or Qs. The greatest total content of Q or N runs was found in the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. The unusual proteome composition and its experimental accessibility make D. discoideum an ideal organism to study mechanisms that regulate the formation of and the cellular response to protein aggregation, as well as the normal function of Q/N-rich sequences. In this study, we reexamined the proteome of D. discoideum with sophisticated bioinformatics tools for the detection of prion-like domains. We find a remarkably high number of prion-like proteins in D. discoideum, suggesting that its proteome has a high overall aggregation potential. To identify mechanisms that allow D. discoideum to tolerate its aggregation-prone proteome, we studied the behavior of several well-characterized aggregation-prone prion-like proteins from other organisms. Our findings show that, in contrast to observations made in S. cerevisiae, Caenorhabditis elegans, or mammalian cells, these proteins do not aggregate in the cytoplasm and are not cytotoxic when overexpressed. However, when heat stress or specific inhibitors compromise molecular chaperones, cytotoxic cytosolic aggregates accumulate, suggesting a prominent role for molecular chaperones in regulating protein aggregation in D. discoideum. We further find that the nucleus serves as a compartment for PQC, where prion-like proteins are targeted by the ubiquitin–proteasome system. Moreover, we identify the disaggregase Hsp101 as a key player in the response to and recovery from stress-induced protein aggregation. Taken together, our results suggest that adaptations in the PQC machinery of D. discoideum have increased the proteostasis capacity of this organism, presumably to tolerate its aggregation-prone prion-like proteome. Results The Proteome of D. discoideum Contains Many Prion-Like Proteins and May Be Highly Aggregation Prone. Sequence stretches that consist of homopolymeric asparagine or glutamine runs are key determinants for protein aggregation and disease. A recent study identified D. discoideum as the organism with the highest incidence of such polyN and polyQ runs. To reinvestigate this finding, we determined the number and length of polyN or polyQ runs in the proteome of D. discoideum. In agreement with previous results, our analysis showed that the fraction of proteins containing N or Q runs exceeds by far the fraction of proteins in the proteomes of S. cerevisiae and Homo sapiens. Moreover, the length of these runs is elevated, with many polyQ or polyN sequences extending beyond the threshold of 35–40 residues. This is surprising, because polyQ stretches above this threshold have been linked to fatal diseases in humans. To determine whether these polyQ-containing proteins are expressed, we subjected cell lysates of D. discoideum to Western blotting with a polyQ-specific antibody. As shown in Fig. 1 B, the amount of polyQ-containing proteins was substantially higher in D. discoideum than in S. cerevisiae or H. sapiens. This indicates that D. discoideum is burdened with a much higher number of aggregation-prone proteins than other organisms. Fig. 1. Bioinformatic analysis reveals a highly aggregation-prone proteome in D. discoideum. Length distribution of N and Q runs in D. discoideum, S. cerevisiae, and H. sapiens. Expression levels of polyQ-containing proteins in cell lysates of D. discoideum... Proteins with prion-like sequence composition also show an increased aggregation propensity. However, in contrast to polyQ and polyN runs, prion-like sequences display a higher compositional complexity. The fact that prion-like domains have a defined composition enabled the development of algorithms for the identification of prion-like proteins in protein sequence databases. The availability of these algorithms led to the discovery of many prion-like sequences in higher eukaryotes. A substantial fraction of these prion-like proteins has now been implicated in protein-misfolding diseases. To further characterize the aggregation potential of the D. discoideum proteome, we used one such algorithm, based on a hidden Markov model. This algorithm was successfully used to identify prion proteins in yeast, and it revealed a large set of disease-causing prion-like proteins in humans. Using this algorithm, we identified ∼1,700 prion-like proteins in D. discoideum. This number substantially exceeds the number of predicted prion proteins in yeast. Together, these findings suggest that the proteome of D. discoideum contains a high number of prion-like proteins and may thus have a much higher aggregation propensity than the proteomes of other organisms. To get insight into the potential functions of these prion-like proteins, we analyzed them with bioinformatics tools. First, we used the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery to cluster the candidates according to their associated protein domains and to perform an enrichment analysis of associated protein superdomain families. We observed that prion-like sequences were specifically linked to proteinase K-like domains or RNA-binding domains. The connection of prion-like domains with RRMs seems to be a general feature of these domains, as similar observations have been made for S. cerevisiae and other organisms. Furthermore, we found specific associations of prion-like proteins with certain groups of gene ontology terms. Prion-like domains were enriched in proteins associated with the cytoskeleton or the nucleus. These proteins also showed significant association with specific molecular functions, such as DNA/RNA interaction, protein modification, or signaling processes. Next, we compared the prevalence of prion-like sequences within the Dictyostelid family. Apart from D. discoideum, D. purpureum is the only Dictyostelid whose genome has been sequenced and fully annotated. We found ∼900 candidate proteins in the proteome of D. purpureum. An ortholog analysis revealed that 505 proteins are shared between D. discoideum and D. purpureum. Moreover, we compared the associated protein superdomain families and found a comparable overlap between both species. These findings indicate that prion-like sequences are not randomly occurring sequence features and that their association with certain protein families is conserved within the Dictyostelid family. This is consistent with the possibility that prion-like sequences have a biological function. Moreover, the fact that these sequences are highly aggregation-prone also suggests that D. discoideum makes significant investments to control these proteins. Therefore, in this study, we investigate how D. discoideum can tolerate and regulate such a large number of aggregation-prone prion-like proteins. Aggregation-Prone Prion-Like Proteins Do Not Aggregate in the Cytoplasm of Dictyostelium discoideum. To identify mechanisms controlling the aggregation of prion-like proteins in D. discoideum, we first studied the aggregation behavior of several well-characterized prion-like proteins. These proteins have been studied extensively in other organisms and have been shown to form cytosolic aggregates in S. cerevisiae, C. elegans, and mammalian cells. In this study, we used the polyQ-containing exon 1 of human huntingtin with 103 consecutive glutamines and a synthetic polyasparagine variant in which the glutamines were replaced by asparagines, to account for the extreme N-richness of D. discoideum. In yeast, both proteins exhibit the same aggregation propensities. We expressed these marker proteins and nonaggregating controls as GFP fusions in D. discoideum cells under the control of a strong constitutive promoter. Surprisingly, Q103-GFP and N47-GFP did not form aggregates in the cytoplasm but were diffusely distributed in the majority of the cells. In contrast, expression of the same marker proteins led to formation of cytosolic foci in S. cerevisiae and mammalian cells. Fig. 2. Aggregation-prone prion-like proteins do not aggregate in the cytosol of D. discoideum. Fluorescence microscopy of D. discoideum cells expressing GFP-tagged aggregation-prone prion-like proteins or control peptides. The numbers... To probe for the presence of SDS-resistant amyloids, we subjected cell lysates to semidenaturing detergent–agarose gel electrophoresis. This method can distinguish between SDS-insoluble amyloids and SDS-soluble assemblies. In Q103-GFP– and N47-GFP–expressing cells, the majority of the GFP fusion protein was found in the SDS-soluble fraction. This is in stark contrast to observations made in S. cerevisiae and mammalian cells. Here, the majority of the protein was found in the SDS-insoluble multimer fraction. Unlike previous observations in yeast, we also detected a different aggregation behavior for N47 and Q103, with more SDS-insoluble material in N47- than in Q103-expressing cells. Similar results were obtained in filter retardation experiments. Based on these findings, we conclude that N47-GFP is more aggregation-prone than Q103 and forms SDS-resistant aggregates in D. discoideum, but only in low amounts. Interestingly, a population of N47-GFP–expressing cells also contained a low amount of cells with nuclear GFP accumulations and puncta. Thus, we conclude that N47 can accumulate in the nucleus in a small fraction of cells, but that Q103 and N47 are mainly soluble in D. discoideum. To further assess the proteostatic capacity of D. discoideum, we investigated the behavior of the prion domain of the yeast prion protein Sup35. This domain switches between an aggregated and a nonaggregated state in S. cerevisiae. In addition, it has been shown to aggregate in the cytosol of mammalian Neuro2a cells and body muscle cells of C. elegans. However, when we expressed NM-GFP in D. discoideum, we observed a diffuse cytosolic distribution and no formation of cytosolic aggregates or SDS-insoluble material. In Neuro2a cells, NM does not aggregate unless preformed fibrils are added to cells. Therefore, to induce aggregation in D. discoideum, we added in vitro assembled amyloid fibrils to D. discoideum cells. However, NM remained diffusely distributed, although the same fibril preparations were competent in inducing aggregation when added to Neuro2a cells. This suggests that NM is kept under tight control in D. discoideum, thus preventing the conversion into and maintenance of the NM prion form. Next, we analyzed variants of NM with distinct aggregation properties. First, we used a variant, which was engineered to have a high aggregation propensity in yeast. The aggregation of NM* in yeast is independent of the coinducing prion factor, and it only slightly depends on the disaggregase Hsp104. Interestingly, expression of NM* did also not lead to the formation of cytosolic aggregates in D. discoideum. Rather, the majority of the cells showed a diffuse cytosolic signal, and only a small fraction of the cells displayed fluorescent foci in the nucleus. In addition, we also observed a small fraction of SDS-resistant material, similar to observations made for N47-GFP. A previous study showed that the relative amount of Qs and Ns in NM can influence their aggregation behavior in S. cerevisiae. A variant in which all Qs were replaced with Ns formed SDS-resistant amyloids, whereas replacing all Ns with Qs resulted in the formation of SDS-soluble amorphous aggregates. Surprisingly, when expressed in D. discoideum, both variants did not form cytosolic aggregates but were diffusely distributed in the cytosol with rare accumulations in the nucleus. These findings show that, unlike in yeast, the relative amount of Ns and Qs has only minor effects on the aggregation propensity of N/Q-rich proteins in D. discoideum. In summary, these findings suggest that proteins exhibiting a high aggregation propensity in other organisms are generally kept soluble in D. discoideum cells. However, proteins with higher aggregation propensities can accumulate in the nucleus and a small fraction can form SDS-insoluble aggregates. To verify that our observations are not an artifact of the expression of heterologous proteins, we tested several predicted prion-like proteins from D. discoideum. When expressed in D. discoideum, the tested candidate PrDs showed a uniform distribution in the cytosol and localized mainly to the SDS-soluble fraction in SDD-AGE experiments. In contrast, when these domains were expressed in S. cerevisiae, they formed SDS-resistant aggregates in the cytosol. Interestingly, one of the prion-like domains coalesced into distinct foci in a fraction of the D. discoideum cells, and these foci localized to the nucleus. This PrD also formed a low amount of SDS-insoluble multimers, as judged by SDD-AGE. These findings indicate that the observed distribution patterns are not unique to heterologous proteins but are reproducible with endogenous proteins. Prion-Like Proteins Accumulate in the Nucleus Where They Are Targeted for Degradation by the Proteasome. Although in the majority of the cells prion-like proteins are kept soluble, we detected a small fraction of cells that showed a nuclear accumulation of N47-GFP or NM*-GFP. In those cells, the GFP signal accumulated in the nucleus over time. A detailed characterization of the nuclear signal revealed that 75% of the cells showed a diffuse nuclear signal, with occasionally occurring small foci; in the remaining 25%, we observed two or three distinct fluorescent foci. Analysis by correlative light and electron microscopy showed that these foci colocalize with electron-dense structures in the vicinity of the nuclear membrane. Similar electron-dense structures were also found in wild-type cells. Previous studies had identified these structures as the nucleolus. The nucleolus is the only nuclear structure in the nucleus lacking DNA and histones. In agreement with this, we observed that DNA and histones are excluded from the structures. Thus, we conclude that prion-like proteins are enriched in the nucleus and can accumulate in structures that are reminiscent of the nucleolus. Fig. 3. Nuclear accumulations are dynamic and associated with the ubiquitin/proteasome system. Light microscopy and correlative light and electron microscopy analysis of nuclear NM* accumulations. Two different nuclear patterns were observed. Numbers... A closer inspection of the nuclear NM* accumulations by electron microscopy did not reveal any electron-dense fibrillar structures, as would be expected for amyloids. This suggests that these punctate structures do not contain amyloid aggregates. To investigate this possibility more thoroughly, we measured the turnover rate of NM* in nuclear puncta by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching. We observed relatively quick recovery times and a high mobile fraction of 88%. We could exclude that this rapid recovery was through nuclear import of NM*, because the diffuse nuclear signal showed no recovery after photobleaching. This suggests that the nuclear puncta do not consist of rigid amyloid aggregates but are rather dynamic structures, which recover by rearrangement of molecules between puncta or from a soluble pool of molecules within the nucleus. This also indicates that the SDS-insoluble material observed in our previous SDD-AGE experiments is not resulting from these nuclear accumulations. Instead, we hypothesize that these SDS-insoluble multimers result from a small fraction of stressed or aged cells, which contain aggregates that are below the resolution limit of the microscope. Why do prion-like proteins accumulate in the nucleus? Previous studies showed that the proteasome of D. discoideum is located in the nucleus. Moreover, studies with cultured mammalian cells reported that cytosolic aggregation-prone proteins can accumulate in the nucleus, presumably to be degraded. Therefore, we tested whether the nuclear accumulations in D. discoideum might be functionally associated with the ubiquitin–proteasome system. First, we analyzed the subcellular distribution of ubiquitin in NM*-GFP–expressing cells. We observed a strong colocalization of the nuclear NM* signal with ubiquitin. This indicates that the nuclear NM*-GFP accumulations contain ubiquitinated proteins and that NM* might be targeted for degradation. To investigate this possibility, we treated NM*-GFP–expressing cells with the proteasome inhibitor MG132. Indeed, proteasome inhibition led to a strong increase in NM*-GFP levels, which was caused by a decreased protein degradation rate. Moreover, proteasome inhibition resulted in an increase in the number of cells containing nuclear NM* foci. This indicates that prion-like proteins are targeted to the nucleus for degradation by the proteasome and that the nuclear accumulations may be caused by an impairment of the ubiquitin–proteasome system. Molecular Chaperones Prevent the Aggregation of Prion-Like Proteins. Recent studies demonstrate that D. discoideum undergoes semiopen mitosis, thus allowing nuclear and nucleolar proteins to translocate to the cytoplasm in certain phases of the cell cycle. We wondered how this behavior would influence the localization of nuclear NM*-GFP. Interestingly, when we followed individual cells with nuclear accumulations through mitosis using live-cell microscopy, we found that the nuclear NM* signal disappeared before division of the nucleus and division of the cell. This indicates that the nuclear accumulations dissolve rapidly, further substantiating the notion that they are dynamic structures. Furthermore, the dissolution coincided temporally with the disassembly of the nucleolus, suggesting that the nucleolus may be required for the formation of NM*-GFP puncta. After cell division, we were able to track the daughter cells until their next division. However, they did not reaccumulate a nuclear NM*-GFP signal. Thus, we conclude that nuclear accumulations are successfully cleared during or shortly after mitosis, thus pointing to the presence of another PQC system in the cytosol that controls the aggregation of prion-like proteins. Fig. 4. Cytosolic chaperones control protein aggregation in the cytoplasm. Time-lapse microscopy of cells coexpressing NM*-GFP and H2B-mRFPmars during mitosis. The GFP signal relocates to the cytosol 10 min before cell division and 5 min before... A plethora of studies has shown that misfolded proteins are controlled by cytosolic molecular chaperones. To test whether molecular chaperones regulate the aggregation behavior of our proteins, we applied specific chaperone inhibitors to cells expressing NM*-GFP. We observed that inhibition of Hsp90 by geldanamycin or radicicol led to the formation of cytosolic foci. Foci formation was accompanied by a strong increase in SDS-insoluble material. This shows that inhibition of Hsp90 induces cytosolic aggregation and implies a prominent role for molecular chaperones in regulating prion-like proteins in the cytoplasm. Prion-Like Proteins Impair Cellular Health Under Conditions of Stress but Not During Normal Growth. Several studies showed that aggregating proteins and, in particular, polyQ can interfere with cellular function. Therefore, we next tested the influence of prion-like proteins on growth and the developmental cycle of D. discoideum. First, we measured the division rate of cells expressing Q103-GFP, N47-GFP, or NM*-GFP, and compared them to cells expressing nonaggregating Q25, N25, or wild-type AX2 cells, respectively. However, we did not detect significant differences in the division times. Next, we tested whether expression of prion-like proteins can influence the developmental cycle. D. discoideum has a remarkable developmental cycle, in which the organism transitions from a single-cell state to a multicellular state. However, we found no differences in developmental timing between cells expressing prion-like proteins and control cells. This suggests that these prion-like proteins do not affect cellular health under normal conditions. Fig. 5. Effects of expressing prion-like proteins on health and development of D. discoideum. Comparison of the cell division time of D. discoideum cells expressing aggregation-prone prion-like proteins and control proteins. No... Our findings so far suggest that prion-like proteins are innocuous under normal growth conditions and are kept soluble, probably by a cytosolic PQC system. Thus, we hypothesized that, by applying additional heat stress, we might overwhelm this PQC system and thereby increase aggregation. Indeed, upon incubation at an elevated temperature, we observed formation of cytosolic foci in cells expressing prion-like proteins. These cytosolic foci were ubiquitin positive. Moreover, the appearance of cytosolic foci was accompanied by a drastic increase in the amount of SDS-insoluble material. Consistent with this, the molecules contained in stress-induced cytosolic aggregates showed a very low mobility in FRAP experiments. This observation shows that the used prion-like marker proteins are indeed aggregation-prone and suggests the presence of a cytosolic PQC system that can be overwhelmed by stress. Next, we tested whether heat-induced aggregation affects cellular viability by comparing cell death rates. We measured death rates at normal growth temperature and after prolonged heat stress. We observed a significant increase in the death rates of cells expressing prion-like proteins in comparison with nonaggregating controls. These findings show that heat stress triggers cytosolic aggregation of prion-like proteins. Furthermore, they indicate that stress conditions render otherwise innocuous prion-like proteins cytotoxic to D. discoideum. Heat-Induced Aggregation of Prion-Like Proteins Is Reversed by an Hsp100 Disaggregase. Cells have evolved diverse mechanisms to deal with aggregated proteins. Aggregates can be sequestered into membrane-free compartments, dissolved and/or degraded. To determine the fate of heat-induced cytosolic aggregates in D. discoideum, we analyzed their behavior in detail. We observed that the number of cells with cytosolic foci increased with the duration of heat stress. However, when the stress was released and the cells were allowed to grow under normal growth conditions, the foci dissolved. This observation further substantiates the notion that a cytosolic PQC system is involved in regulating aggregation both during normal growth conditions and upon stress. Fig. 6. Hsp101 is a major player in the control of heat-induced protein aggregation. Fluorescence time-lapse microscopy analysis of D. discoideum cells expressing Q103-GFP or NM*-GFP during stress. Heat stress triggers formation of cytosolic... In yeast and plants, members of the Hsp100 protein family regulate heat-induced protein aggregation by reversing amorphous and amyloid aggregates. These so-called disaggregases are essential for thermotolerance. We searched the proteome of D. discoideum for orthologs of Hsp100s proteins and found a potential candidate protein: Hsp101. The protein is not expressed during normal growth conditions, but increased expression levels could be detected after short periods of heat stress. To test the influence of Hsp101 on our prion-like marker proteins, we analyzed the effects of Hsp101 overexpression and functional inhibition. Overexpression did not alter the subcellular localization of Q103 under normal growth conditions. However, when we overexpressed Hsps101 in heat-stressed cells, formation of cytosolic Q103 aggregates was prevented. Next, we investigated the functional effect of Hsp101 inactivation. Because a knockout of Hsp101 was not successful, we generated dominant-negative variants of the protein. Formation of heterooligomers composed of the wild-type protein and the dominant-negative variant has been shown to inactivate the disaggregase. When we expressed dominant-negative Hsp101 in a Q103-GFP background, foci formation during heat stress was not altered. However, inactivation of Hsp101 prolonged the presence of cytosolic foci after stress release. These findings indicate that Hsp101 is required for the clearance of aggregates after an acute stress event. Next, we tested whether Hsp101 is required for thermotolerance in D. discoideum, as in other organisms. To do this, we applied prolonged heat stress and measured the relative increase in dead cells. Overexpression of Hsp101 led to a decrease in dead cells, whereas impairing Hsp101 function increased the fraction of dead cells. This suggests that Hsp101 functions in a similar manner as other members of the Hsp100 family in other species. Taken together, these data reveal that Hsp101 can reverse heat-induced aggregates of prion-like proteins. They further show that Hsp101 is an important player in the regulation of protein aggregation during and after stress, thus providing protection against high temperatures. In summary, our results suggest that D. discoideum has developed potent PQC mechanisms to regulate the aggregation of prion-like proteins during normal growth and upon stress. This suggests that D. discoideum may be a resourceful model organism to study the cellular mechanisms that control prion-like proteins and thus prevent their aggregation. Discussion In this study, we show that the proteome of the social amoeba D. discoideum has a high aggregation propensity. However, we find that both endogenous and heterologous prion-like proteins do not aggregate in the cytosol of D. discoideum but are kept soluble. Moreover, they show no signs of toxicity. Impairment of the PQC system by heat stress or specific inhibitors, however, leads to the formation of cytotoxic aggregates within the cytosol. This suggests a role for cytosolic molecular chaperones in regulating protein aggregation. Furthermore, we identify the disaggregase Hsp101 as a major player of stress recovery and survival. In addition, we provide evidence that prion-like proteins accumulate in the nucleus to be degraded by the proteasome. This suggests that D. discoideum has adapted its proteostasis network to tolerate the high number of aggregation-prone proteins in its proteome. The propensity of a protein to misfold and aggregate is determined by its amino acid sequence. N/Q-rich sequences in particular have been shown to have a high aggregation tendency. A previous multispecies analysis showed that the occurrence of N or Q sequence runs varies substantially between organisms. This study was also the first to reveal that N/Q-rich proteins are particularly abundant in the social amoebae D. discoideum. We characterize the proteome of D. discoideum in more detail by both assessing the number and length of polyN and polyQ runs, and identifying more complex N/Q-rich sequences with prion-like amino acid composition. Our analysis reveals an exceptionally high number of prion-like proteins in D. discoideum. These aggregation-prone prion-like proteins are associated with specific groups of GO terms and specific protein superdomain families, suggesting that prion-like domains have unknown functions in D. discoideum. Previous studies have speculated about the functional significance of prion-like proteins in D. discoideum. The first analysis of poly-amino acid stretches in D. discoideum showed that such sequences occur only in specific protein families. More recent work by Sucgang et al. suggested that poly-amino acid repeats are microsatellites. Moreover, these authors provided data that contradict the notion that the N/Q-rich sequences are functional. Their study compared poly-amino acid repeats—including N/Q-rich repeats—in D. discoideum and the close relative D. purpureum. They found only a low number of protein orthologs with conserved poly-amino acid repeats. Based on this finding, the authors concluded that poly-amino acid stretches are randomly distributed and occur due to species-specific idiosyncrasies that may affect the DNA replication or repair machinery of D. discoideum. In contrast, our approach identified a high number of orthologs in D. discoideum and D. purpureum. In addition, we found a remarkable overlap of protein superdomain families. An explanation for this discrepancy may be found in the different methods used. Sucgang et al. used direct sequence alignment. In this method, stretches of differing size may lead to misalignments, thus decreasing the number or positive hits, as noted by the authors themselves. In contrast, our approach uses a sliding window to identify amino acid stretches with a certain “prion probability” and then annotates the region as candidate prion domain. This more flexible assignment of protein domains facilitates the subsequent identification of protein orthologs. Taken together, our findings suggest that N/Q-rich sequences in D. discoideum are not randomly occurring sequence features and may have biological functions. This assumption is further supported by the observation that the association of RRM domains with prion-like sequences, which had previously been reported for yeast and mammalian proteins, is conserved in D. discoideum. In addition, prion-like proteins associate with distinct GO clusters in D. discoideum and similar GO clusters can be found in S. cerevisiae, Drosophila melanogaster, and H. sapiens. We speculate that the amino acid composition of these domains is modified by different functional constraints in other organisms. Nevertheless, these findings suggest that N/Q-rich sequence stretches are biologically relevant and conserved from yeast to mammals, despite the fact that they are prone to misfold and aggregate. This suggests that D. discoideum may be a very useful model organism to study the functions of prion-like domains and the cellular pathways that are involved in their regulation. Studies with several different model organisms have shown that the expression of polyQ-containing proteins is associated with protein aggregation in the cytosol and cytotoxic effects. Surprisingly, however, we did not observe cytosolic aggregates for any of the tested prion-like proteins. On the contrary, Q103-GFP and NM-GFP remained soluble, as judged by fluorescence microscopy and biochemical analysis. The N-rich variant of Q103, N47, as well as highly aggregation-prone variants of NM all showed a diffuse cytosolic localization but exhibited a small amount of aggregated material, which may result from a small population of stressed or aged cells. This is in stark contrast to observations made in S. cerevisiae, C. elegans, D. melanogaster, and mammalian cells, where all tested proteins aggregate in the cytosol. Moreover, the expression of prion-like proteins in these organisms was detrimental, because of cytotoxic effects. However, in D. discoideum, the expression of prion-like proteins did not lead to measurable effects on cellular health during the vegetative cycle or development. This suggests that D. discoideum has evolved mechanisms that render this organism resilient to the detrimental effects of prion-like proteins. What are the molecular pathways that make D. discoideum resilient to highly aggregation-prone prion-like proteins? We noticed that prion-like proteins accumulate in the nucleus of D. discoideum cells and were occasionally restricted to structures that are reminiscent of nucleoli. The accumulation of aggregated proteins in the nucleus and, particularly, in the nucleolus has been reported previously for mammalian cells. Disease-causing variants of human huntingtin form nuclear aggregates, which are found adjacent to the nucleolus. Nuclear aggregates are also found in spinocerebral ataxia, another neurodegenerative disease caused by aggregation of polyQ proteins. However, nuclear aggregation is not limited to disease-causing proteins. Upon proteasome inhibition, stress-related and non–stress-related proteins translocate to the nucleolus and accumulate in structures that are known as nuclear aggresomes. The threshold for nuclear aggresome formation is determined by the capacity of the ubiquitin–proteasome system. Moreover, proteasomes localize to nucleoli during proteotoxic stress, and aggresome formation requires intact nucleoli. These findings are consistent with our observations and suggest that D. discoideum uses nucleoli or nucleoli-like structures to degrade or store misfolded cytosolic proteins in the nucleus. Recent studies suggest that misfolded cytosolic proteins are imported into the nucleus for degradation. Several pieces of evidence support the assumption that this might also apply to prion-like proteins in D. discoideum. First, as in yeast, proteasomes are highly enriched in the nucleus of D. discoideum. Second, we found that the number of cells with nuclear NM*-GFP accumulations was significantly increased upon proteasome inhibition. Third, we observed that nuclear NM*-GFP puncta colocalized with ubiquitin. However, it remains unclear whether these nuclear structures are storage depots for misfolded proteins or are actively engaged in degrading misfolded proteins. Previous studies reported that N/Q-rich proteins cannot be degraded efficiently by the proteasome, unless proteasomal activity is increased. Therefore, we speculate that D. discoideum has evolved mechanisms to efficiently degrade and prevent the aggregation of prion-like proteins. In agreement with this, we find that a Q/N-rich protein is efficiently turned over through proteasomal degradation in D. discoideum. This suggests that D. discoideum has evolved an efficient nuclear PQC system, which plays an important role in controlling cytosolic prion-like proteins. A wide range of studies showed that molecular chaperones, in particular Hsp90 and the Hsp70/Hsp40 chaperone system, could antagonize the aggregation and toxicity of aggregation-prone disease-related proteins. In agreement with this, we observed an increase in cytosolic protein aggregation when Hsp90 was inhibited. Addition of geldanamycin led to the formation of cytosolic foci and a drastic increase in SDS-insoluble material. Geldanamycin binds the ATP-binding site of Hsp90 and blocks the maturation of Hsp90 substrates as well as the refolding of stress-denatured protein. Therefore, our data suggest a prominent role for molecular chaperones in the regulation of prion-like proteins during normal growth conditions. Future studies will show whether Hsp90 is involved in targeting prion-like proteins to the proteasome or regulates these proteins independently of the degradation machinery. Interestingly, in bacteria, yeast, and plants, proteins of the Hsp100 family can dissolve heat-induced protein aggregates and thereby confer thermotolerance to these organisms. We identified a disaggregase ortholog in D. discoideum and analyzed its influence on prion-like proteins. The formation of aggregates in response to heat stress was prevented by overexpression of Hsp101, whereas compromising Hsp101 function impaired the clearance of protein aggregates. This suggests that the disaggregase plays a key role in controlling protein aggregation during and after stress. In agreement with this, we found that Hsp101 is required for thermotolerance in D. discoideum. Interestingly, Hsp101 is heat-inducible, but it is not expressed during normal growth conditions. This indicates that the disaggregase Hsp101 provides an additional layer of control that complements the cytosolic PQC machinery in times of stress. We speculate that Hsp101 is required to release prion-like proteins from stress-induced compartments, and it may also be involved in targeting them to the proteasome. Together, these findings suggest that D. discoideum has evolved mechanisms to control protein aggregation both during normal growth conditions and upon stress. Cytosolic molecular chaperones and the ubiquitin–proteasome system seem to play a major role. Further studies will uncover the specific molecular adaptations that have equipped D. discoideum with a more robust proteostasis system. In fact, a recent study in Plasmodium falciparum, an organism with a similarly N/Q-rich proteome, showed an example for such an adaptation, where a member of the Hsp110 protein family showed a much higher disaggregation activity than the Hsp110 homologs in mammalian cells. Thus, by studying the proteostasis machinery of D. discoideum in detail, we will learn how a complex protein-folding environment can be managed successfully. We therefore predict that D. discoideum will be a very useful model organism to characterize the molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of prion-like proteins. Lessons learned in D. discoideum could therefore point to new therapeutic interventions to treat the many protein-misfolding diseases that are caused by prion-like proteins. Materials and Methods Prediction of Prion-Like Domains and Computational Analysis. Prediction of prion-like domains and domain enrichment analysis was performed as described previously. Genome sequences and annotations were obtained from DictyBase. D. discoideum Techniques, Strains, and Media. The D. discoideum strain background used in this study is AX2-214. A list of strains used in this study can be found in Dataset S2 ; expression plasmids were generated using Gateway cloning strategy and appropriate plasmids for expression in D. discoideum. Cells were grown in AX medium at 23 °C under light. Transformation of D. discoideum cells was performed as described previously. Development. Development of D. discoideum cells was induced as described previously. Different developmental stage structures were imaged on an Olympus SZX12 upright stereomicroscope. Growth Curves. Cells were grown at 23 °C under constant shaking and light. The cell numbers were assessed manually by counting cells in disposable hemocytometer counting chambers according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Survival Assays. D. discoideum cells were grown at 25 °C or 34 °C under constant shaking and light. Cells were stained with propidium iodide and analyzed using an FACSCalibur cell analyzer equipped with 488- and 633-nm laser lines. In total, 10,000 cells were counted for each analysis, and cell lines were sampled in biological triplicates. SDD-AGE. SDD-AGE was performed as described previously. Sample Preparation for Microscopy. For live-cell microscopy, D. discoideum cells were grown overnight in LoFlo medium to reduce background fluorescence. Before imaging, cells were transferred to glass bottom dishes and allowed to settle for 20 min. During imaging, cells were kept at 22 °C using a cooling chamber. If required, D. discoideum cells were fixed using a picric acid–paraformaldehyde fixation protocol. Cells were stained with DAPI and/or anti-ubiquitin antibody in PBS, 0.1% Triton X-100, and 0.1% BSA. For sample preparation for CLEM, see SI Materials and Methods, Correlative Light and Electron Microscopy. Wide-Field Microscopy. Images and time-lapse movies were acquired using a Deltavision microscope system with softWoRx 4.1.2 software. The system was based on an Olympus IX71 microscope, which was used with a 100×/1.4 numerical aperture or 60×/1.42 N.A. objective or 20×/0.75 N.A. objective. The images were collected with a Cool SnapHQ camera as 1,024 × 1,024 pixel files using 1 × 1 binning. All images were deconvolved using standard softWoRx deconvolution algorithms. Images acquired with the Deltavision setup were maximum-intensity projections of at least 20 individual images. FRAP. Images were acquired on a spinning-disk Olympus IX81 inverted stand microscope using an Olympus UPlanSApo 60×, 1.20-W objective and iQ 1.10.5 software. The microscope was equipped with a Yokogawa CSU-X1 spinning disk scan head. The images were collected with an Andor iXon EM with DU-897 BV back illuminated EMCCD. Prebleaching images were acquired as z stacks with a time interval of 5 min. The cells were bleached in a 30 × 30-nm region in three pulses with 40% laser power for 30 ms. Postbleaching images were acquired as z stacks with time intervals of 30 s for the first 10 frames and 1-min intervals for the following 10 frames. For image analysis, see SI Materials and Methods, FRAP Image Analysis. Supplementary Material Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. 