 Cobaltabisdicarbollide −, is a complex boron-based anion that has the unusual property of self-assembly into membranes and vesicles. These membranes have similar dimensions to biological membranes found in cells, and previously COSAN has been shown to pass through synthetic lipid membranes and those of living cells without causing breakdown of membrane barrier properties. Here, we investigate the interaction of this inorganic membrane system with living cells. We show that COSAN has no immediate effect on cell viability, and cells fully recover when COSAN is removed following exposure for hours to days. COSAN elicits a range of cell biological effects, including altered cell morphology, inhibition of cell growth and, in some cases, apoptosis. These observations reveal a new biology at the interface between inorganic, synthetic COSAN membranes and naturally occurring biological membranes. All biological membranes are formed by self-assembly of lipid molecules, with their polar head groups exposed to the aqueous environment and their fatty acid tails orientated internally, to create a hydrophobic barrier 1. These membranes establish the boundary between the living cells and the external environment, and form barriers between internal cell compartments and organelles. Control of biomolecular flow across, and within, membranes is an important element for cell regulatory processes, and this flux is achieved by transport and channel proteins, or re-sculpting membranes via vesicle intermediates. A diversity of lipid membrane components increase complexity by imparting different physicochemical membrane properties, such as membrane thickness, lateral diffusion rate and curvature 2, 3. Membrane integrity is essential for control of the distribution of ions, biomolecules and metabolites, and when disrupted leads to a rapid loss of cell viability. Cobaltabisdicarbollide, −, commonly known as COSAN, is a complex, boron-based anion that forms vesicles and membranes in aqueous solution 4. COSAN comprises of a central cobalt atom sandwiched between two carboranyl clusters 5, 6, 7. Unlike the polarized lipid molecules that form biological membranes, COSAN has a dispersed net negative charge 8 but a hydrophobic surface, and forms intermolecular interactions via its weakly polarized B-H and C-H bonds 9, 10, 11. The simultaneous hydrophobic and hydrophilic nature of COSAN makes it soluble in both water and oils, and at a critical concentration it forms small, monolayer vesicles, and eventually micelles, with dimensions only slightly smaller than those formed from lipid bilayers 4, 12. Figure 1 The effect of COSAN on mammalian cells. We have previously shown that COSAN vesicles are able to pass directly through synthetic lipid membranes with zero-order kinetics 12. We further showed that when applied to cells growing in culture, COSAN passed into cells without disrupting membrane integrity 13. Here, we examine the effects of COSAN and some of its derivatives on cell behaviour, demonstrating that COSAN has a range of biological effects and in particular causes cell growth arrest in all cell types investigated. These effects are reversible, suggesting a biological interaction rather than chemical toxicity. Results COSAN interactions with living cells We examined the effect of COSAN on a range of mammalian cell lines: HEK293, HeLa, 3T3 cells, growing as adherent monolayers, and a lymphoblastoid line THP-1, growing in suspension. In all concentrations examined, COSAN treatment had no immediate effect on cell viability, with cells showing no signs of membrane disruption. For most cells and culture conditions, we observed cell rounding within minutes to an hour of addition of COSAN, but with adherent cells remaining attached to the substratum. Cell rounding was also seen with cells plated in PBS, similar aqueous conditions to those used in previous biophysical studies in which COSAN forms vesicles 12. In addition to morphological change, all cells tested arrested proliferation and growth. Using cell proliferation in 4 day culture as an assay, we calculated ED 50 values of between 99–157 μM. Table 1 Effective dose for COSAN and I 2 -COSAN) on cell growth For some cells and growth conditions, however we observed additional effects. When HEK293 cells were plated at low density, and hence had a higher proliferation rate, they began to bleb after 8 hours of treatment, having the appearance of cells entering apoptosis 14 with large numbers of cells dying at 24 hours. If HEK293 cells grown under these conditions were treated with both COSAN and the caspase-3 inhibitor Ivachtin to block apoptosis, cells remained viable for 24 hours, and fully recovered if COSAN was then washed out and cells grown for a further 24 hours. Finally, if HEK293 cells grown at low density were treated with COSAN for 5 hours, 3 hours before obvious apoptosis, and then COSAN was washed out, cells recovered and began to grow and proliferate normally. In contrast, HeLa cells grown under the same conditions showed no evidence for blebbing or cell death. Instead, they took on an unusual, highly vacuolated appearance after 24 hours. When COSAN was applied to HeLa cells for 5 hours and then removed, cells reverted to the same morphology as untreated cells, indicating again that COSAN-mediated effects were reversible. Even when cells were exposed to COSAN for 12 hours and then washed free for a further 12 hours, the majority of cell showed no vacuolation, and those cells with vacuoles showed only minimal effects compared to 24 hour exposure. We conclude that of the cells examined apoptosis is restricted to HEK293 cells, and other cell types show different cellular changes not associated with cell death. As these additional effects require long-term exposure, greater than 5 hours, and are reversible if COSAN is removed before this time, we conclude that COSAN is not cytotoxic in the short term. To probe the effect of COSAN on cell growth without these longer-term confounding effects, we switched the investigation to Dictyostelium discoideum cells, a eukaryotic cell that is evolutionarily close to animal cells, but lacks caspase-mediated apoptosis 15, 16. We found that these cells were much more sensitive to COSAN, with an ED 50 of 2.6 ± 0.29 μM, and total arrest of proliferation occurring at 4 μM. Under phase contrast microscopy, treated cells retained the refractile appearance of living cells, but rounded up and often exhibited a single large protrusion. Consistent with a lack of cytotoxicity, cells rapidly reverted to the untreated state following COSAN removal. Due to the morphological change, cells became loosely attached to the underlying substratum. Cell detachment however cannot explain the growth arrest, as untreated Dictyostelium cells grow well in shaking suspension. As seen for mammalian cells, cell rounding was also observed when COSAN was added in phosphate buffer or water. In growth medium Dictyostelium cells remained viable for long periods in COSAN. To date, we have found no limits for Dictyostelium, with cultures remaining viable for more than 1 month in 10 μM COSAN, and recovering after removal. In addition, cells were viable and grew well in COSAN-free culture, even after prolonged exposure to 500 μM of COSAN, almost 200 times the ED 50 value. Figure 2 The effect of COSAN on Dictyostelium cells. Modification of COSAN alters its cellular potency Using the more sensitive Dictyostelium cells, we tested a range of chemical variations and modifications of COSAN. Substitution of cobalt for iron as the central metal made no major difference to compound potency. However, methylation of COSAN, or linking two COSAN clusters via a PEG chain decreased cell potency. In contrast, addition of iodine to make di-iodo-COSAN increased potency. 4A ). Dictyostelium cell recovery after I 2 -COSAN treatment took longer than COSAN and was dose-dependent, suggesting a stronger interaction with its cellular targets. When tested on mammalian cell cultures, again I 2 -COSAN was more potent than COSAN. In addition, we tested the influence of different biocompatible cations: salts of COSAN, Li + and Na + ; salts of FESAN, Li + and Na + ; salts of I 2 -COSAN, H + and Na +, but found no differences in effects on cells. On this basis, all biological tests were carried out with Na + as the cation of the COSAN anion and its derivatives. Figure 3 A chemical series based on COSAN reveals increased potency of I 2 -COSAN on living cells. Figure 4 Analysis of I 2 -COSAN on cell growth. We had found no, or very little, effect of COSAN on the growth of bacteria. In contrast, I 2 -COSAN arrested growth of the two bacterial species we tested, E. coli and K. pneumoniae,. Interestingly, we found that E. coli was significantly more sensitive to I 2 -COSAN than K. pneumoniae. Growth arrest was reversed by I 2 -COSAN removal or dilution to below its ED 50 value. Direct visualization of I 2 -COSAN within cells To investigate why I 2 -COSAN was more potent than the original COSAN molecule, we used micro-Raman spectroscopy to compare uptake and release of both molecules. As previously reported, the distinctive vibrational peak at 2570 cm −1 of B-H bonds provides a means of direct visualization and quantification of COSAN and I 2 -COSAN in living HEK293 cells 13, showing that both COSAN and I 2 -COSAN accumulates inside cells. In fact, we found that both COSAN and I 2 -COSAN reach intracellular concentrations substantially greater than in the external medium. This is illustrated well in the case of I 2 -COSAN, where an extracellular 2 mM concentration of I 2 -COSAN, a concentration too low for normal detection, accumulated in 30 minutes to a concentration of approximately 25 mM within cells, a greater than 10-fold rise. Although both molecules possessed the ability to accumulate against the concentration gradient, we observed that I 2 -COSAN reached an intra-cellular concentration 3–4 times that of COSAN. When COSAN or I 2 -COSAN was then removed from the medium, they initially remained within the cell and then were gradually lost over the preceding hours. However 4 hours after COSAN or I 2 -COSAN removal from the external environment, there was more retained inside the cell than originally applied to the outside, and I 2 -COSAN was still detectable within cells after 4 days. These observations indicate that the rate of entry of both COSAN and I 2 -COSAN is greater than the exit rate, and can explain the intracellular accumulation. Figure 5 Monitoring COSAN and I 2 -COSAN in living cells. Although absolute concentration of I 2 -COSAN inside the cells was higher than COSAN, in both cases the concentration 4 hours after removal was 20% of the total peak concentration. This indicated that COSAN and I 2 -COSAN exited cells at the same rate, and did not explain why intracellular I 2 -COSAN was higher than COSAN. To investigate this further, we measured the octanol-water Partition Coefficient as an indication of lipophilicity, and found that I 2 -COSAN has a partition value approximately 3.5-fold higher than COSAN. This study indicates that I 2 -COSAN possesses significantly higher lipophilicity than COSAN. The ability to accumulate and measure I 2 -COSAN within cells that are incubated in I 2 -COSAN concentrations below the detection threshold offers a strong signal contrast with which to image the subcellular distribution. As previously reported for treatment with higher COSAN concentrations, cells treated with 2 mM I 2 -COSAN showed that although present within both the cytoplasm and nucleus, I 2 -COSAN was not homogeneously distributed, with some cytoplasmic regions showing higher concentrations than others. Currently, we do not have sufficient spatial resolution to correlate these higher concentration regions with known sub-cellular structures. It is very clear, however, that there was no substantial accumulation in the plasma membrane, consistent with our previous biophysical observations that COSAN passed directly through artificial membranes 12. Discussion The interaction of COSAN and related molecules with synthetic and biological membranes was described in previous reports 12, 13, and here we have explored the biological interactions with living cells. COSAN and I 2 -COSAN form vesicles in aqueous solution 4 and have the unusual property of transiting lipid bilayers with zero order kinetics 12, where rate is independent of the initial concentration. Previously, we observed fusion and transit of COSAN vesicles through the lipid membrane of the liposomes 12, and COSAN entry into living cells 13. In the experiments reported here, we show that COSAN entry into cells neither disrupts the plasma membrane nor is immediately cytotoxic. This is consistent with the previous biophysical experiments 12 that demonstrated that the boron-rich anion COSAN and its I 2 -COSAN derivative cross through cell-free artificial lipid bilayer synthetic membranes, either prokaryotic or eukaryotic. We found that for most eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell cultures, cells remain viable with prolonged COSAN treatment, but have arrested cell growth and proliferation, indicating a cytostatic, not cytotoxic, effect. When COSAN is washed from the cells, this cytostatic effect is reversed and they resume growth. However, under some conditions, additional cell effects were observed: proliferating HEK293 cells exhibiting apoptosis and HeLa cells forming large intracellular vacuoles. These additional, cell-specific events require exposure of many hours, contrasting to the morphological changes, followed by growth arrest, that occurs rapidly after COSAN exposure in all eukaryotic cells. These observations suggest that the interaction of COSAN with cells is more than a simple physicochemical process and may entail more active interactions with intracellular cell signalling pathways that control proliferation, death or membrane dynamics. The nature of these interactions is currently unknown. With our current imaging techniques we cannot determine whether separate COSAN vesicles form within cells as seen in artificial liposome experiments or whether COSAN forms more complex structures within the cytoplasm, such as hybrid COSAN and phospholipid membranes. We note however the association between membrane fluidity, cell proliferation arrest and apoptosis seen with other small molecules, such as methyl jasmonate 17, and it is possible that all the biological effects we observe could arise due to membrane interactions. Alternatively, COSAN may mediate its effects due to protein interactions either by enzyme inhibition via active site binding, such the modified COSAN molecules that inhibit enzymes 18, 19, or more general interference by binding to protein surfaces. More detailed analysis is required to resolve these mechanistic possibilities. The effects of COSAN are seen in a broad range of conditions, spanning different counter ions and cell media and buffers. In addition, the core effects on cell morphology and cell growth arrest are conserved over many cell types, including Dictyostelium and bacteria, although the sensitivity to COSAN and its derivatives varies widely over different cell types. Changing the structure of the COSAN had a large effect on the potency of its effect, with diCOSAN structures having no or very little effect, whereas addition of iodine enhances its biological effects. To investigate why I 2 -COSAN has higher potency than COSAN, we used micro-Raman spectroscopy to monitor both COSAN and I 2 -COSAN within living cells. We found that both molecules exit cells at a slower, but equal, rate in comparison to entry. This leads to accumulation within the cell against the concentration gradient, however I 2 -COSAN accumulates to a higher level. Currently, we do not know whether COSAN accumulation reaches a maximum concentration, however the cell biological effects described in this paper occur at much lower concentrations of COSAN or I 2 -COSAN than used for imaging, and so there is plenty of capacity for both to accumulate to a level with significant effects. A key difference between COSAN and I 2 -COSAN is the approximate 3.5 times higher lipophilicity of the I 2 -COSAN molecule, which suggests a higher affinity for the lipid environment. This difference is also consistent with observations on artificial membranes 12, where the rate-limiting factor for COSAN and I 2 -COSAN translocation is partitioning between lipid and water phase, and the slower permeation rate seen for I 2 -COSAN could result from its greater affinity for lipids. Importantly, we do not see either COSAN or I 2 -COSAN accumulation within the plasma membrane of cells further demonstrating that COSAN anions do not accumulate within the lipid membrane phase. A valuable feature of the inorganic boron-based COSAN membranes reported here is that they are not present in nature and therefore unlikely to be further modified or degraded by cellular enzymes. Consistent with this, we have observed no chemical modification of COSAN or I 2 -COSAN in the cell systems reported here. This biologically inert feature may offer new opportunities for drug design and molecular delivery systems. Recent work demonstrates that functionalized I-COSAN vesicles show good biodistribution and can be imaged throughout whole mice 20, and we would predict that they would not show major toxicity if concentrations are maintained below 100 μM. COSAN, and other borane clusters, can be coupled to bioactive molecules, such as inhibitors, siRNA and protein ligands 21, 22, 23, 24, and may have the potential to carry these molecules across the plasma membrane and into cells. COSAN vesicles could also be used to encapsulate water soluble or hydrophilic compounds, however it is currently unclear how the topology of the COSAN vesicles changes as they merge with lipid bilayer membranes and whether this would deliver into the cell or disperse on the cell surface. As COSAN can accumulate to high concentrations in living cells, this may enhance potential therapeutic effects. For example, its cell accumulation may be beneficial for Boron neutron capture therapy proposed for cancer therapy 25, 26, 27, or other clinical usages. We also note the differential sensitivity between cell state and cell species. In tissue culture, we observed cell death in proliferating cells following prolonged COSAN treatment, however confluent monolayers appeared unaffected. If this is translated to the in vivo context, then it may be possible to target rapidly growing cells. Dictyostelium amoebae show a much higher sensitivity to COSAN and its derivatives. If this higher sensitivity to COSAN were also present in other unicellular eukaryotes, it may offer an amoebicidal agent to target protozoan and amoebozoan pathogens. Placed in the context of earlier papers, these observations demonstrate that COSAN is able to accumulate within cells without affecting membrane integrity. Once inside the cell, COSAN is not immediately cytotoxic, but is cytostatic over the long term, and cells recover following its removal. Specific biological effects, however, vary with cell type and conditions. These results reveal novel biology interactions at the interface of biological and synthetic membranes. Methods COSAN and its derivatives Single COSAN moieties Cs, Cs 6 ; Cs, Cs 6 ; Cs, Cs 28 ; Cs, Cs 28 ; and three compounds containing two COSAN moieties: Na 2 29 ; Na 2 30 and Na 2 31 were synthesized as described in the literature. The water-insoluble compounds were dissolved in a mixture of acetonitrile/water and passed repeatedly through a cation exchanging resin, which had been loaded previously with the desired cation. The solvent was removed by evaporation 29. For cell experiments, all compounds were dissolved in KK2 or phosphate-buffered saline prior to addition to cell medium. Cell culture Bacteria, Dictyostelium and mammalian cells were grown using standard laboratory procedures, appropriate for the cell type, e.g. Medium type,, cell density and growth temperature. Cell numbers for maintain standard culture densities and measuring growth rates were measured by methods appropriate to cell type: optical density at 600 nm for bacteria; direct cell counting with a haemocytometer for Dictyostelium cells; a combination of direct cell counting and luminescent detection of ATP for mammalian cells. Cells were visually detected an IX71 inverted DIC microscope, 40× objective and images captured using a Hamamatsu Orca ER camera. To calculate ED 50, independent data sets were fit to an exponential curve, and individual ED 50 values were calculated by interpolation. The mean values of three independent ED 50 values were calculated. Micro Raman spectroscopy Samples were visualized with a Raman microscope system, stimulated with a diode pumped solid-state laser, analysed with a spectrometer and acquired via a spectroscopy CCD camera. COSAN and I 2 -COSAN uptakes was determined for HEK293 cells in phosphate-buffered saline by performing Raman single-point spectroscopy. Single cell Raman spectra were acquired from 20 cells 13. Partition Coefficient measurement The Partition Coefficient is defined as the ratio of the amount of compound present in the organic phase to the amount present in the aqueous phase. Different amounts of Na and Na have been added to a 10 ml vial containing 3 ml of n -octanol and 3 ml of deionized water. The different vials have been horizontally and vigorously shacked at room temperature for 2 hours at 350 rpm, to ensure the compound's transfer between the two phases. After, the vials are left standing for 1 hour in order to separate the phases, and later centrifuged 10 minutes at 6000 rpm. Finally, the organic and the aqueous phases have been transferred to a UV Cell and the UV absorption has been measured in a Shimadzu UV-Vis 1700 spectrophotometer, at the maximum absorbance of λ: 299 and 281 nm for Na, in n -octanol and water, respectively; and 289 and 281 nm for Na, again in n -octanol and water, respectively. The interpolation of the obtained values in the previously prepared quantification curves allowed knowing the concentration of metallacarborane in each phase. Due to the partial solubility of n -octanol in water 0.032 g/100 g at 25°C, and of water in n -octanol 3.8 g/100 g, the calibration curves have been prepared with water saturated n -octanol and n -octanol saturated water, in order to avoid any possible medium interference. Author Contributions M.T., C.V., F.T. and A.H. conceived the experiments, designed the project and wrote the paper. M.T., J.F., K.A., E.P. and E.C. performed the experiments. Supplementary Material Supplementary Information: Supplementary figure legends Click here to view. 