 In this study, we have performed the first mass spectrometric analysis of N-glycans of the M31 mutant strain of the cellular slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum, previously shown to have a defect in glucosidase II. Together with glucosidase I, this enzyme mediates part of the initial processing of N-glycans; defects in either glucosidase are associated with human diseases and result in an accumulation of incorrectly-processed oligosaccharides which are not, or only poor, substrates for a range of downstream enzymes. To examine the effect of the glucosidase II mutation in Dictyostelium, we employed off-line LC-MALDI-TOF-MS in combination with chemical and enzymatic treatments and MS/MS to analyse the neutral and anionic N-glycans of the mutant as compared to the wild-type. The major neutral species were, as expected, of the composition Hex 10-11 HexNAc 2-3 with one or two terminal glucose residues. Consistent with the block in processing of neutral N-glycans caused by the absence of glucosidase II, fucose was apparently absent from the N-glycans and bisecting N-acetylglucosamine was rare. The major anionic oligosaccharides were sulphated and/or methylphosphorylated forms of Hex 8-11 HexNAc 2-3, many of which surprisingly lacked glucose residues entirely. As anionic N-glycans are considered to be mostly associated with lysosomal enzymes in Dictyostelium, we hypothesise that glycosidases present in the acidic compartments may act on the oligosaccharides attached to such slime mould proteins. Furthermore, our chosen analytical approach enabled us, via observation of diagnostic negative-mode MS/MS fragments, to determine the fine structure of the methylphosphorylated and sulphated N-glycans of the M31 glucosidase mutant in their native state. Keywords: Glycans, glycomics, sulphate, methylphosphate 1. Introduction N-glycosylation is almost ubiquitous in eukaryotes and is also known in bacteria and archaea. However, a high variability in terms of finally-processed structures is obvious when comparing different species, which is reflected also in the types of enzymes present. Nevertheless, amongst eukaryotes which are not unicellular obligate parasites, the initial stages of the N-glycosylation process are highly conserved. After transfer of a tetradecasaccharide containing three glucose, nine mannose and two N- acetylglucosamine residues to protein, the three glucose residues are removed by α-glucosidases I and II, which are resident in the endoplasmic reticulum and have a neutral pH optimum. Two human diseases are associated with defects in these enzymes: mutations of glucosidase I are associated with a congenital disorder of glycosylation, whereas defects of the β-subunit of glucosidase II are found in some patients with polycystic liver disease. Homologues of genes encoding glucosidase I and the α and β subunits of glucosidase II are present in a range of organisms including the cellular slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum. The biological role of glucosidase II has been assessed with a range of mutant cell lines and organisms, including Arabidopsis thaliana, Candida albicans, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Trypanosoma brucei knock-outs as well as a hypercellulolytic strain of Trichoderma reesei, a mouse lymphoma cell line and the Dicytostelium discoideum modA mutant. A recurring feature of the plant and fungal mutants is the occurrence of cell wall phenotypes suggesting that glucosidase II is required for proper formation of cell walls; indeed in Dictyostelium, which also produces cellulose, stunted fruiting bodies are the obvious morphological phenotype of the modA strain. Otherwise, the modA mutant displays some growth retardation and alterations in the levels of some intracellular and secreted glycosidases. It is possible that the binding to ER lectins involved in quality control in the secretory pathway is affected by a lack of glucosidase II activity; certainly, calnexin binds Glc 1 Man 9 GlcNAc 2, but not Glc 2-3 Man 9 GlcNAc 2 and an absence of glucosidase II may in some cases prevent association with calnexin and so result in increased degradation of proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. D. discoideum has proven to be an interesting model organism as it undergoes, under conditions of environmental stress, the transition from a single-cell amoeba to a multicellular organism with fruiting bodies; it also has an alternative sexual lifecycle. Over the past thirty years, there have been a number of studies regarding the N-glycosylation of this species. The consensus is that the finally processed N-glycans contain a number of features unusual for oligomannosidic-type structures: methylphosphate, sulphate, bisected GlcNAc, intersected GlcNAc and core α1,3-fucose residues are found, whereas there are shifts in the N-glycome during development from amoebae to fruiting bodies. Some mutants with defects in N-glycosylation are known, but much of the available information on the glycans of wild-type and mutant strains was based on radiolabelling studies and not on mass spectrometry. Recently, though, studies from two laboratories have used a combination of HPLC and MALDI-TOF MS to elucidate the structures of many N-glycans from D. discoideum including some from glycosylation mutants. Key to the workflow in our own laboratory has been the use of a number of separation techniques, including solid-phase extraction early on in the analyses followed by either reversed phase and hydrophilic-interaction/anionic-exchange HPLC in order to yield fractions with lower complexity, thus avoiding suppression of a number of the glycans in the subsequent mass spectrometric analyses. In this study, we apply our methodology to examination of the N-glycans of a glucosidase II mutant of D. discoideum ; this M31 strain has been previously shown to have altered size and charge of its N-glycans, which are rescuable effects phenocopied by a specific knock-out of the gene encoding the glucosidase II catalytic α subunit. Thereby we note a reduced glycomic complexity as compared to the wild-type, but also the presence of anionic oligosaccharides with unexpected backbone structures. The most likely explanation is that glycosidases in cell compartments other than the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus contribute to the final spectrum of N-glycans present in the slime mould. 2. Experimental Procedures 2.1 Slime mould cultivation The M31 and Ax3 strains were obtained from the Dictyostelium Stock Centre and grown in HL5 liquid medium according to standard techniques. 2.2 Cloning and sequencing of the glucosidase II gene Based on the sequences in Dictybase and GenBank, the open reading frame cDNA encoding modA was isolated from mutant and wild type cells using TRIZOL and SuperScript RT. For the PCR reaction combination of two forward modA -1, modA -3 and two reverse primers modA -2, modA -4 were used with GoTaq polymerase. The purified PCR products were ligated into pGEM-T vector and transformed into E. coli JM 109 cells. The sequencing of the plasmid DNA was performed by MWG and sequence alignments were done using the Multalin server. 2.3 Expression of P. pastoris ER mannosidase Mns1 The Pichia homologue of S. cerevisiae ER mannosidase I was identified by blasting the S. cerevisiae MNS1 coding sequence against the P. pastoris GS115 genome. The P. pastoris MNS1 gene was amplified from genomic DNA using the following primers: MNS1_KpnI_fw and MNS1_XbaI_rv. After digestion with the respective enzymes, the partial open reading frame encoding the catalytic region without the original leader peptide was ligated into the pPICzαA vector to produce a C-terminal His-tagged fusion protein. The sequence was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and after linearization using DraI, the linearized plasmid was used to transform P. pastoris X-33 cells. Selected positive clones were grown in YPD medium overnight prior to transfer to YP medium containing 1% methanol for a total of 48 hours at 25°C. Expression of secreted recombinant mannosidase in the medium was verified by Western blotting using a mouse His-tag specific primary antibody in combination with an anti-mouse-IgG alkaline phosphatase conjugated secondary antibody. Protein activity was confirmed using PA-labeled Man 9 GlcNAc 2 glycan as substrate. His-tag affinity purification was essentially performed as described previously using Ni-NTA agarose ; recombinant protein was eluted with 500 mM imidazole and then desalted using Vivaspin columns prior to storage in 20 mM TrisCl, 25 mM NaCl, pH 7.5 at 4°C. 2.4 Expression of GH99 endo-α-mannosidase The plasmid encoding Bacteroides xylanisolvens endo-α-mannosidase in pET30a was kindly provided by Prof. Gideon J. Davies and used to transform E. coli Rosetta cells. Starter cultures were grown at 37°C overnight in LB medium containing kanamycin and used to inoculate 10 ml of LB/kanamycin at on OD 600 = 0.05. Cells were grown at 37°C until an OD 600 of 0.6 was reached. The temperature was reduced to 16°C and protein expression was induced overnight by adding IPTG to a final concentration of 500 μM. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer. Cellular protein was released by three consecutive freeze-thaw treatments and by a single sonication step. Cell debris was collected by centrifugation and the supernatant was kept for protein purification. Recombinant protein was detected by Western blotting using a His-tag sensitive primary antibody and purified on Ni-NTA agarose as described above. 2.5 Release and purification of N-glycans Cellular material was heat-treated, homogenised by sonication and proteolysed with pepsin, prior to purification of the peptides as in our previously-published procedures. After cation-exchange and gel filtration chromatography, peptides dissolved in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate were incubated with PNGase F overnight at 37 °C, prior to addition of an excess of 20 mM ammonium acetate and incubation with PNGase A overnight. Subsequent Dowex chromatography enabled the separation of the free N-glycans from the residual peptides. The free N-glycans were subject to solid phase extraction using non-porous graphitised carbon as previously published ; the resulting neutral and anionic pools of N-glycans were labelled with 2-aminopyridine prior to subsequent HPLC and MALDI TOF MS/MS analysis. 2.6 Separation of neutral and anionic and N-Glycans Separation of the labelled N-glycans was performed using one of two HPLC columns. The hydrophilic-interaction/anion-exchange system was successfully applied for Dictyostelium N-glycans using an IonPac AS11 column as described previously. A two solvent gradient was applied using buffer A and buffer B at a flow rate of 1 ml/min: 0-5 min, 99% B; 5-50 min, 90% B; 50-65 min, 80% B; 65-85 min, 75% B. A pool of pyridylaminated oligomannosidic N-glycans from white beans was used to calibrate the column. Reverse-phase HPLC was performed using buffer C and the gradient was a 1% increase of buffer D per minute for 30 minutes at 1.5 ml/min. The column was calibrated with a dextran standard. The fluorescence was measured at 320 nm and 400 nm using a Shimadzu RF-20A XS detector. 2.7 N-glycan analysis with MALDI-TOF MS Collected peaks from HPLC were dried and reconstituted in deionized water and analysed by MALDI-TOF MS using 6-aza-2-thiothymine as matrix. The peptide standard calibration II was used as a mass calibrant for the N-glycans. The MS and MS/MS spectra were generated using either an Ultraflex MALDI TOF/TOF or an Autoflex Speed MALDI TOF/TOF in positive and negative reflectron ion modes. Spectra were processed with the manufacturer’s software using the SNAP algorithm with a signal/noise threshold of 6 for MS and 3 for MS/MS and thereafter analysed manually. 2.8 Chemical and enzymatic treatments of the N-glycans Digestions of pyridylaminated N-glycans with commercial mannosidases were performed at 37 °C in 50 mM ammonium acetate buffer using either 0.2 μl Aspergillus saitoi α1,2 mannosidase or 0.2 μl Canavalia ensiformis mannosidase. Recombinant B. xylanisolvens endo-α-mannosidase was incubated directly with 1 μl aliquots of HPLC purified N-glycan for overnight at 37 °C. The recombinant P. pastoris ER mannosidase I was incubated with N-glycans at room temperature overnight in 80 mM MES pH 6.9 buffer containing 25 mM CaCl 2. Aliquots of glycans of the glucosidase-containing supernatant from an insect cell line were incubated with purified N-glycans in 40 mM MES pH 6.9 at 30°C overnight. The methylphosphorylated N-glycans were subject to hydrofluoric acid treatment to cleave phosphodiester bonds on ice at 4 °C for 36 h prior to evaporation. The digests were either measured directly with MALDI-TOF MS or after a purification step using either C18 or NPGC solid phase extraction or RP-HPLC prior to analysis. 3. Results 3.1 Determination of the genetic defect in the M31 glucosidase II mutant The Dictyostelium M31 mutant was previously shown to be phenocopied by a specific mutation of the modA glucosidase II gene in the DG1033 strain as well as be rescued by transformation with the wild-type gene under control of an actin promoter. However, the exact nature of the mutation in M31 was not known. RT-PCR using mRNA from the M31 strain was performed using primers specific for the modA gene and the fragments were ligated into a standard cloning vector; sequencing of clones derived from two independent PCR reactions showed the same G→A mutation at nucleotide 1931 of the open reading frame which would result in a substitution of a conserved glycine residue by aspartate. This amino acid is in a region associated with glucosidase II mutations in other organisms – in particular, the Ser599→Phe alteration in the Arabidopsis rsw3 mutant and a frameshift in the Trichoderma Rut-30C strain. We propose that this alteration results in a diminution or abolition of glucosidase II activity, which in turn has an impact on the N-glycome of Dictyostelium ; indeed, in an initial screen for glycomic differences in M31, Western blotting with anti-horseradish peroxidase, wheat germ agglutinin and a single-chain antibody specific for mannose-6-phosphate showed, respectively, that core α1,3-fucosylation is absent, that WGA reactivity is reduced and that mannose-6-phosphate is still present. Figure 1 Determination of the mutation in the M31 modA glucosidase II gene 3.2 Glycomic screening workflow Glycopeptides from axenically-grown cells of the M31 mutant strain were treated with both PNGase F and PNGase A prior to fractionation of the N-glycans by solid phase extraction: one pool, eluted with 40% acetonitrile alone from non-porous graphitised carbon, contained predominantly neutral N-glycans as judged by MALDI-TOF MS in positive and negative modes, whereas the second pool, eluted with 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid was enriched in a set of anionic N-glycans. Similar to our study on another Dictyostelium mutant, the two pools were then subject to fluorescent labelling with 2-aminopyridine prior to MALDI-TOF MS, RP-HPLC and HIAX chromatography. Whereas HIAX is particularly useful for separation by size and charge, RP-HPLC can discriminate isomeric structures. Each HPLC fraction was analysed by MALDI-TOF MS and MS/MS; also selected glycans were incubated with enzymes, whereas many anionic glycans were treated with hydrofluoric acid to remove phosphodiesters prior to re-analysis by mass spectrometry. A comparison to the corresponding pools of the wild-type AX3 was made; in terms of fluorescence of the two pools, the ratio of neutral- and anionic-enriched glycans was approximately 3:1 for both AX3 and M31. Figure 2 MALDI-TOF mass spectra of neutral and anionic N-glycans from two Dictyostelium strains Figure 3 HIAX chromatograms for neutral and anionic N-glycans from the M31 strain Figure 4 RP-HPLC of neutral N-glycans from the M31 strain 3.3 Neutral N-glycans of the M31 mutant As shown in Figure 2C and summarised in Table 1, neutral N-glycans ranging from m/z 1637 to m/z 2691 were observed. The two most dominant glycans of the mutant strain had the composition Hex 11 HexNAc 2-3, as compared to Hex 8 HexNAc 4 Fuc 0-1 for the wild-type. The presence of the Hex 11 HexNAc 2-3 as the major glycans would be compatible with a loss of glucosidase II activity which should theoretically result in a block in N-glycan processing at the stage of Glc 2 Man 9 GlcNAc 2 ; therefore, we presumed that two of the hexose residues of these structures were indeed terminal α-linked glucose moieties which would result in partial mannosidase resistance of the N-glycans. Glycans in the range Hex 8-11 HexNAc 2-3 were analysed by MS and MS/MS before and after a range of enzymatic treatments. In the absence of relevant commercially-available glucosidases, an N -butyldeoxynojirimycin-sensitive α-glucosidase activity present in supernatants from insect cell cultures as well as a recombinant bacterial endomannosidse were used to treat selected glycans. Digestions with jack bean α-mannosidase or Aspergillus or Pichia α1,2-specific mannosidases with and without prior glucosidase or endomannosidase treatments were also performed. Table 1 Summary of the N-glycan structures analysed from the Dictyostelium M31 strain As mentioned above, the two major neutral N-glycans as judged by intensity were Hex 11 HexNAc 2-3 ; these were the primary components of the two major RP-HPLC peaks as well as the two major HIAX peaks. 5 ). MS/MS of these glycans results in a major Hex 6 HexNAc 2 -PA fragment. Both were sensitive to glucosidase and endomannosidase digestions, which resulted in a loss of the m/z 1475 fragment and appearance of ones of m/z 1151 and 989 respectively. Furthermore, the number of residues removed by jack bean α-mannosidase digestion of Hex 11 HexNAc 2 increased from four to eight after glucosidase treatment. Consistent with the predicted structure, an α1,2-specific mannosidase removed two residues and Pichia ER mannosidase only one. Due to the presence of the ‘intersecting’ GlcNAc, Hex 11 HexNAc 3 was more resistant to mannosidase treatments. On the basis of the fragmentation and digestion data, the conclusion is that the Hex 11 HexNAc 2-3 structures are, as expected, capped with two glucose residues on the ‘A’ branch. Figure 5 Analysis of major neutral N-glycans from the M31 strain The next most common neutral N-glycans were Hex 10 HexNAc 2-3. Hex 10 HexNAc 2 was only found in one RP-HPLC fraction and digestions of Hex 10 HexNAc 2 with glucosidase, ER mannosidase, α1,2-mannosidase, endomannosidase and jack bean α-mannosidase digestion, analogous to those for Hex 11 HexNAc 2 mentioned above, were compatible with a composition of Glc 1 Man 9 GlcNAc 2. Hex 10 HexNAc 3 was detected in three RP-HPLC fractions ; these forms could be distinguished on the basis of the results of glucosidase, endomannosidase and jack bean mannosidase digestions and by MS/MS. While MS/MS of the major isomer with 8.2 g.u. results in a dominant m/z 1313 fragment, both minor forms show m/z 1475 fragments when subject to MS/MS. Based on the fragmentation pattern, the third HexNAc is assumed to be an intersected GlcNAc which also blocks the action of mannosidase; the major isomer is concluded to be a monoglucosylated form of Man 9 GlcNAc 3 and the two minor isomers are suspected to be diglucosylated versions of Man 8 GlcNAc 3 based on Man8B and Man8C scaffolds. RP-HPLC also separated two isomers of Hex 9 HexNAc 2. Again MS/MS and mannosidase digestion could distinguish these forms: the later eluting one carries two terminal glucose residues and has the composition Glc 2 Man 7 GlcNAc 2, whereas the earlier-eluting isomer has the standard Man 9 GlcNAc 2 structure with which it shares the elution time in terms of glucose units. The Hex 8-9 HexNAc 3 structures lost four or five residues after jack bean mannosidase digestion, consistent with a lack of terminal glucose residues and the presence of an intersected GlcNAc. While the Hex 9 HexNAc 3 possessed an m/z 1151 fragment, the Hex 8 HexNAc 3 glycan has an m/z 989 fragment and a later elution time than Hex 9 HexNAc 3 ; therefore, the latter is presumed to be a form of Man8A carrying an intersected GlcNAc residue as in the wild-type. 3.4 Anionic N-glycans of the M31 mutant The most dominant anionic N-glycans of the M31 mutant in the overall negative-mode mass spectrum carry one methylphosphate or one sulphate residue with traces of glycans carrying both modifications; this compares to the very obvious presence of dianionic and trianionic glycans in the overall spectrum for the anionic-enriched fraction of glycans from the wild-type AX3 strain. The surprise was that the major anionic glycans of the M31 mutant contained nine or ten hexose residues, as compared to the eleven hexose residues present in the most dominant neutral species; in the case of the wild-type, the majority of the neutral and the anionic glycans contain eight hexose residues. This was a first hint that unexpected processing occurs prior to the definition of the final glycosylation pattern of proteins carrying anionic glycans in the mutant. As for the neutral glycans, HPLC fractionation was able to reveal a greater complexity in the anionic N-glycome of M31 than apparent from the complete spectrum and MALDI-TOF MS of the individual fractions showed the presence of glycans also containing two or three anionic residues in combinations such as Hex 9-10 HexNAc 2 2, Hex 8-11 HexNAc 2-3 PMeS, Hex 8-10 HexNAc 2 PMeS 2 and Hex 8-10 HexNac 2 S 2-3. Whereas methylphosphate modified glycans were well observed in positive and negative ion modes, sulphated glycans were only detected in their intact form in the negative mode. As previously described, diagnostic for the presence of methylphosphate and sulphate were fragments of m/z 255 and 403 in the negative mode. A selection of MS/MS of anionic Hex9-based structures is shown in Figure 6 and data on a number of anionic Hex8-based glycans are presented in Figure 7. Figure 6 MS/MS of anionic N-glycans from the M31 strain Figure 7 Definition of isomers of anionic Man8-based N-glycans The two most dominant anionic HIAX fractions contained Hex 9 HexNAc 3 PMe and Hex 10 HexNAc 3 PMe. MS/MS of these showed the presence of a m/z 1106 fragment in negative mode and either 1151 or 1313 fragments in positive mode ; in contrast, a negative-mode fragment of m/z 1083 typical of wild-type glycans was not observed in any structure from the M31 strain. Hydrofluoric acid treatment resulted in loss of the methylphosphate moieties and after subsequent jack bean mannosidase digestion, respectively up to five or two mannose residues were removed, whereas subsequent α1,2-mannosidase treatment resulted in loss of respectively three or one residues. As prior to hydrofluoric acid treatment only four mannose residues could be lost upon jack bean mannosidase treatment from Hex 9 HexNAc 3 PMe, a terminal position for the methylphosphate is proposed. MS/MS of the related Hex 9 HexNAc 2 PMe glycan, lacking the intersecting GlcNAc, resulted in appearance of an m/z 903 fragment also indicative of a similar position of the methylphosphate on the α1,6-arm. The Hex 8 HexNAc 2-3 PMe structures were each found in single HIAX fractions, but also in two RP-HPLC fractions each. Analogous to the difference in retention time between Man8 isomers and based on the different fragmentation patterns upon MS/MS, we propose that these are based on respective Man8A and Man8B scaffolds for the 3.7 and 4.5 g.u. RP-HPLC fractions of Hex 8 HexNAc 3 PMe and for the 3.7 and 3.3 g.u. fractions for Hex 8 HexNAc 2 PMe. RP-HPLC of HIAX fraction 6 following HF treatment indeed showed that the resulting Hex 8 HexNAc 3 isomers from M31 eluted at 5.4 and 7.2 g.u., the latter co-eluting with the Hex 8 HexNAc 3 derived from AX3 which is presumed to be based on Man8A ; similarly for Hex 8 HexNAc 2 PMe, HF treatment of HIAX fraction 5 resulted in two RP-HPLC peaks of 4.8 and 5.4 g.u., which correspond to literature values for the elution of Man8B and Man8A. Monosulphated Hex 8-11 HexNAc 2-3 S were detected in negative mode of individual HPLC fractions, but the levels of these were far lower than those carrying a single methylphosphate residue; example MS/MS spectra are shown in Figure 6A and C. Within the negative-mode spectrum of the entire anionic pool, the Hex 11 HexNAc 3 S species was most obvious monosulphated glycan; this lost three residues upon endomannosidase digestion. Unlike the mixture of isomers for methylphosphate-containing Hex8 structures, MS/MS data indicated that the Hex 8 HexNAc 2 S was a sulphated form of the Man8A isomer. Di- and tri-anionic glycans eluted later on the HIAX column than mono-anionic species, but earlier when performing RP-HPLC. Hex 9-10 HexNAc 2 2, resulted in a fragment of m/z 997 suggesting that both the B and C branches were modified with terminal methylphosphate residues. An alternative form of di-anionic glycan species is represented by Hex 8-10 HexNAc 2-3 PMeS structures; MS/MS showed the presence of m/z 255 and 403 and, in some cases, 497 fragments. Jack bean mannosidase digestion of Hex 9 HexNAc 2 PMeS resulted in the loss four mannose residues; the subsequently observed m/z 741 and 821 fragments are proposed to be Hex 4 PMeS 0-1 units. In this case, the sulphate and methylphosphate are not on adjoining residues, but are respectively on the B and C antennae. Similarly, disulphated Hex 8 HexNAc 2 S 2 is predicted to be a Man8A structure also with subterminal sulphates on the B and C arms. A significant portion of the anionic glycans contained one methylphosphate and two sulphate moieties. MS/MS of Hex 9 HexNAc 2 PMeS 2 resulted in fragments of m/z 403, 1021 and 1101 in negative mode indicative of three anionic modifications of the α1,6-branch. The position of the second sulphate was more difficult to discern, but jack bean mannosidase digestion of Hex 8-9 HexNAc 2 PMeS 2 resulted in the loss of three or four mannose residues; the subsequently observed m/z 921 fragment is suggestive of a Hex 4 PMeS 2 unit as -. After hydrofluoric acid treatment of Hex 8-9 HexNAc 2 PMeS 2 to remove the methylphosphate, a further mannose residue could be lost upon jack bean mannosidase resulting in Hex 4 HexNAc 2 S 2. The ‘lower’ α1,3-branch of the glycan is thereby concluded not to be modified; both sulphates are proposed to be on sub-terminal mannose residues of the non-digested structure in the context of standard Man8A and Man9 scaffolds. 7F ). The trisulphated Hex 8 HexNAc 2 S 3 is also concluded to be based on Man8A, due to its sensitivity to jack bean mannosidase as well as the m/z 989 positive-mode and m/z 504 and 1108 negative-mode fragments of the untreated glycan. 4. Discussion 4.1 Analysis and chromatography of N-glycans of lower eukaryotes Recent years have seen an increase in the possibilities for glycomic analyses of high sensitivity ; a primary tool is mass spectrometry, especially of LC-ESI-MS and MALDI-TOF-MS of native and permethylated N-glycans. As in a number of our previously-published studies, we have opted here for an off-line LC-MALDI-TOF MS approach in order to separate the N-glycans into fractions of lower complexity and facilitate their analysis by chemical and enzymatic treatments on a small scale. This enables us to also examine the structures of even low abundance structures in their native state. Due to the wide variability in the N-glycans of various protists and invertebrates there is no single analytical workflow, but glycomic analyses of each species type very often have to be tailored to suit the properties of the glycans present. Thus, whereas N-glycans of nematodes, cestodes or trichomonads are either neutral or zwitterionic, the protein-linked oligosaccharides of insects can be neutral, acidic or zwitterionic and the N-glycans of oysters are neutral or sulphated ; in the case of trematodes apparently only neutral glycans have been reported. Keeping in mind the historic literature on the N-glycans of Dictyostelium, primarily based on chromatography of radiolabelled glycans and one NMR/MS-centered study, the presence of both neutral and anionic glycans has to be considered. Although these classes are the same as in the oyster, a different approach is used by us when analysing glycans from these different sources; while no solid-phase extraction was necessary prior to HPLC of oyster N-glycans, we needed to pre-fractionate neutral and anionic N-glycomic pools from the slime mould prior to MS and HPLC analysis. This acts not only as a polishing step during the N-glycan purification protocol, which is not necessary in every case, but separates different types of glycans and so the type of solid-phase extraction varies. Graphitised carbon is a good choice for separating neutral from anionic glycans, whereas reversed-phase materials may be appropriate for clean-up of mixtures of neutral and zwitterionic N-glycans. Subsequent fractionation by HPLC is also important to uncover the complexity of invertebrate glycomes; here, we have used both RP-HPLC, which is very suitable for examining isomeric glycans with the same mass, and HIAX, for size/charge separation. In other cases, ‘pure’ NP-HPLC may also be appropriate, as in the case of the oyster glycome, or a ‘2D’-combination of NP- and RP-HPLC as applied to Caenorhabditis and Trichomonas in order to achieve almost complete separation into single structures; particularly the latter greatly simplifies interpretation of exoglycosidase digests and avoids co-fragmentation of other glycans in the same sample when performing MS/MS. 4.2 The glycomic impact of inhibition or ablation of glucosidase II Glucosidase II is a key enzyme in the standard biosynthetic pathway for eukaryotic N-glycans whether from yeast or mammals. Inhibition or ablation of this enzyme is expected to prevent further processing by glycosidases and glycosyltransferases in the secretory pathway. Previous data on the Dictyostelium discoideum M31 glucosidase II mutant have indicated that radiolabelled N-glycans are increased in size and have a decreased degree of sulphation and phosphorylation in comparison to the wild-type. Our new mass spectrometric data confirm that the N-glycome of Dictyostelium is strongly affected in the M31 glucosidase II mutant; nevertheless, our study indicates that a remarkable degree of processing still takes place. An increased degree of resistance of mannosidase digestion of M31 glycans was hypothesised to be due to two ‘blocking’ groups : one being glucose and the other remained then undefined, but which is probably due to the intersecting GlcNAc detected in the present study. The main neutral structures contain, as expected, the glucose residues which would otherwise be removed by glucosidase II; however, the modification with intersecting GlcNAc is seemingly not affected. On the other hand, core α1,3-fucosylation is abolished and processing by mannosidases and the bisecting N -acetylglucosaminyltransferase is strongly reduced. The previous data on wild-type Hex 8 HexNAc 3 2 and our own unpublished data regarding the major wild-type anionic N-glycans 2 and Hex 8 HexNAc 3 PMeS 2 ) indicate the presence of methylphosphate on the A and C branches of a Man8A scaffold. The surprise in the mutant is with the anionic N-glycans; in this case the most dominant structure is Hex 9 HexNAc 3 PMe, with methylphosphate on the B or C branches, but which lacks any glucose residues Therefore the question arises as to how the glucose residues are removed before the glycoproteins reach their final molecular form in the mutant. Many studies on slime mould glycosylation have been performed on lysosomal enzymes which are induced to be secreted upon transfer of amoebae to a dilute buffer; these enzymes carry predominantly anionic N-glycans. Although the exact role of mannose-6-phosphorylation in targetting of lysosomal enzymes in Dictyostelium is unclear, it would appear that the presence of 6-methylphosphorylation and 6-sulphation is a characteristic of lysosomal enzymes in this phagocytic organism. Thus it may be that a high proportion of glycoproteins which are modified by at least one anionic residue are directed to the lysosome where acidic glucosidases and mannosidases can act. Thereby, as summarised in Figure 8, we hypothesise that while an absence of the glucosidase II results in a reduction in the degree of modification by methylphosphate and sulphate, the action of glycosidases in the acidic lysosome results in removal of the glucose residues from the A branch and, therefore, the oligomannose scaffolds on the mature lysosomal glycoproteins of the M31 mutant are not unlike those of the wild-type ). The traces of deglucosylated neutral glycans may also result from the action of lysosomal hydrolases on proteins which have an anionic glycan at a separate N-glycosylated site; however, examination of the Dictyostelium genome would appear to rule out the possibility of an endomannosidase capable of generating, as in vertebrates, the Man8A isomer from a glucosylated Man9 glycan. Figure 8 Hypothesised pathway for biosynthesis and post-Golgi processing of N-glycans in Dictyostelium Some of the anionic glycans of the M31 strain contain only eight mannose residues with and without intersecting GlcNAc. Those containing solely methylphosphate were present as isomers based on Man8A and Man8B; the Man8A form is that isomer seemingly typical for Dictyostelium, whereas Man8B is rare in this organism. In other organisms, these isomers result from the action of different enzymes: Man8A will result either from the action of endomannosidase on glucosylated glycans or from Golgi mannosidase I processing of deglucosylated glycans, whereas Man8B is the product of the endoplasmic reticulum mannosidase. As deglucosylation in the endoplasmic reticulum does not occur in the M31 strain and there is no apparent endomannosidase homologue in the slime mould, an ER mannosidase in Dictyostelium has the chance to remove the α1,2-linked mannose from the B branch, whereas the removal of mannose from the A branch by Golgi mannosidase I is blocked. According to our aforementioned hypothesis, removal of glucose and one mannose from the A branch is then only possible in the lysosome. Interestingly, there are three neutral isomers of Hex 10 HexNAc 3 which lack either a mannose from the B or C branch or a glucose from the A branch. 4.3 Specificity of glycan-modifying transferases in Dictyostelium The variability of the impact of the lack of glucosidase II on the different types of modifications enables us to make conclusions regarding the specificity of the relevant enzymes. Obviously, the action of the core α1,3-fucosyltransferase, presumably located in the Golgi apparatus, is completely blocked if deglucosylation in the ER cannot take place; also, the bisecting N -acetylglucosaminyltransferase is significantly inhibited if the glucose residues are not removed. This may well be explained by the three-dimensional structure of the neutral M31 oligosaccharides. On the other hand, the position of the intersecting N -acetylglucosamine is still accessible to the relevant transferase and so still around half of the N-glycans carry this residue in the mutant. For the anionic modifications, the lower A branch is no longer an acceptor for either the GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase, which catalyses the first step in formation of the methylphosphate moieties, or the sulphotransferases; however, the B and C branches can still be modified. Thus, the numbers of anionic groups on the glycans decreases, even though we do not detect a drastic shift towards neutral structures. The question of mannose trimming pathways in the presence of the glucose residues is more complicated as the removal of mannose by mannosidases outside the ER and Golgi is, as discussed above, probable. In the absence of detailed enzymatic data, there remain many unanswered questions regarding these pathways. 4.4 Conclusion The ablation of glucosidase II has a major impact on the N-glycome of the slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum as well as on the morphology of its fruiting bodies; especially for the anionic glycans, the mass spectrometric definition of the structures resulted in some surprises. In terms of major structures, it was predominantly neutral glycans which were still carrying diglucosylated ‘caps’, which may interfere with lectin-based quality-control mechanisms in the endoplasmic reticulum and so may have an impact on cell wall morphology. On the other hand, the scaffolds of the anionic glycans tended to be trimmed more than expected, thus suggesting that removal of glucose and mannose residues may occur in Dictyostelium in a manner independent of glucosidase II. The final definition of N-glycan processing in this model organism requires a set of recombinant enzymes and of substrates currently not available. However, by our studies, the chromatographic and mass spectrometric tools to analyse the glycomic complexity of this ‘not so simple’ system are now established. Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to Prof. Gideon Davies for the kind gift of the Bx GH99 expression plasmid, to Dr. Shi Yan for help with preparing Figure 8 and to ao. Univ-Prof. Ebrahim Razzazi-Fazeli for access to the Ultraflex I mass spectrometer. This work was funded by grants from the Austrian Fonds zur Förderung der wissenschaftlichen Forschung to D.R., I.B.H.W. and K.P. Abbreviations g.u. glucose units HIAX hydrophilic-interaction/anionic-exchange PA pyridylamine Footnotes Conflicts of Interest None Article information Electrophoresis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 Aug 1. Published in final edited form as: Electrophoresis. 2014 Aug; 35: 2116–2129. Published online 2014 Mar 31. doi: 10.1002/elps.201300612 PMCID: PMC4072505 EMSID: EMS57584 PMID: 24574058 Alba Hykollari, Martin Dragosits, Dubravko Rendić, Iain B. H. Wilson, and Katharina Paschinger * Department für Chemie, Universität für Bodenkultur, A-1190 Wien, Austria * To whom correspondence should be addressed: ta.ca.ukob@regnihcsap.anirahtak PMC Copyright notice The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at Electrophoresis 