 Cytoskeletal motors act as cargo transporters in cells 1 and may be harnessed for directed transport applications in molecular detection and diagnostic devices 2. High processivity — the ability to take many steps along a track before dissociating 3 — is often a desirable characteristic because it allows nanoscale motors to transport cargoes over distances of microns in vivo and in vitro. Natural processive myosins 4, 5 are dimeric and use internal tension to coordinate the detachment cycles of the two heads 6 – 8. Here, we show that processivity can be enhanced in engineered myosins using two non-natural strategies designed to optimize the effectiveness of random, uncoordinated stepping: formation of three-headed and four-headed myosins; and introduction of flexible elements between heads. We quantify improvements using systematic single-molecule characterization of a panel of engineered motors. To test the modularity of our approach, we design a controllably bidirectional myosin that is robustly processive in both the forward and backward direction, and also produce the fastest processive cytoskeletal motor measured to date, reaching a speed of 10 μ m/s. Previous investigations have shown that processive myosin motion can be tolerant to dramatic changes in lever arm structure and mechanics 9, 10. These studies challenged the idea that processivity depends critically on head-head coordination mediated by internal strain: while natural dimeric motors such as myosin V and myosin VI make use of strain-dependent gating of nucleotide exchange to prevent unproductive detachment of the front head 6 – 8, this mechanism may yield only modest gains in processivity relative to uncoordinated stepping. Processivity without coordination has also been observed and discussed in recent studies of cytoplasmic dynein 11, 12. Processive motion of a dimeric motor can be explained by the statistics of independently cycling monomers, dependent on kinetic properties of the catalytic head: specifically, the motor variant must have a high duty ratio, defined as the fraction of the mechanochemical cycle spent bound to the filament 3. Models of uncoordinated stepping suggest that trimeric or tetrameric myosins — which have not been observed in nature — could be dramatically more processive than dimers. Potential gains are illustrated by a toy kinetic model that has been useful for conceptual discussions of processivity 7, 10, in which the mechanochemical pathway of a myosin head is approximated by a two-state cycle governed by an attachment rate k on and a detachment rate k off. With three or four heads and a high duty ratio r =k on /, the termination of a run by simultaneous detachment of all heads becomes an unlikely event. This simple picture ignores potential detrimental effects of additional heads, which could include disruption of natural strain-mediated nucleotide gating, unintentional introduction of unproductive gating, or interference with actin rebinding due to mechanical or steric interactions between heads or due to site occlusion. To test whether increasing the number of heads can improve the processivity of engineered motors, we designed a series of constructs based on myosin VI. Myosin VI has a high duty ratio 5 of 0.85–0.95 10, 13 and is processive in dimeric constructs 5, 10, including chimeric dimers with artificial lever arms composed of 2 spectrin repeats 9, 10. We created M6DI 816 2R~DIM, M6DI 816 2R~TRI, and M6DI 816 2R~TET by fusing the chimeric myosin VI motor to engineered coiled coil variants 14 GCN4-pIL, GCN4-pII, and GCN4-pLI to generate dimeric, trimeric, and tetrameric motors, respectively. We used single-fluorophore tracking to quantify the processivities of the engineered constructs. For all ATP concentrations investigated, motor trajectories show run lengths that increase steeply with increasing oligomerization state. M6DI 816 2R~TRI and M6DI 816 2R~TET suffer only minor reductions in velocity relative to their dimeric counterpart. Figure 1 Multimerization effects on engineered myosin VI processivity and stepping behaviour. Single molecule fluorescence trajectories for M6DI 816 2R dimers, trimers, and tetramers recorded at 2mM ATPtogether with corresponding cartoons... To further characterize the behaviour of the M6DI 816 2R constructs, we analysed motor trajectories at high resolution using evanescent darkfield gold nanoparticle tracking 15. Individual steps were observable in M6DI 816 2R~DIM, TRI, and TET trajectories. Step size distributions depend on the oligomerization state ; trimers and tetramers show increased frequencies of backsteps and short steps relative to dimers. Overall, trimers and tetramers have slightly shorter mean displacements per step, but many more steps per diffusive encounter. Shortening the lever arms of our dimers, trimers, and tetramers results in substantially reduced run lengths. M6DI 816 1R~DIM, M6DI 816 1R~TRI, and M6DI 816 1R~TET were generated by truncating the lever arms of the M6DI 816 2R constructs to only one spectrin repeat. Only M6DI 816 1R~TET yields measurably processive runs, and these runs are observable only at low. Engineered myosins with shortened lever arms have displayed low processivities in a number of previous studies 16, 17, including our work on controllable bidirectional myosins 18. Possible causes include inhibition of rebinding due to increased strain in 2-head-bound states 16, 17, 19, aberrant gating due to high and/or off-axis strain, and inaccessibility of preferred off-axis sites due to surface-bound filaments. Figure 2 Effects of increased flexibility on myosin VI constructs with short lever arms. Single molecule fluorescence trajectories for dimers, trimers, and tetramers were recorded at 2mM ATP or 50 μM, showing differences due to... To address possible causes of reduced processivity, we created modified M6DI 816 1R~ constructs in which we added a “slack” element consisting of a spectrin repeat flanked with flexible 4 hinges on both sides. Without extending the rigid lever arm, this slack element is expected to provide increased conformational freedom, reduce internal strain, and provide easier access to potential binding sites. The additional compliance should abrogate strain-mediated gating, which could reduce processivity if gating is beneficial but may increase processivity if unproductive gating is present. The addition of slack results in dramatic run length increases relative to the original M6DI 816 1R constructs. M6DI 816 1R~1R~TET exhibits a mean run length of < L >=6.87 ± 0.80 μm at 2 mM ATP. In comparison, M6DI 816 1R~TET is not processive at 2 mM ATP, and has a mean run length of only < L >=0.24 ± 0.02 μm at 50 μM ATP. Table 1 Effects of increased flexibility on myosin VI constructs with short lever arms. We created additional constructs to verify that the beneficial effect of additional compliance does not depend on having more total spectrin repeats in the motor. M6DI 816 ~1R~TRI and M6DI 816 ~1R~TET differ from M6DI 816 1R~TRI and M6DI 816 1R~TET only via the insertion of a 4 hinge between the motor domain and lever arm. Both constructs have much longer mean run lengths than their M6DI 816 1R counterparts. We tested the generalizability of our multimerization and slack strategies by constructing engineered motors based on myosin XI, a class with properties that differ significantly from myosin VI. Myosins in this fast andplus-end directed class 20, 21 are found in plants and algae and are responsible for transport of golgi stacks, peroxisomes, and mitochondria 22, and for cytoplasmic streaming 23. Processive motion of wild-type myosin XI dimers purified from Nicotiana tabacum has been recorded 21 at 7 μm/s, the fastest previously observed processive movement of a cytoskeletal motor. No processive behaviour has been reported for other native myosin XI complexes or for any recombinantly produced myosin XI protein. We created engineered myosin XI motors that lack any rigidly attached lever arms, fusing only our slack element ~1R~ and engineered coiled coil domains to the catalytic domain of myosin XI from Nicotiana tabacum or Chara corallina. We measured processive motion for NM11CD 738 ~1R~DIM, TRI, and TET, and CM11CD 746 ~1R~DIM and TET. As seen with our myosin VI constructs, processivity increased with oligomerization state. These motors move substantially faster than the myosin VI multimers. Figure 3 Characterization of engineered myosin XI motors. Cartoons and block diagrams for constructs using the Nicotiana tabacum and Chara corallina myosin XI catalytic domains. Run lengths and velocities are shown : a short-lived actin-bound state favours high velocities, but disfavours processivity. The simultaneous advantage in speed and processivity of Chara M11 over Nicotiana M11 may be related to the unusual charge distribution in Chara myosin actin binding loops 25, which has previously been proposed to enable high speed without sacrificing actin affinity. Having developed a general approach for engineering processivity, we applied it to the design of two processive motors with two different properties desirable for potential applications: controllable bidirectionality and high speed. For both design targets, we chose to make tetramers with slack elements to achieve maximum processivity while counteracting potential detrimental effects from short lever arm lengths. We previously engineered a chemically controlled bidirectional myosin that switches direction in response to calcium concentration 18. MCaR-2IQ-DIM exhibits processive motion in both and directions. However, this construct is not measurably processive at saturating ATP, and shows only moderate run lengths even at 50 μM ATP:< L >=550 nm for -end directed motion and < L >=170 nm for -end directed motion. Here, we created MCaR-2IQ~1R~TET by fusing MCaR-2IQ to a flexible 4 hinge, a spectrin repeat, an additional hinge, and the tetrameric GCN4-pLI coiled coil. MCaR-2IQ~1R~TET is highly processive and has mean run lengths at 2mM ATP that exceed those of MCaR-2IQ-DIM at 50 μM ATP. High processivity facilitates new experiments in which individual motors are dynamically switchable via in situ buffer exchange. Figure 4 Characterization of design targets for combining processivity with other desirable characteristics. MCaR-2IQ~1R~TET schematic. MCaR-2IQ~1R~TET is processive at 2mM ATP in both low and high calcium conditions. Randomly selected motor... Chara corallina myosin XI is the fastest known cytoskeletal motor 26. Our results showed that Chara myosin can be incorporated into processive tetramers, although no processive behaviour has previously been reported. We reasoned that if we could increase the speed of our processive Chara constructs by adding a rigidly attached lever arm, we might achieve velocities exceeding any known processive cytoskeletal motors. Building on previous work in which the lever arm of the Chara myosin was successfully replaced with two spectrin repeats 27, we generated a tetrameric construct containing a 2R lever arm and a ~1R~ slack element. CM11CD 746 2R~1R~TET remains measurably processive at velocities up to < V >=10 μm/s. To our knowledge, this is the fastest processive speed measured for a cytoskeletal motor. Previous work on multimotor cargo transport has established that dimeric processive motors have longer run lengths when assembled into teams of two or more dimers 28 – 32. Using bead assemblies 29, 33 or DNA scaffolds 28, 30, 31, this effect has been observed for kinesin-1 28, 29, 31, 32, myosin V 30, and dynein 28, 33. Here, we have shown that engineered monomers can be assembled into processive complexes; fine-tuned coordination and native dimer architectures are disposable 9, 10, and effective processivity enhancement can be achieved by forming multiheaded constructs and introducing flexible spacers designed to increase diffusive freedom while abrogating internal tension. Quantitative improvements in processivity, while smaller than seen for a toy model that ignores interference effects and other details, are larger than has generally been reported forcomparable multimotor assemblies: for both M6DI 816 2R and CM11CD 746 constructs, the tetramer is ~10X more processive than the dimer, which may be compared with a ~2X improvement in processivity for coupling two myosin V dimers together using a DNA scaffold 30. Our measurements complement the recent discovery of processive motion in small defined assemblies of kinesin-14 dimers, which are non-processive in isolation 32. This work provides a general approach for increasing the processivities of engineered myosins in synthetic biology or nanotechnology applications. The modularity of the approach allows high processivity to be combined with complex engineered properties such as directionality control, or with higher velocities than are normally associated with processive motors. Engineered complexes are simply and efficiently assembled upon expression of a single polypeptide chain, and should be deployable in vivo for modifying the parameters of cargo transport processes 34. Engineered motors may also be used for in vitro imitations of these cellular systems, which achieve effective long-range transport through a combination of processive stepping, high filament densities, and high motor velocities 35. In diagnostic device designs that use molecular motors to overcome diffusion limits for sensitive detection 36 or perform molecular sorting tasks 37, long-range transport has often been implemented using filament-based cargo carriers 2. New processive motors will enhance the capabilities of alternative designs using motor-based cargo carriers 38, allowing for further miniaturization and molecular customization and control. METHODS Proteins DNA constructs were assembled from modules encoding porcine myosin VI, Chara corallina myosin XI, Nicotiana tabacum myosin XI, Dictyostelium α -actinin, and engineered GCN4 leucine zipper variants pIL, pII, and pLI 14. All constructs contained a C-terminal flexible linker, HaloTag protein sequence, and flag tag and were cloned into pBiEx-1. Proteins were expressed via direct transfection of SF9 cells and purified and labeled with TMR HaloTag ligand or PEG-biotin HaloTag ligand as previously described 9, 10. Single-molecule fluorescence tracking assays Assays were carried out in Assay Buffer containing 25 mM imidazole, 25 mM KCl, 1 mM EGTA, and MgCl 2. The concentration of MgCl 2 added varied depending on final assay ATP concentration to give 2mM free Mg 2+, according to MAXCHELATOR. Calmodulin was added when assaying myosin VI constructs. Blocking buffer consisted of AB with 1 mg/mL BSA. Imaging buffer consisted of AB with the desired ATP concentration, 1 mM phosphocreatine, 100 μg/mL creatine phosphokinase, 0.4% glucose, 0.2mg/mL glucose oxidase, 36 μg/mL catalase, and 1.8mM trolox. MCaR-2IQ~1R~TET constructs were assayed in buffers with 2 μM calmodulin and either pCa 4 or EGTA as described 18, with MgCl 2 added to yield 2 mM free Mg2+upon addition of 2 mM ATP in imaging buffer. Assays were performed essentially as described 10, except that plasma-cleaned coverslips were used without any nitrocellulose coating. Briefly, N -ethyl maleimide inactivated full-length skeletal muscle myosin was used to immobilize actin filaments stabilized with excess Alexa 633 phalloidin. Nonspecific binding was minimized by incubation with blocking buffer. Motors were added in imaging buffer. Videomicroscopy data were collected on an electron multiplying charge coupled device camera under objective-side total internal reflection fluorescence excitation using a 532 nm diode-pumped solid-state laser through a 1.49 NA 100x objective. Actin filaments were imaged prior to recording assay videos with a separate emission filter set. Motor trajectories were tracked using custom software as described 10. To avoid artefacts due to undersampling of short runs 10, an analysis cut-off was used: only trajectories lasting at least three frames and traveling more thantwo pixels were scored for velocity, run length, and directionality. For the high-velocity motorCM11CD 746 2R~1R~TET assayed at 100 μM and 500 μM ATP, the cut-off was increased to three pixels. Mean run lengths were corrected for runs that terminated at the end of a filament using the Kaplan-Meier survivor function, and the reported errors of the mean are the error estimates from this function. Constructs with mean run lengths < L > greater than two s.e.m. above one pixel were deemed “measurably processive”. “Mixed” runs for MCaR-2IQ~1R~TET were defined as runs that showed >216 nm movement in one direction and subsequently >216 nm in the other direction. Velocity error estimates were calculated as described 10, except that s.e.m. weighting was not used and the number of sets used in bootstrapping was equal to the number of runs scored. Fit error estimates for model fit parameters were calculated as described 10. A summary of run length and velocity data can be found in Supplementary Table 1. Gold nanoparticle tracking assays NeutrAvidin-coated 50 nm gold nanospheres were washed into binding buffer tween-20, and 1 mg/mL BSA) by centrifugation and resuspension. PEG-biotin labeled proteins were incubated with washed beads for 15 min at 25°C before dilution into imaging buffer. Assays were carried out as for single-molecule fluorescence tracking assays above with the addition of 0.2% tween-20 in the blocking buffer and 1 mg/mL BSA and 0.2% tween-20 in the imaging buffer, which contained 50 μM ATP. Gold particles were imaged using objective-side evanescent darkfield microscopy. Laser illumination was provided by a 532 nm diode-pumped solid-state laser through a 1.49 NA 60x objective and totally internally reflected at the sample interface; additional details of the microscope design will be presented elsewhere. Scattered light was imaged on a high-speed CMOS camera at 500 Hz. Analysis details are provided in Supplementary Methods. Supplementary Material 1 Click here to view. 