PIP3-independent activation of TorC2 and PKB at the cell’s leading edge mediates chemotaxis You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF PIP3-independent activation of TorC2 and PKB at the cell’s leading edge mediates chemotaxis Curr Biol. 2008 Jul 22; 18: 1034–1043. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Current biology : CB Author Manuscript HHS Public Access PIP3-independent activation of TorC2 and PKB at the cell’s leading edge mediates chemotaxis Yoichiro Kamimura, Yuan Xiong,, and Peter N. Devreotes Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials 01. NIHMS60711-supplement-01.pdf GUID: AE7F746D-20EE-407A-872C-56BFECA900C7 02. NIHMS60711-supplement-02.mov GUID: 75F5067B-B01C-4E12-90B4-5E22C3DE0571 03. NIHMS60711-supplement-03.mov GUID: 41A40B24-C3B1-4E22-8771-C8EDEBD56EF9 04. NIHMS60711-supplement-04.mov GUID: 686115A5-2AEB-408F-AF6B-044A4985F2B5 05. NIHMS60711-supplement-05.mov GUID: A99189B3-5D5F-4F06-9332-8E28302DB46C 06. NIHMS60711-supplement-06.mov GUID: C17555C3-C1F9-4FC9-966E-B51DC50A2B18 07. NIHMS60711-supplement-07.mov GUID: 383CD2E6-44ED-4550-B38F-B724B08D7ED8 08. NIHMS60711-supplement-08.mov GUID: 8B0ACDD4-0967-496B-B2BB-4C9E45111AD3 Summary Background Studies show that high phosphotidylinositol 3,4,5 tris phosphate promotes cytoskeletal rearrangements and alters cell motility and chemotaxis, possibly through activation of PKBs. However, chemotaxis can still occur in the absence of PIP 3 and the identities of the PIP 3 independent pathways remain unknown. Results Here, we outline a PIP 3 -independent pathway linking temporal and spatial activation of PKBs by Tor complex 2 to the chemotactic response. Within seconds of stimulating Dictyostelium cells with chemoattractant, two PKB homologs, PKBA and PKBR1, mediate transient phosphorylation of at least eight proteins, including Talin, PI4P 5-kinase, two RasGefs, and a RhoGap. Surprisingly, all of the substrates are phosphorylated with normal kinetics in cells lacking PI 3-kinase activity. Cells deficient in TorC2 or PKB activity show reduced phosphorylation of the endogenous substrates and are impaired in chemotaxis. The PKBs are activated through phosphorylation of their hydrophobic motifs via TorC2 and subsequent phosphorylation of their activation loops. These chemoattractant-inducible events restricted to the cell’s leading edge even in the absence of PIP 3. Activation of TorC2 depends on heterotrimeric G-protein function and intermediate G-proteins, including Ras GTPases. Conclusions The data lead to a model where cytosolic TorC2, encountering locally activated small G-protein at the leading of the cell, becomes activated and phosphorylates PKBs. These in turn phosphorylate a series of signaling and cytoskeletal proteins, thereby regulating directed migration. Keywords: TorC2, PKB, chemotaxis Introduction Chemotaxis, the directed movement of cells along chemical gradients, is a fundamental cellular response critical to numerous biological processes, including embryogenesis, inflammation, and wound healing. An understanding of chemotaxis could lead to treatments for inflammatory diseases as well as methods to control cancer metastasis. The basic issue in chemotaxis is how shallow chemoattractant gradients differentially bias pseudopod activity at the front and rear of the cell to direct movement. Previous studies have shown that chemoattractant receptors are uniformly distributed along the membrane but that activation of signaling pathways can be confined at the cell’s leading edge. Current research is focused on the mechanisms that spatially restrict signaling and on the events that link local activation to regulation of the cytoskeleton. Dictyostelium discoideum is the most extensively characterized model system for chemotaxis and its study has provided important insights into the process in highly motile cells such as leukocytes. Chemoattractant signaling triggers a series of stereotypical reactions that regulate cell motility, polarity, and directional sensing. One well-studied reaction is accumulation of phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate. In D. discoideum, PIP 3 accumulation occurs at the front of chemotaxing cells because PI3K is recruited to the membrane facing the chemoattractant source and PTEN dissociates from this region. In pten − cells, excess PIP 3 diffuses back from the leading edge, the cells extend pseudopods around much of their perimeter, and lose polarity. In neutrophils, chemoattractants similarly promote PIP 3 accumulation at the leading edge and forced elevation of PIP 3 is sufficient to cause the cells to polarize. While these observations demonstrate the involvement of PIP 3 signaling in chemotaxis, studies suggest there are additional pathways. For instance, D. discoideum cells treated with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 as well as pi3k1-5 − cells, in which all of the type-I phosphoinositide 3-kinases are disrupted, are still able to carry out chemotaxis. Furthermore, neutrophils from PI3Kγ knockout mice are able to carry out chemotaxis under certain conditions. Recently, it was revealed that a pathway containing a phopholipase A 2 functions in parallel with the PIP 3 pathway in D. discoideum. Thus, it is likely that in most cells multiple pathways participate in a network that mediates chemotaxis. A critical regulator of chemotaxis, found through genetic analysis in D. discoideum is Pianissimo, now known to be a component of the “Tor complex 2”. PiaA and other subunits, Rip3 and Lst8, are the orthologs of mammalian Rictor, mSin1, and mLst8, respectively, and form a complex with a unique Tor kinase. TorC2 may also regulate cytoskeletal-based events in other cells. In cultured cells knockdown of a subunit of TorC2 altered cell morphology indicating that it may regulate the actin meshwork. Knockout mice lacking TorC2 subunits die in embryogenesis although fibroblasts from these embryos did not show cytoskeletal defects. In addition, TorC2 controls cell cycle dependent actin polarization in budding yeast. One biochemical role of TorC2 is phosphorylation of the hydrophobic motifs of PKBs and PKCs. In knockout mice of mSin1, Rictor, or Lst8, the hydrophobic motif of AKT1 was not phosphorylated. Surprisingly, in these studies HM phosphorylation was not required for phosphorylation of all PKB substrates in vivo. D. discoideum has two PKB homologs, PKBA and PKBR1. Whereas PKBA has a PIP 3 -specific PH domain at its N-terminus like the mammalian PKBs, PKBR1 is myristoylated, persistently localized on the membrane, and relatively independent of PIP 3. Otherwise, the two enzymes are highly homologous to mammalian PKBs, including within the activation loops and the HMs. Cells lacking PKBA are reported to have a weak chemotaxis defect in early development. While pkbR1 − cells arrest development after aggregation, they are reported to have little defect in chemotaxis. However, in light of the observations of PIP 3 independent chemotaxis, we examined the role of TorC2 and PKBR1 in more detail. These studies led us to a PIP 3 -independent pathway by which receptor/G-protein stimulation leads to activation of TorC2 and phosphorylation of the HMs in the PKBs. Our findings show that activation of TorC2 involves a RasGEF and an intermediate G-protein and occurs selectively at the leading edge of the cell. Importantly, we find PKB substrates include Talin B, several RasGEFs, a RhoGAP, and PI4P 5-kinase providing possible links to the cytoskeleton. Results Role of TorC2 and PKBR1 in chemotaxis To assess the role of TorC2 and PKBR1 in chemotaxis, we assessed the ability of disruptants to respond to a gradient formed by a cAMP-filled micropipette. Interestingly, detachment of the fronts from the coverslip, a rare phenomenon in wild-type cells, was very prevalent in pkbR1 − cells. Together these results show that pkbR1 − cells have a strong defect in chemotaxis which may involve a problem in adhesion. We noted that when pkbR1 − cells were cultured for several months, the chemotactic behavior seemed to ameliorate somewhat, possibly due to upregulation of PKBA. However, disruptants of PKBA alone showed little chemotactic defect. We should note that our results conflict with previous descriptions of pkbA − and pkbR1 − cells. This is possibly due to differences in strains or conditions used in the respective laboratories, nevertheless, these differences have important implications for the mechanism of PIP 3 -independent chemotaxis as outlined below. Figure 1 Chemotaxis of WT, pkbR1 − and piaA − cells in the micropipette assay Table 1 Quantification of cellular behavior To show the chemotaxis defects were specific, we expressed PKBR1 in the pkbR1 − cells. Vector expressing pkbR1 − cells showed reduced directionality towards the micropipette even after 30 min of exposure to the gradient Figure S1A, left and Movie S1A left). On the other hand, PKBR1 expressing pkbR1 − cells showed significantly better chemotaxis, most of the cells faced the micropipette during this assay. Interestingly, the PKBR1 expressing cells took slightly longer than wild-type cells to begin chemotaxis after the micropipette was placed and then they became hyperelongated. These were consistent dominant effects of expression of PKBR1, since the same phenotypes were observed when PKBR1 was expressed in wild-type cells. Since TorC2 is required for the activation of PKBR1, we directly compared the phenotypes of fresh piaA − and pkbR1 − cells in the same background. As previously reported, the piaA − cells displayed very impaired chemotaxis with both reduced speed and chemotactic index. The piaA − cells had a rounded morphology and lacked polarity, which to some extent distinguished them from the polarized pkbR1 − cells. This suggests that TorC2 may regulate other factor in addition to PKBR1 to establish polarity. Chemoattractant-mediated phosphorylation of PKB substrates To get at the origin of the chemotactic defects, we sought to define the PKB substrates. We used antibodies directed against the phosphorylated consensus motifs of PKB and a variety of other kinases to detect proteins modified following chemoattractant stimulation. Cell extracts were prepared for immunoblot analysis at the indicated times after stimulation. For PKB, multiple bands appeared and declined with different kinetics. To display the rapid kinetics more clearly, samples were taken at closer intervals. A number of early bands such as pp65/67 and pp90 peaked within 20–60 sec of cAMP addition, marginally slower than activation of PKBA or PKBR1 reported previously. The slight delay may stem from our procedure of keeping cells on ice to prevent them from spontaneously responding before stimulation. These signals were specific receptor-mediated phosphorylation events. First, the other substrate phosphospecific antibodies showed completely different patterns Figure S2A. In particular, for CDK, many phosphorylated proteins were stained in resting cells and this pattern did not change substantially after stimulation. Second, there were no bands appearing in the absence of stimulation Figure S2B. Third, in subcellular fractionation experiments, we noticed that the signals were greatly reduced in the absence of phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. Figure 2 The TorC2-PKBR1 pathway regulates a major portion of Dictyostelium PKB activity The relative contributions of PKBA and PKBR1 to these chemoattractant-induced phosphorylations were strongly correlated with the chemotactic defects in the pkbR1 − and pkbA − cells. As shown in Figure 2C, most proteins were still phosphorylated in the pkbA − cells, indicating that PKBA is not primarily responsible for these modifications. On the other hand, in pkbR1 − cells, the signals from pp350, pp280, pp200, pp180, pp110, pp90, and pp65/67 were strongly reduced compared to those in wild-type cells. In pkbA − / pkbR1 − cells the bands were further reduced, suggesting overlap of substrate specificity. Some bands were unaffected in either single or double mutants and we presume these are not PKB substrates. We next determined which bands were recovered when PKBR1 was expressed in pkbR1 − cells. Seven signals were recovered and an additional band, pp140, also appeared. These results identify eight putative substrates of PKBR1 and/or PKBA in vivo and show that chemoattractant is an important regulator of these kinases. Chemoattractant-induced phosphorylation of Talin, PI4P 5-kinase, two RasGefs, and a RhoGap We identified five of the putative PKB substrates using an immunoprecipitation strategy followed by SDS gel separation and mass spectrometry. One of the proteins, pp280, was identified as Talin B through recovery of four peptides in mass spectrometry from the purified band. Importantly, Talin B contains the specific consensus site recognized by the antibody in a phosphorylation dependent manner. Talin B was present at the same levels in wild-type, pkbR1 −, piaA − cells and was specifically immunoprecipitated with the phospho PKB substrate antibody only in cells expressing PKBR1 and stimulated with cAMP. At pp180 we found a Ras GEF, GEFN, containing the PKB motifs. At pp110 we found another Ras GEF, GEFS, containing the PKB motifs as well as a PI4P 5-kinase domain-containing protein, containing the PKB motif. At pp65/67 we found a RhoGAP domain containing protein, GACQ, containing the PKB motif. For the latter three proteins, we validated chemoattractant-mediated phosphorylation by expressing corresponding GFP-fusion proteins in wild-type cells. In each case a new appropriately sized band appeared when stained with phospho PKB substrate antibody. This interesting set of proteins suggests mechanisms by which chemoattractant-mediated PKB phosphorylation controls signaling and cytoskeletal events that underlie chemotaxis. Figure 3 TalB is a substrate of Dictyostelium PKB Activation of the PKBs by TorC2 through phosphorylation in the hydrophobic motif Studies in mammals and Drosophila indicate that PKBs have one phosphorylation site in the AL and another in the HM that are necessary for activity. To confirm the importance of these sites, we performed mutational analysis of each in PKBR1 and examined whether the mutant proteins could complement the developmental defects of pkbR1 − cells or support phosphorylation of the endogenous substrates. Substitution of AL T309 with alanine or phosphomimics, aspartate or glutamate, produced inactive enzymes in both assays, suggesting that T309 is critical for function. Substitution of alanine for HM T470 also yielded an inactive enzyme. However, PKBR1 T470D and PKBR1 T470E complemented the developmental defect and restored the normal pattern of phosphorylation to the pkbR1 − cells. These results strongly suggest that phosphorylation of T470 is important for the in vivo kinase activity of PKBR1. Since piaA − and pkbR1 − cells displayed similar chemotactic defects and TorC2 has been reported to be necessary for activation of AKT in Drosophila and mammalian cells, we next investigated the role of TorC2 in activation of PKBA and PKBR1. In cells lacking PiaA, the phosphorylations of endogenous PKB substrates were greatly reduced. In order to show that PKBR1 was a TorC2 substrate, we examined phosphorylation of T470 directly. We noticed that the epitope of the anti phospho-PDK1 docking motif antibody matched closely with HM of PKBR1 and tested whether this antibody could recognize T470 of PKBR1 in a phosphorylation dependent manner. In pkbR1 − cells expressing PKBR1, the antibody selectively stained the protein following stimulation. The band was present in PKBR1 WT and PKBR1 T309A but absent in PKBR1 T470A. The signal in PKBR1 T309A was consistently lower than in PKBR1 WT, indicating that T309 influences T470 phosphorylation. The staining was disappeared when PKBR1-HA proteins were immunoprecipitated, and treated with λ phosphatase. We also detected a 75 kDa band during cAMP stimulation of wild-type but not pkbR1 − cells, presumably phosphorylation at T470 in endogenous PKBR1. Most significantly, T470 phosphorylation was completely absent in piaA − cells and it was reduced by over 75% in rip3 − cells, which lack another of the TorC2 subunits. This data strongly suggests that TorC2 is the kinase that phosphorylates the HM of PKBR1 and, since PKBR1 is persistently associated with the membrane, the TorC2 is activated by chemoattractant. Figure 4 PKBR1 is regulated through phosphorylations in the hydrophobic motif by TorC2 and in the activation loop independently of PIP 3 We also directly observed chemoattractant-induced phosphorylation at T309 of PKBR1 and T278 of PKBA conserved activation loop, using the anti-phospho PKC antibody that detects phosphorylation of the AL. The larger band disappeared in pkbR1 − cells and both bands were absent in pkbA − / pkbR1 − cells. These phosphorylations peaked at 30 to 60 sec, kinetics nearly identical to those of the HM phosphorylation of PKBR1 by TorC2. Curiously, we noticed that the AL phosphorylation of PKBA was increased in pkbR1 − cells compared to wild-type cells, suggesting that it depends on a balance between the amount of PKBR1 and PKBA. It has been shown that mammalian PKBs can, under some circumstances, be phosphorylated in the AL independently of TorC2 and therefore we asked whether or not this is the case for each PKB in D. discoideum. As shown in Figure 4C, the phosphorylation of PKBR1 completely disappeared in piaA − cells whereas that of PKBA was decreased but still weakly remained at 30 sec. To further confirm the effect of the HM phosphorylation on the AL phosphorylation, we used PKBR1 T470A. Consistently, after cAMP stimulation, the anti-phospho PKC antibody stained neither PKBR1 T470A nor PKBR1 T309A whereas PKBR1 was stained strongly. These results suggest that the phosphorylation in the HM is a strict prerequisite for AL phosphorylation in PKBR1 whereas it enhances AL phosphorylation in PKBA. Activation of PKBR1 by TorC2 is independent of PIP 3 The kinetics of T470 phosphorylation and activation of PKBR1 by TorC2 are essentially identical to those for chemoattractant-induced accumulation of PIP 3 ; however, PKBR1 activity measured in vitro is stimulated by cAMP in pi3k1-2 − cells. We used pi3k1-5 − quintuple knockout cells and LY294002 to ask whether activation of TorC2 and PKBR1 in vivo against endogenous substrates required PIP 3. Anti phospho PKB antibody detected nearly the same level of phosphorylation of pp350, pp200, pp180, and pp110 in pi3k1-5 − compared to wild-type cells while the phosphorylation of pp90 and pp65/67 were reduced slightly. Acute treatment with PI3K inhibitor LY294002 also reduced the signals only slightly. These small reductions are likely caused by a failure to activate PKBA activity and the results suggest that PKBR1 activation is largely independent of PIP 3. Next we assessed whether TorC2 activity is regulated by the PIP 3 pathway by monitoring T470 phosphorylation. Again, there were no significant differences between wild-type and pi3k1-5 − cells. Surprisingly, 30 µM LY294002 reduced T470 phosphorylation of PKBR1 by about 50%. Considering the lack of dependence on PI3-kinases, we suggest that this is because LY294002 can directly inhibit TorC2 activity. These results further suggest that the TorC2-PKBR1 pathway is independent of PIP 3. Since unlike other PKBs, PKBR1 is persistently present on the membrane while phosphorylation of T470 increases and decreases, it appears that TorC2 is transiently activated by chemoattractant. We also directly assessed the dependence of the phosphorylation of T309 of PKBR1 and T278 or PKBA on PIP 3. For PKBR1, there were no significant differences between wild-type and pi3k1-5 − cells. In addition, 30 µM LY294002 caused a slight reduction, probably because LY294002 inhibits T470 phosphorylation which is required for T309 phosphorylation. In both pi3k1-5 − and 30 µM LY294002 treated cells, the phosphorylation of PKBA was lost, suggesting that phosphorylation of the AL occurs during its recruitment to the membrane. To reveal whether the phosphorylation of T470 is sufficient for full activation of PKBR1, the phosphomimetic substitution T470E mutant was studied further. As shown in Figure S4A, T470E can complement the biological and biochemical defects in pkbR1 − cells. When starved pkbR1 − cells carrying PKBR1 T470E were stimulated, phosphorylations of endogenous substrate were induced although some bands were slightly reduced compared to PKBR1 WT. Both PKBR1 wt and PKBR1 T470E in pkbR1 − cells were phosphorylated at T309 after cAMP addition, although the phosphorylation of PKBR1 T470E was weaker and less sustained. Furthermore, chemoattractant-mediated changes in phosphorylation of PKBR1 T470E were observed with the same-kinetics in piaA − cells. However, this was apparently not sufficient activation to cause full phosphorylation of the endogenous substrates and PKBR1 T470E did not suppress the development defects of piaA − cells. These findings have several implications. First, a role of TorC2 in addition to T470 phosphorylation is required for full PKBR1 activation. Second, T309 phosphorylation must be regulated by yet another mechanism besides PIP 3 or T470 phosphorylation. D. discoideum contains two PDK1-like enzymes. It is possible that these enzymes act together with TorC2 to activate PKBR1. Two GTP binding proteins are required for TorC2 activation To further explore the pathway for activation of TorC2, we devised a cell-free system. Cell lysates were stimulated with GTPγS, incubated briefly, and the phosphorylation of the HM and AL of PKBR1 and phosphorylation of endogenous PKB substrates assessed. We monitored GTPγS-mediated phosphorylation of PKBR1 as well as phosphorylation of endogenous substrate, pp 65/67. Consistently, phosphorylation of T309 or pp65/67 was not observed in piaA − cells. However, both could be rapidly reconstituted by mixing lysates of pkbR1 − and piaA − cells. This indicates that TorC2 present in the pkbR1 − cell lysates can be activated and phosphorylate PKBR1 present in the piaA − cell lysates. This is consistent with previous data showing that wild-type supernatants can reconstitute adenylyl cyclase activation to lysates from piaA − cells prestimulated with cAMP or GTPγS. Figure 5 Two GTP binding proteins are required for TorC2 activity The cell-free system together with the assays of phosphorylations mediated by chemoattractant in living cells allowed us to explore the pathway for TorC2 activation more directly. In intact cells chemoattractant-induced phosphorylations of either PKBR1 or PKBA HMs or ALs were strictly dependent on functional heterotrimeric G-proteins since these modifications were completely absent in cells lacking the unique Gβ present in D. discoideum. However, in lysates from g β − cells, GTPγS was still able to activate TorC2, as evidenced by phosphorylation of T309 of PKBR1, although the levels were somewhat reduced. These observations suggest that activation of the heterotrimeric G-protein by chemoattractant is relayed to an intermediate G-protein in the pathway. In vitro, the heterotrimeric G-protein can be bypassed by direct activation of the intermediate G-protein by GTPγs. One possibility is that the intermediate G-protein are Ras family members since these proteins have been shown to be activated by chemoattractant. The phosphorylation of PKBR1 was reduced by over 60% in cells lacking the RasGEF AleA, suggesting that a Ras-like G-protein could be involved in the pathway. These results prompted us to test cells lacking RasG or/and RasC. However, in the rasG − cells, phosphorylation events in either in vivo or in vitro assays were basically identical to those wild type cells. On the other hand, in rasC − G − cells phosphorylation of PKB substrates, the HM of PKBR1, and the ALs of PKBR1 and PKBA were significantly reduced. Quantification of the HM of PKBR1 and the ALS of PKBR1 and PKBA were reduced by 70%, 66%, and 38%, respectively. Together, these data suggest that these Ras proteins play a role in TorC2 activation. However, since activity remains in the ras C − G − cells, additional intermediate G-proteins must also be involved. Local activation of TorC2 and PKB at the leading edge of chemotaxing cells We wondered whether spatially localized activation of TorC2 and PKBR1 might account for their role in chemotaxis. To investigate TorC2 activation, phosphorylation of the AL of PKBR1 was monitored by staining cells with the anti phos-PKC antibody. Cells were stimulated uniformly with cAMP and the time course of staining was assessed. Consistent with the immunoblot analysis, there was a transient burst of staining that appeared within 5 sec of stimulation and declined by 60 sec. This increase was absent in PKBR1 T470A cells as expected. The staining with an anti HA antibody was uniform along the cell perimeter and showed no time-dependent changes. These observations suggest that this staining reaction reflects the activation of TorC2 and can be used to monitor the distribution of TorC2 activation in living cells. As shown in 6B, the leading edge of chemotaxing cells were strongly and selectively stained using this approach. These signals were below the level of detection in wild-type cells and were absent in pkbR1 − cells expressing PKBR1 T470A in which T309 is not phosphorylated. Both PKBR1 WT and PKBR1 T470A are localized uniformly along the membrane as detected by an anti-HA antibody. Figure 6 The activity of TorC2 and PKBR1 is spatially regulated in chemotaxing cells As a second "biosensor" for the activity of TorC2, we developed a molecular tool, R1-AKT-HA, in which the PH domain of human AKT1 was replaced with the N-terminus of PKBR1 containing the myristoylation site. Although R1-AKT-HA could not complement the developmental defects of pkbR1 − cells, following cAMP stimulation it was phosphorylated in the HM as assessed by an anti phospho-AKT antibody in immunoblots. This phosphorylation disappeared in piaA − cells showing that R1-AKT-HA is phosphorylated by TorC2 and that this antibody can be used to explore the spatial pattern of activation of TorC2. While wild-type cells did not show any significant staining with the anti phospho-AKT antibody, R1-AKT-HA expressing cells were stained selectively at the leading edge. When stained with anti HA antibody R1-AKT-HA was localized uniformly along the membrane like PKBR1 as expected. These observations suggest that, although TorC2 is found largely in the cytosol, it is selectively activated by chemoattractant stimulation and at the leading edge of chemotaxing cells. Discussion Our observations define a pathway linking chemoattractant receptors through activation of TorC2 and PKBs to regulation of the cytoskeleton at the cell's leading edge. Figure 7 summarizes these findings. Chemoattractant binds to the surface receptor and activates the heterotrimeric G-protein. The activated G-protein signals through a RasGEF to intermediate G-proteins, including RasC. We speculate that activation of the intermediate G-proteins is confined to the front of the cell, leading to spatially restricted activation of TorC2 and PKBR1. Chemoattractant also triggers to local accumulation of PIP 3 at the front as previously described. PKBA is recruited to the front through its PIP 3 –specific PH domain and TorC2 enhances its activation. These events result in chemoattractant-mediated phosphorylation of Talin B and other signaling proteins, providing a possible link to the cytoskeleton. Figure 7 Schematic diagram of signaling events at the leading edge of a chemotaxing cell Combined genetic and biochemical analyses show there is an intermediate G-protein involved in activation of TorC2. In intact cells, activation of TorC2 by chemoattractant assessed by phosphorylation of HM and AL sites as well as phosphorylation of endogenous substrates, requires heterotrimeric G-protein function. In cells lacking the Ras GEF AleA the activation is attenuated. However, in a cell-free system GTPγS activates TorC2 in the absence of heterotrimeric G-protein function, indicating that a second intermediate G-protein is involved. It has been reported that since RasG interacts with Rip3 in yeast two-hybrid assays, RasG activates TorC2. Our results indicate that the mechanism is more complex. First, while rip3 − cells are significantly impaired, some activation still occurs in the absence of Rip3. Second, our results suggest that RasC, together with AleA, plays a role in the activation since cells lacking RasG show no defect while those lacking RasG and RasC show a partial defect. This suggests that an additional inrtermediate G-protein is also required. Further investigation will be required to determine whether the target of GTPγS stimulation are different Ras family members, a combination of Ras proteins, or as yet undetermined G-proteins and also whether other subunits of TorC2 besides Rip3 participate in the activation. How might the temporal and spatial regulation of TorC2 activity be mediated? Our studies of the persistently membrane associated PKBR1 force us to consider schemes which do not involve PKB recruitment. We speculate that cytosolic TorC2 encounters membrane associated activators, such as the intermediate G-protein at the leading edge and phosphorylates PKBR1 before TorC2 returns to the cytosol. It has been shown that RasG and RasC are activated by chemoattractants and that the Ras binding domain of Raf localizes selectively to the front of chemotaxing cells. However, as noted above, cells lacking RasG and RasC still activate PKBR1. Therefore, we seek an additional locally activated intermediate G-protein. Significantly, one of the PKB substrates we have identified is Talin B and we have traced a pathway from chemoattractant stimulation to Talin B phosphorylation. Furthermore, we speculate that Talin B is selectively phosphorylated at the leading edge of the cell since TorC2 is active there. Cells lacking Talin B display a developmental phenotype similar to cells lacking PKBR1 in that they arrest as late aggregates. Talin controls cell attachment to the substratum by interacting with integrins and D. discoideum cells expresses a series of primitive integrins which regulate cell adhesion and interact with Talin. Interestingly, we find that the effect of loss of PKBR1 activity on chemotaxis seems to include a reduction in cell attachment to the substrate. However, it remains to be determined whether Talin B, and its phosphorylation, regulates cell adhesion or other cytoskeletal events. Furthermore, the other PKB substrates we have identified no doubt also participate in aspects of chemotaxis. The chemotactic signaling pathways are remarkably resilient. Links from PIP 3, localized at the cell's leading edge, to the cytoskeleton have been abundantly documented in D. discoideum and in mammalian cells. Evidence suggests that these connections involve PH-domain containing PKBs. However, an equally strong body of evidence shows that cells can carry out chemotaxis without PIP 3. For D. discoideum, these two apparently conflicting observations can be resolved by the scheme shown in Figure 7. We speculate that responses to excessive PIP 3 are mediated by PKBA. In the absence of significant changes in PIP 3 levels, endogenous PKB substrates still undergo transient phosphorylation due to the chemoattractant-mediated activation of TorC2 and PKBR1 we have described here. If the phosphorylation events are blocked by removal of the PKBs or TorC2, chemotaxis is greatly impaired. Thus, in wild-type cells, the temporal and spatial pattern of the endogeneous phosphorylation events is controlled redundantly by local changes in PIP 3 and/or by local activation of TorC2. Previous reports have suggested physiological roles for TorC2 and PKBs in regulation of the cytoskeleton in other cells, consistent with our findings of a role in chemotaxis. In budding yeast, TorC2 regulates actin patch polarization via YPKs, yeast PKB homologs. In HeLa cells and 3T3 fibroblasts, reduction of TorC2 activity affects the extent of polymerized actin in cells, leading to different morphological changes and knockouts of TorC2 subunits in mice are lethal. In a variety of cancer cells, alterations in the activity of various PKB isoforms have been reported to enhance or decrease motility, invasion, and metastasis. Furthermore, it has been suggested that PKB, and its kinase PDK1, are required for chemotaxis of endothelial cells during vascular vessel formation. More directly, knockdown of PKB as well as the actin binding protein Girdin, a substrate of PKB, in Vero fibroblasts impaired migration in wound healing assays. Signaling networks similar to the framework outlined in Figure 7 may underlie these various observations. What of the reports of PIP 3 -independent chemotaxis? The scheme in Figure 7 implies that activation of TorC2 at the cell's leading edge acts redundantly with PIP 3. The equivalent of PKBR1 could be a standard, PH-domain containing PKB under unusual conditions when PIP 3 levels are extremely low or high and TorC2 would be the dominant regulator. Alternatively, TorC2 might act on another kinase such as PKC, which might serve as the equivalent of PKBR1. Chemotaxis is mediated by a network of signaling events and our results indicate that TorC2-PKB represents an important pathway in addition to the PI3K and PLA 2 pathways which have been shown to redundantly regulate chemotaxis. TorC2 activation is independent of both PIP 3 and PLA 2 indicating that there are three parallel pathways. It will be interesting to learn whether simultaneous block of all pathways leads to an even more severe phenotype. It is likely that each of these pathways regulates a specific set of physiological responses that mediate an aspect of chemotaxis. Further understanding may require us to delineate these responses, understand how they act together in chemotaxis, and assign pathways to each response. Supplementary Material 01 Click here to view. 02 Click here to view. 03 Click here to view. 04 Click here to view. 05 Click here to view. 06 Click here to view. 07 Click here to view. 08 Click here to view. Acknowledgements The authors wish to acknowledge members of the Devreotes lab, particularly Jonathan Franca-Koh and Stacey Willard for critical reading. We thank Dr R.R. Kay for pi3k1-5 − cells, Dr. M. Iijima for the PKBA disruption plasmid, Dr K. Inouye for α-Talin B antibody, Dr R.H. Insall for aleA − cells, Drs. R. Meile and R.A. Firtel for the PKBR1 disruption plasmid, PKBR1 cDNA, and helpful advice, Dr. G. Weeks for cAR1 expressing rasC − G − cells and proteomics core facility in Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, for mass spectrometry analysis. This work was supported by NIH GM 28007 and NIH GM 34933 to P.N.D. and by Uehara memorial foundation to Y.K‥ Footnotes Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. Article information Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 May 12. Published in final edited form as: Curr Biol. 2008 Jul 22; 18: 1034–1043. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.06.068 PMCID: PMC4018231 NIHMSID: NIHMS60711 PMID: 18635356 Yoichiro Kamimura, 1 Yuan Xiong, 2 Pablo A. Iglesias, 2 Oliver Hoeller, 3 Parvin Bolourani, 4 and Peter N. Devreotes 1, * Yoichiro Kamimura 1 Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA Find articles by Yoichiro Kamimura Yuan Xiong 2 Department of Electrical and computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, School of Engineering, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA Find articles by Yuan Xiong Pablo A. Iglesias 2 Department of Electrical and computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, School of Engineering, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA Find articles by Pablo A. Iglesias Oliver Hoeller 3 Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom Find articles by Oliver Hoeller Parvin Bolourani 4 Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada Find articles by Parvin Bolourani Peter N. Devreotes 1 Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA Find articles by Peter N. Devreotes 1 Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA 2 Department of Electrical and computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, School of Engineering, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA 3 Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom 4 Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada * correspondence: ude.imhj@dnp PMC Copyright notice Publisher's Disclaimer The publisher's final edited version of this article is available free at Curr Biol 