 Chemotaxis, the directed migration of cells in chemical gradients, is a vital process in normal physiology and in the pathogenesis of many diseases. Chemotactic cells display motility, directional sensing, and polarity. Motility refers to the random extension of pseudopodia, which may be driven by spontaneous actin waves that propagate through the cytoskeleton. Directional sensing is mediated by a system that detects temporal and spatial stimuli and biases motility toward the gradient. Polarity gives cells morphologically and functionally distinct leading and lagging edges by relocating proteins or their activities selectively to the poles. By exploiting the genetic advantages of Dictyostelium, investigators are working out the complex network of interactions between the proteins that have been implicated in the chemotactic processes of motility, directional sensing, and polarity. Keywords: Dictyostelium, adaptation, Local Excitation Global Inhibition model, protein localization INTRODUCTION: CHEMOTAXIS OCCURS IN MANY CELL TYPES Many cells have an internal compass that allows them to detect extracellular chemical gradients and move toward or away from higher concentrations. This process is referred to as chemotaxis or directed cell migration. During embryogenesis, chemotaxis is important for individual and group cell migration events, organ formation, and wiring of the nervous system. In the adult, chemotaxis is critical for the trafficking of immune cells and in inflammation, regenerative processes such as wound healing, and maintenance of tissue architecture. Evidence suggests that chemotaxis allows stem cells to target to and persist in their niches. See Supplemental Sidebar 1 for examples of the importance of chemotaxis in disease. Although an increasing number of cell types that carry out chemotaxis are being discovered, the signal transduction events mediating directed migration have been most thoroughly studied in Dictyostelium, neutrophils, and a variety of transformed mammalian cells. The amoeboid movements of Dictyostelium toward 3′,5′-cyclic adenosine monophosphate and of neutrophils toward a variety of chemokines are based on the extension of pseudopodia. In both cell types, chemoattractants activate G-protein coupled receptors, resulting in the localized accumulation of signaling molecules, such as phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate, toward the high side of the gradient. PIP 3 accumulation leads to pseudopodia extension at the leading edge of cells, which is thought to be driven by localized Rac-mediated actin polymerization. Primordial germ cells also use GPCRs to sense chemoattractants, but these cells maintain uniform PIP 3 levels throughout the membrane and migrate by extending actin-free blebs. These blebs may be generated by myosin-based contraction, which is also important at the lagging edge for migration in Dictyostelium and neutrophils. These contractions are generally directed by Rho, and in Dictyostelium, myosin regulation also involves 3′,5′-cyclic guanosine monophosphate. The combination of forces at the leading and lagging edges generates rapid movement. Adaptation to persistent stimulation in Dictyostelium and neutrophils allows for enhanced sensitivity to differences in chemoattractant concentrations across the cell. Stimulation of fibroblasts or breast carcinoma cells with growth factors that bind to Receptor Tyrosine Kinases also results in PIP 3 accumulation and Rac-mediated actin polymerization at the leading edge (reviewed in 