 Hirano bodies are paracrystalline F-actin-rich structures associated with diverse conditions, including neurodegeneration and aging. Generation of model Hirano bodies using altered forms of Dictyostelium 34-kDa actin-bundling protein allows studies of their physiological function and mechanism of formation. We describe a novel 34-kDa protein mutant, E60K, with a point mutation within the inhibitory domain of the 34-kDa protein. Expression of E60K in Dictyostelium induces the formation of model Hirano bodies. The E60K protein has activated actin binding and is calcium regulated, unlike other forms of the 34-kDa protein that induce Hirano bodies and that have activated actin binding but lack calcium regulation. Actin filaments in the presence of E60K in vitro show enhanced resistance to disassembly induced by latrunculin B. Actin filaments in model Hirano bodies are also protected from latrunculin-induced depolymerization. We used nocodazole and blebbistatin to probe the role of the microtubules and myosin II, respectively, in the formation of model Hirano bodies. In the presence of these inhibitors, model Hirano bodies can form but are smaller than controls at early times of formation. The ultrastructure of model Hirano bodies did not reveal any major difference in structure and organization in the presence of inhibitors. In summary, these results support the conclusion that formation of model Hirano bodies is promoted by gain-of-function actin filament bundling, which enhances actin filament stabilization. Microtubules and myosin II contribute to but are not required for formation of model Hirano bodies. INTRODUCTION Actin is a major cytoskeletal protein found in all eukaryotic cells. Actin can be found in two forms: monomeric and filamentous. The populations of both G-actin and F-actin are controlled and regulated by a large number of actin-interacting proteins that modulate the assembly and disassembly of actin filaments. For example, unpolymerized actin pools are maintained primarily through G-actin-binding proteins that sequester monomeric actin. In contrast, F-actin-binding proteins help to stabilize F-actin structures and to cross-link and/or bundle actin filaments into elaborate multimolecular structures. The actin cytoskeleton is involved in many important cellular processes, such as cell motility, cell shape, cell signaling, and intracellular trafficking. Tight regulation of the actin cytoskeleton is important to proper cellular function. Cytoplasmic aggregations containing actin and actin-binding proteins are associated with a number of neurodegenerative diseases and can assemble as either actin/cofilin rods or Hirano bodies. Hirano bodies are large, eosinophilic, actin-rich intracytoplasmic structures that contain paracrystalline arrays of F-actin and actin-binding proteins. Hirano bodies have been described in postmortem tissues and are found primarily in the CA1 area of Ammon's horn of the hippocampus. Hirano bodies have been found to be associated with a number of different neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease, Pick's disease, and Guam amylotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia complex. Hirano bodies have also been associated with chronic alcoholism, as well as general aging. Despite a large body of literature describing the structure, incidence, and antigens associated with Hirano bodies, the mechanism by which Hirano bodies are formed and their relationship to disease remain largely unexplored. A cellular system enables the formation of model Hirano bodies for studies of the formation and physiological consequences of these structures. Model Hirano bodies were induced to form in the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum and mammalian cells by expression of altered forms of a 34-kDa actin cross-linking protein. The 34-kDa actin-binding protein is one of many actin cross-linking proteins found in Dictyostelium and has been biochemically characterized as a calcium-sensitive actin-bundling protein. Molecular dissection of recombinant forms of the 34-kDa protein has revealed three actin-binding sites, as well as an N-terminal inhibitory domain that is proposed to regulate 34-kDa protein binding to F-actin. A purified C-terminal fragment was characterized in vitro and found to possess a calcium-insensitive enhanced F-actin affinity. Therefore, it has been proposed that CT-induced model Hirano body formation may be the result of increased F-actin binding and loss of calcium regulation. Further studies using additional mutated forms of the 34-kDa protein are consistent with the conclusion that activation of actin binding and loss of calcium regulation are biochemical properties invariably associated with induction of model Hirano bodies. On the cellular level, this model system was used to demonstrate that Hirano body formation proceeds by formation of small aggregates, followed by consolidation into a single large Hirano body. Degradation of Hirano bodies in this model is complex and involves the proteasome, autophagy, and secretion to the extracellular milieu. The goal of this study was to investigate the formation of Hirano bodies by probing both the biochemical or structural features required for the formation of Hirano bodies and the roles of other cellular components. We describe a novel mutant form of the 34-kDa protein that has a point mutation at amino acid position E60 in the proposed inhibitory domain. Studies of E60K show that although it retains calcium-sensitive F-actin binding, it has a higher F-actin-binding affinity than the wild-type 34-kDa protein and induces formation of highly ordered paracrystalline model Hirano bodies in Dictyostelium. In addition, using the actin-depolymerizing drug latrunculin B, we demonstrate that depolymerization of actin filaments in vitro and model Hirano bodies in living cells is severely inhibited by the presence of the E60K protein. At the cellular level, neither depolymerization of microtubules with nocodazole nor inhibition of myosin II with blebbistatin induces a major change in the ultrastructure of Hirano bodies. However, there was a discernible difference in the rate of formation of aggregates that grow into large model Hirano bodies in the presence of either nocodazole or blebbistatin. These observations support the hypothesis that both enhanced filament cross-linking and the inhibition of normal actin filament turnover lead to an accumulation of F-actin that is further organized into the highly ordered arrays that comprise Hirano bodies. MATERIALS AND METHODS Plasmids. The E60K mutant form of the 34-kDa actin-bundling protein in pVEII was generated serendipitously during construction of pVEII-34 kDa-EGFP. For recombinant-protein expression in bacteria, the E60K cDNA was amplified from the pVEII-E60K-EGFP plasmid using PCR and cloned into the BamHI site of pET-15b. The plasmids were sequenced to verify fidelity. Actin. G-actin was prepared from rabbit skeletal muscle acetone powder, purified by Sephadex G-150 chromatography, and maintained in G-actin buffer at 4°C for up to 1 week with daily buffer changes. After 1 week, the G-actin was subjected to a cycle of polymerization in high-salt buffer and depolymerization by dialysis against G-actin buffer before maintenance in G-actin buffer. Bacterial expression and purification of recombinant proteins. Expression and purification of the wild-type 34-kDa protein and the mutant E60K protein in pET15b were performed as previously described for the recombinant wild-type 34-kDa protein. The proteins were purified to homogeneity as assessed by SDS-PAGE, followed by Coomassie blue stain. The protein concentrations were determined by the bicinchoninic acid method, using bovine serum albumin as the protein standard. All purified recombinant proteins were dialyzed against 2 mM PIPES, pH 7.0, 50 mM KCl, 0.2 mM DTT, 0.03% NaN 3 and stored at −80°C. F-actin cosedimentation assays. High-speed F-actin cosedimentation assays were performed as previously described. The F-actin polymerization conditions were 20 mM PIPES, pH 7.0, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl 2, 1 mM ATP, 5 mM EGTA, 0.2 mM DTT. Evaluation of calcium sensitivity was performed by the absence or presence of 4.5 mM CaCl 2 in the previous buffer. The free calcium ion concentrations were calculated using maxchelator.stanford.edu with NIST database 46, vol.8, at pH 7 and 25°C. The “high-calcium” and “low-calcium” conditions correspond to free calcium ion concentrations of 3.1 μM and 1.4 × 10 −8 M, respectively. The solutions were centrifuged in a Beckman airfuge at 23 lb/in 2 for 30 min. The supernatant and pellet samples were collected and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie blue staining. Protein bands were quantified using scanning densitometry. Latrunculin B cosedimentation assays were performed by polymerizing 3 μM G-actin in the presence or absence of either 3 μM E60K or wild-type 34-kDa protein for 2 h at room temperature. After polymerization, latB was added to a final concentration of 4.5 μM and incubated for either 2 h or 24 h prior to the cosedimentation assay described above. Cosedimentation assays were performed a minimum of three times. Dictyostelium culture growth. Axenic strains of Dictyostelium were routinely maintained in axenic cultures with shaking at 150 rpm in HL-5 medium at 20°C. Inducible expression of either the wild-type 34-kDa protein or the E60K mutant protein fused to green fluorescent protein was achieved by utilizing the discoidin promoter in pVEII so that protein expression could be suppressed or induced by the addition or removal, respectively, of 1 mM folate from the growth medium in cells lacking the 34-kDa protein. Mutant Dictyostelium bearing a disruption of the autophagy gene atg5 were a generous gift from Rich Kessin, Columbia University, and have been described previously. To induce expression of E60K and formation of model Hirano bodies, cell cultures were grown to 1.0 × 10 6 cells/ml in the presence of folate and harvested by centrifugation. The cells were washed 2 times with Sorensen's phosphate buffer, pH 6.1, to remove the folate to induce E60K expression and resuspended at 5 × 10 5 cells/ml in HL5 medium with the appropriate antibiotics for the strain. Ten milliliters of cell suspension was used to inoculate 100-mm petri dishes. The cells were incubated at 20°C for 16 to 20 h after plating on coverslips. Under these growth conditions, >80% of pVEII-E60K-EGFP cells contained at least 1 Hirano body. For expression experiments performed in the presence or absence of either nocodazole or blebbistatin, cells were harvested approximately 24 h prior to the start of induction; washed twice with Sorensen's phosphate buffer, pH 6.1, and twice with HL-5; and plated at 3.5 × 10 5 cells in HL-5 on microscope coverslips or in 6-well tissue culture-treated plates to induce the expression of E60K-GFP. Nocodazole and blebbistatin were present at final concentrations of 10 μg/ml and 100 μM, respectively, and cells were examined at 3.5, 5.5, 7.5, and 24 h after induction of protein expression and in the presence or absence of drugs. Fluorescence microscopy. Latrunculin B was applied to E60K-enhanced green fluorescent protein and 34-kDa–EGFP Dictyostelium cells 16 to 20 h after induction of E60K expression. The cells were dislodged, replated on a coverslip, and allowed to adhere for 30 min at 20°C. Stock solutions of either 1 mM latB in 20% dimethyl sulfoxide and Sorensen's phosphate buffer, pH 6.1, or 20% DMSO and Sorensen's phosphate buffer were added and allowed to mix by diffusion to achieve a final concentration of latrunculin B of 10 μM or 0 μM, respectively. After incubation for 2 h at 20°C, the cells were fixed and stained with tetramethyl rhodamine isocyanate -phalloidin as described previously. Coverslips were examined on a Zeiss LSM 510 VIS/META confocal microscope. For quantitative fluorescence comparisons, the red-channel gain settings for E60K-EGFP and 34-kDa–EGFP Dictyostelium cells were set using the non-latB-treated controls for each and held constant for recording of latB-treated cells. Quantitative analysis of changes in TRITC fluorescence was performed using ImageJ. Experiments were performed three times. Study of the size distribution of Hirano bodies was performed by fluorescence microscopy. Samples of cells expressing E60K-GFP were fixed for 25 min in 3.7% formaldehyde in Sorensen's buffer with 1 mM EGTA, pH 7. The cells were permeabilized with acetone for 2 min. The coverslips were allowed to air dry and mounted with Crystal Mount on microscope slides. Images of the GFP signal were collected with a Zeiss LSM 510 VIS/META confocal microscope using a 40× objective. The exposure and illumination settings were kept constant for all the images collected. For all samples, fields of cells were selected randomly, all images were analyzed, and at least 100 Hirano bodies were counted per condition in each experiment. Each experiment was repeated at least three times. Hirano body sizes were quantified with ImageJ. Distributions of Hirano body size were not Gaussian. The effect of drugs on Hirano body size was assessed by dividing the range of Hirano body sizes into quintiles. The number of Hirano bodies in each size range in the drug-treated cells was compared to the control, and the results were analyzed using the chi-square test. Transmission electron microscopy. Transmission electron microscopy was used to determine the structures of Hirano bodies formed by E60K protein expressed in Dictyostelium. Dictyostelium cells were prepared for TEM as previously described. Cells were embedded in EMbed 812, sectioned using either an RMC 5000 or MT-X ultramicrotome with a diamond knife, and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. Specimens were examined by transmission electron microscopy using a JEOL 1200 EX equipped with a Gatan detector. F-actin solutions were negatively stained with 2% uranyl acetate and visualized using a JEOL 100 CXII transmission electron microscope operating at 80 kV as previously described. G-actin was polymerized in 20 mM PIPES, pH 7.0, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl 2, 1 mM ATP, 5 mM EGTA, 0.2 mM DTT at 4°C overnight and added to either 34-kDa protein or E60K protein to give final concentrations of 5 μM and 2.5 μM, respectively. RESULTS Previous studies have demonstrated that gain-of-function mutant forms of the 34-kDa protein can induce the formation of model Hirano bodies when expressed in either Dictyostelium or mammalian cells. During the construction and characterization of a vector employing the discoidin promoter to drive inducible expression of the 34-kDa protein fused to GFP, a clone was identified that showed large aggregates of GFP that colocalized with rhodamine-phalloidin staining and appeared similar to model Hirano bodies. Since model Hirano bodies are not induced by expression of the wild-type 34-kDa protein alone or fused to GFP, we isolated and sequenced the plasmid from these cells and compared the sequence to that expected for 34-kDa protein–GFP. The results showed a single base change altering codon 60 from GAA, encoding glutamate, to AAA, encoding lysine. Model Hirano body formation following transformation of cells with plasmids carrying this sequence was reproducible. The E60K mutation is in the putative inhibitory region of the 34-kDa protein, which spans residues 1 to 76. The formation of model Hirano bodies by mutant 34-kDa proteins is believed to be the result of increased F-actin affinity and loss of calcium sensitivity. We characterized the mutated E60K protein to further dissect the properties required for model Hirano body formation. Biochemical characterization of E60K protein. For biochemical characterization of the E60K protein, the protein was expressed and purified from Escherichia coli using methods developed for the wild-type protein. As assessed by gel filtration chromatography, the purified E60K protein was monomeric in solution, like the wild-type 34-kDa protein. F-actin cosedimentation assays were utilized to characterize the binding of the E60K protein to actin filaments at a low calcium concentration in mixtures of 3 μM 34-kDa or E60K protein and 3 to 60 μM F-actin. At an equimolar actin–to–34-kDa protein concentration, approximately 1 mol of 34-kDa protein bound to every 5 mol of actin. In contrast, at the same molar ratio, E60K protein bound to F-actin at 0.65 to 1. Increasing the total actin concentration to 6 μM resulted in nearly all of the E60K protein being bound but had only a modest effect on the total amount of 34-kDa protein bound. Even at very high actin–to–34-kDa protein concentrations, the binding of the 34-kDa protein did not attain saturation. These results confirm a substantially higher affinity and maximal level of binding of E60K protein to F-actin compared to wild-type 34-kDa protein. To assess the calcium sensitivity, 3 μM E60K or 34-kDa protein was mixed with 3 μM F-actin at a low or high calcium concentration. More of the E60K protein bound to F-actin at both low and high calcium concentrations, as shown in Table 1. The binding of the E60K and 34-kDa proteins to F-actin in the presence of a high calcium concentration was slightly more than half that observed with low calcium in both cases. Thus, the E60K protein exhibits activated F-actin binding, but unlike other modified 34-kDa proteins with activated actin binding that induce formation of Hirano bodies, the E60K protein retains calcium sensitivity. FIG 1 Cosedimentation of 34-kDa and E60K proteins with F-actin. Binding of 3 μM E60K or 34-kDa protein as a function of the actin concentration at low calcium. The E60K protein saturated at a 2:1 molar ratio, while the... TABLE 1 Determination of calcium-sensitive binding of 34-kDa and E60K proteins to F-actin a Stabilization of actin filaments to latrunculin B-induced depolymerization in vitro. Full-length and truncated forms of the 34-kDa protein have been previously shown to inhibit F-actin depolymerization in a concentration-dependent manner. The 34-kDa protein affects the off rate of actin monomers from the ends of actin filaments but does not cap the ends, since the critical concentration is not altered. The observation that the E60K protein had an increased affinity for F-actin compared to the wild-type 34-kDa protein led us to determine the effect on F-actin depolymerization. F-actin was effectively depolymerized in the presence of latB, as shown in Table 2. The presence of the 34-kDa protein partially inhibited latB-induced depolymerization in vitro. In contrast, the E60K protein completely inhibited depolymerization with no significant change in the F-actin concentration after either 2 or 24 h in the presence of latB. Thus, the higher affinity of E60K for F-actin correlates with the ability to inhibit depolymerization by effectively decreasing the off rate of the actin monomer from the filament. TABLE 2 Concentrations of F-actin sedimented in the presence of either 34-kDa or E60K protein and of 4.5 μM latB for 2 or 24 h E60K protein cross-links and bundles F-actin. The 34-kDa protein cross-links and bundles F-actin. The ability of E60K protein to cross-link and bundle actin filaments was examined by negative-stain transmission electron microscopy. Both the 34-kDa protein and the E60K protein cross-linked and bundled F-actin. The bundles of actin cross-linked by E60K revealed more cross-striations than those formed with the wild-type 34-kDa protein, likely due to higher ordering and occupancy of cross-link sites reflecting the higher stoichiometry of binding. FIG 2 Transmission electron micrographs of solutions of F-actin and either the 34-kDa protein or the E60K protein. F-actin. F-actin and 34-kDa protein. F-actin and E60K protein. The E60K protein bundles F-actin similarly to the actin-bundling... E60K protein expression leads to Hirano body formation. The observation that E60K protein cross-links and bundles F-actin together with the gain-of-function F-actin binding was consistent with other mutant forms of the 34-kDa protein that formed model Hirano bodies. The E60K protein was tested for the ability to form model Hirano bodies in Dictyostelium lacking the wild-type 34-kDa protein. E60K-EGFP localized in large punctate structures located within the cytoplasm. The colocalization of E60K-EGFP and F-actin within the structures is consistent with the presence of model Hirano bodies seen in previous studies done with other mutant forms of the 34-kDa protein. Hirano bodies are defined by their hallmark ultrastructural appearance, which is observed both in Hirano bodies in the brain and in model Hirano bodies in cell cultures. F-actin filaments are arranged into a paracrystalline structure that appears as a filament array with a center-to-center filament spacing of 10 to 12 nm or as a herringbone structure, depending on the plane of the section. Transmission electron microscopy was used to examine Dictyostelium cells expressing E60K-EGFP, as shown in Fig. 4. Large inclusions with the hallmark characteristics of F-actin within Hirano bodies are observed. The E60K protein with the gain-of-function F-actin binding causes the formation of model Hirano bodies. This result is consistent with other 34-kDa protein gain-of-function mutants that induce formation of model Hirano bodies. FIG 3 Expression of E60K-GFP protein in abpB − Dictyostelium cells leads to the formation of model Hirano bodies. Dictyostelium cells were transformed with plasmid to express the E60K protein or the 34-kDa protein fused to GFP. Cells were examined by... FIG 4 Transmission electron micrographs of E60K-EGFP-expressing abpB − Dictyostelium cells with model Hirano bodies. Transmission electron micrograph of a cell expressing E60K protein with model Hirano bodies. The model Hirano bodies are distinct... Hirano bodies are resistant to latrunculin B drug treatment. It is known that latB treatment of Dictyostelium induces the depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton, and latB has been used in numerous studies to examine the role of actin in such cell processes as endocytosis, cell motility, and regulation of contractile vacuoles. Since the E60K protein reduced F-actin depolymerization in vitro by latB, and since Hirano bodies are composed primarily of actin filaments, we used latB to compare the stability of actin filaments in model Hirano bodies to the other actin filaments in the cell. The 34-kDa–EGFP cells with no latB treatment had normal cortical 34-kDa protein localization and colocalization with F-actin, as detected by TRITC-phalloidin staining. B ). The E60K-EGFP cells without latB contained large model Hirano bodies that were enriched in E60K-EGFP and F-actin. F ). latB treatment of 34-kDa–EGFP cells caused a 77% decrease in F-actin content, as assessed by the decrease in TRITC-phalloidin staining. The 34-kDa–EGFP fluorescence levels remained high, but the cellular distribution of the 34-kDa protein appeared to be diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm, indicating that it was no longer localized in the F-actin cytoskeleton. In contrast, E60K-EGFP cells in the presence of latB had E60K-EGFP localization similar to that in the absence of latB, as shown in Fig. 5E and ​ andG. G. TRITC-phalloidin staining of latB E60K-EGFP cells shows an overall 43% decrease in cytoplasmic F-actin, significantly less than that observed in latB-treated 34-kDa–EGFP cells. Measurements of TRITC-phalloidin fluorescence levels contained within the model Hirano bodies in the presence and absence of latB showed that only 31% of the F-actin in model Hirano bodies was susceptible to depolymerization by latB. These results show that F-actin within model Hirano bodies is less susceptible to disassembly by latB, consistent with the hypothesis that increased stability of actin filaments is a property of Hirano bodies that contributes to the formation and assembly of these structures. FIG 5 Hirano bodies are resistant to depolymerization induced by latB. Dictyostelium cells expressing either 34-kDa–EGFP or E60K-EGFP were incubated with 10 μM latB for 2 h and processed for fluorescence microscopy. 34-kDa–EGFP-expressing... TABLE 3 Average mean intensities of TRITC-phalloidin fluorescence measured in E60K-EGFP- and 34-kDa–EGFP-expressing cells in the presence and absence of latrunculin B Role of the cytoskeleton in the formation and degradation of model Hirano bodies. Cytoskeletal structures can contribute to the formation and degradation of Hirano bodies in a variety of ways. In order to determine the contributions of the microtubule and actin cytoskeleton to the formation and degradation of model Hirano bodies in Dictyostelium, an inducible discoidin promoter was utilized to drive the expression of E60K-EGFP and to establish an approximate start time for Hirano body formation. A Dictyostelium autophagy knockout mutant, atg5 −, was utilized to slow or delay the degradation of Hirano bodies by the autophagy pathway and to focus on events during the formation of Hirano bodies. Chemical inhibitors were utilized to probe the roles of microtubules and myosin II in model Hirano body formation. Microtubules were depolymerized with nocodazole, the most effective reagent in Dictyostelium. Model Hirano bodies in Dictyostelium are highly enriched for myosin II, but not myosin I. Myosin II function was inhibited with blebbistatin, a specific inhibitor of nonmuscle myosin II whose activity has been documented in Dictyostelium. The model Hirano body area was measured by fluorescence microscopy at 3.5, 5.5, 7.5, and 24 h after the removal of folate from the media to induce the expression of the E60K-GFP protein in atg5 − cells. Model Hirano bodies were able to form under all experimental conditions, and all three conditions involved very dispersed size distributions in the Hirano body area. The efficacy of the drugs was confirmed by observation of cell rounding and decrease in membrane ruffling and movement in the presence of blebbistatin and by staining for microtubules in the presence of nocodazole. FIG 6 Representative size distribution of model Hirano bodies as a function of time in the presence of either nocodazole or blebbistatin or in the absence of the inhibitors. Induction of E60K-GFP expression... TABLE 4 Mean sizes of model Hirano bodies formed in the absence or presence of either 10 μM nocodazole or 100 μM blebbistatin The mean size of model Hirano bodies formed in the presence of blebbistatin is smaller than those obtained in the presence of nocodazole, which is smaller than the control at 3.5 and 5.5 h after induction. At 7.5 h, the mean size is not very different. After 24 h of induction, the mean model Hirano body size is smaller in the presence of nocodazole than the control, which in turn is smaller than those formed in the presence of blebbistatin. This is in contrast to the results at 3.5 and 5.5 h. Since the distribution of model Hirano body sizes was highly skewed and different for each time and condition, comparison of the size frequency distribution in the presence of either blebbistatin or nocodazole to the control was performed by chi-square analysis, as shown in Table 4. The distribution of model Hirano body sizes formed in the presence of either nocodazole or blebbistatin showed significant differences from the control at different time points, depending on the drug. These results show that while neither microtubules nor myosin II is required for model Hirano body formation, they are both required for optimal formation of model Hirano bodies, and they contribute to different facets of model Hirano body formation. Hirano bodies are characterized by hallmark ultrastructural properties. Electron microscopy was performed at 7.5 h to verify that model Hirano bodies were formed in the presence of the drugs in an atg5 − background. The paracrystalline order of F-actin in the model Hirano bodies is shown in Fig. 7. Model Hirano bodies formed in the presence of either nocodazole or blebbistatin appeared similar to those formed in the absence of drug. Model Hirano bodies formed in the atg5 − background also appeared similar in organization to those observed in an AX2 background. Images were collected at a variety of tilt angles and higher magnification to gather more information regarding the structure and organization of the model Hirano bodies. Consistent differences in the structure and order of model Hirano bodies formed in the presence and absence of nocodazole and blebbistatin or cell line could not be established. FIG 7 Transmission electron micrographs of E60K-EGFP-expressing atg5 − Dictyostelium cells with model Hirano bodies. The cells were fixed for electron microscopy 7.5 h after induction of E60K expression. E60K expressed in wild-type AX2 cells.... DISCUSSION Hirano bodies form under a wide array of stresses and conditions, but the actual signal or process required for the formation of Hirano bodies is not known. The development of an experimental system for formation of model Hirano bodies has provided a facile approach to this question. Three altered forms of the 34-kDa actin-bundling protein induce model Hirano bodies: CT, 34-kDa ΔEF1, and E60K. CT is a truncated protein comprising amino acids 124 to 295, while the 34-kDa ΔEF1 has a mutation in the first putative EF hand. The E60K protein has a point mutation in codon 60, which is in the region of the inhibitory domain, but not in the first interaction zone. All three proteins show activated actin binding and cross-linking. The CT and 34-kDa ΔEF1 proteins lack calcium regulation of actin binding, in addition to possessing activated actin binding. The 34-kDa protein is regulated by calcium and can bind to the sides of actin filaments, cross-link actin filaments into bundles, and slow the disassembly of actin filaments. The 34-kDa protein is localized to transient cellular structures, such as filopodia and the phagocytic cup, as well as the leading and trailing edges of migrating cells. The E60K protein has an enhanced ability to bind filaments, to cross-link actin filaments into highly ordered bundles, and to slow the disassembly of actin filaments. The binding of the E60K protein to F-actin is calcium regulated, as is the parental 34-kDa protein. However, this property is not translated into facile disassembly of the model Hirano body, unlike the transient cellular structures the 34-kDa protein participates in. Probing the stability of actin filaments in the presence of latrunculin B shows that the highly ordered actin in model Hirano bodies is more resistant to disassembly than actin filaments in other regions of the cytoskeleton. Previous work in Dictyostelium has shown alternative methods for the formation of actin aggregates. Jasplakinolide, a toxin derived from a marine sponge, induces formation of actin-rich inclusions, actin aggresomes, in Dictyostelium and in mammalian cells. The actin aggresomes are also more resistant to disassembly but lack the paracrystalline order that is characteristic of Hirano bodies. Jasplakinolide stabilizes actin filaments, decreases the rate of depolymerization and the critical concentration of actin, and promotes nucleation of actin filaments. However, jasplakinolide lacks cross-linking activity, suggesting that cross-linking of actin filaments is an essential element in the formation of paracrystalline order in Hirano bodies. Overexpression of VASP tethered to endosomes in Dictyostelium produced large actin aggregates. VASP contains 1 actin-binding domain but forms tetramers in solution and can cross-link actin filaments. Tethering to the membrane brings VASP and actin filaments into close spatial proximity. The large actin aggregates did not exhibit the paracrystalline order of Hirano bodies, which further suggests that not only cross-linking, but also bundling of actin filaments, plays a role in the formation of ordered actin aggregates. The finding that the E60K protein retains calcium regulation of actin binding in addition to activation of actin binding is noteworthy, since this result shows that activation of actin binding is sufficient to trigger formation of Hirano bodies and that loss of calcium regulation is not an additional factor. Taken together, these results indicate that both stabilization of actin filaments by inhibition of disassembly and high-affinity cross-linking are required to induce the formation and maintenance of Hirano bodies in cells. In the initial stages of model Hirano body formation, stabilization of filaments, alignment, and bundling promote the formation of small clusters of aggregated filaments. We tested for a possible role for the cytoskeleton in the formation of Hirano bodies using the drugs nocodazole and blebbistatin to depolymerize microtubules and to inhibit myosin II, respectively. A role for microtubules in the formation of model Hirano bodies was suggested by the initial reports that aggresomes form by transport of small nascent structures to form a single large aggregate in each cell. Similarly, small nascent structures are transported on microtubule tracks to form actin aggresomes following application of jasplakinolide. Our studies show that model Hirano bodies form in cells treated with nocodazole but are smaller than in controls. These results indicate that microtubules contribute to the formation of small aggregates and their growth into large model Hirano bodies but that microtubules are not required for model Hirano body formation. Our results also support a role for myosin II in the dynamics of early model Hirano body formation, since the size of model Hirano bodies formed in the presence of blebbistatin grew more slowly than that of the control. Blebbistatin is a specific small-molecule inhibitor of myosin II. Blebbistatin binds to the ADP/Pi state of myosin II and blocks the actin-activated ATPase of myosin II. Blebbistatin-inhibited myosin can bind actin but is in a low-affinity conformation. In Dictyostelium, blebbistatin blocks myosin II-dependent processes, but not other processes known to be dependent on myosins I, V, and VII. The finding that model Hirano bodies formed in the presence of blebbistatin are smaller than controls is consistent with the observation that model Hirano bodies contain myosin II, but not myosin I. However, these results do not allow us to define the precise role of myosin II during the formation of Hirano bodies. The simplest and most direct mechanism would be inhibition of myosin II-dependent transport of the nascent model Hirano body structures into large aggregates. However, myosin II that is ATPase defective can still provide a function by cross-linking actin filaments and plays a structural role independent of its motor function. An elegant recent study revealed that nonmuscle myosin II plays a role in cytokinesis that involves cross-linking and tension, but not translocation of actin filaments. Thus, myosin II could play a role in the structure and collection of the actin filaments into the aggregates and/or a role in the transport of small structures into a single large aggregate in each cell. Taken together, these findings suggest that myosin II is not required for Hirano body formation but facilitates the process of forming actin aggregates and their subsequent coalescence. An additional possible explanation of the effect of blebbistatin on the size of model Hirano bodies involves a role of the actin cytoskeleton and myosin II in degradation of Hirano bodies. The turnover of model Hirano bodies can occur by autophagy, as well as the proteasome or exocytosis. While the cytoskeleton is not required for nonselective macroautophagy, the actin cytoskeleton is needed for selective autophagy in yeast and contributes to atg9 cycling and the formation of the preautophagosomal structure. A recent study showed that myosin II is activated by the kinase atg1, which phosphorylates a myosin light-chain kinase-like protein and contributes to membrane trafficking for the formation of autophagosomes. In this scenario, the smaller size of the model Hirano body-like structures would involve a failure in formation and maturation of autophagosomes. Consistent with this possibility is the observation that many of the model Hirano body structures observed were contained in vesicles in both the presence and absence of blebbistatin and in both wild-type cells and cells lacking atg5 −. The delivery of model Hirano bodies to a vesicular compartment could occur by an alternative pathway that is independent of atg5 and atg7. Further elucidation of the role of myosin II in the dynamics of Hirano bodies will be an exciting challenge for future investigations. 