Two distinct sensing pathways allow recognition of Klebsiella pneumoniae by Dictyostelium amoebae You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Two distinct sensing pathways allow recognition of K lebsiella pneumoniae by D ictyostelium amoebae Cell Microbiol. 2013 Nov; 16: 311–323. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Wiley-Blackwell Online Open Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Cellular Microbiology Wiley-Blackwell, John Wiley & Sons Two distinct sensing pathways allow recognition of K lebsiella pneumoniae by D ictyostelium amoebae Wanessa C Lima, Damien Balestrino,, and Pierre Cosson Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials Supplementary cmi0016-0311-SD1.pdf GUID: AB61DFDB-8466-467D-8017-EF1E43CA9524 Summary Recognition of bacteria by metazoans is mediated by receptors that recognize different types of microorganisms and elicit specific cellular responses. The soil amoebae D ictyostelium discoideum feeds upon a variable mixture of environmental bacteria, and it is expected to recognize and adapt to various food sources. To date, however, no bacteria-sensing mechanisms have been described. In this study, we isolated a D ictyostelium mutant unable to grow in the presence of non-capsulated K lebsiella pneumoniae bacteria, but growing as efficiently as wild-type cells in the presence of other bacteria, such as B acillus subtilis. fspA KO cells were also unable to respond to K. pneumoniae and more specifically to bacterially secreted folate in a chemokinetic assay, while they responded readily to B. subtilis. Remarkably, both WT and fspA KO cells were able to grow in the presence of capsulated LM21 K. pneumoniae, and responded to purified capsule, indicating that capsule recognition may represent an alternative, FspA-independent mechanism for K. pneumoniae sensing. When LM21 capsule synthesis genes were deleted, growth and chemokinetic response were lost for fspA KO cells, but not for WT cells. Altogether, these results indicate that D ictyostelium amoebae use specific recognition mechanisms to respond to different K. pneumoniae elements. Introduction In multicellular organisms, recognition of bacterial pathogens is essential to stimulate specific antibacterial responses and to allow the defence of the organism against infections. Mammalian and Drosophila cells make use of a collection of receptors that directly detect molecules exposed at the surface of bacteria or secreted by bacteria. In Drosophila melanogaster, the search for mechanisms involved in recognition of microorganisms has notably led to the discovery and characterization of Toll receptors that were later shown to also play a key role in bacterial recognition in mammalian organisms. Toll receptors are part of a signalling pathway ultimately controlling the transcriptional activity of NF-κB like transcription factors and the production of antimicrobial peptides. Recognition of bacteria by a eukaryotic cell and subsequent cell activation can be linked to initiation of phagocytosis -recognition by CD14 receptor, which triggers bacterial uptake and induces inflammatory response; Melendez and Tay, 2008 ), but in many instances different receptors are involved in recognition/activation and in phagocytosis of bacteria. For example, in mammalian cells, Toll-like receptors recognize bacterial LPS, but phagocytosis is achieved by the Fcγ and scavenger receptors upregulated by the same TLRs. While specialized phagocytic cells are essential for elimination of invading microorganisms and for clearance of dying cells in multicellular organisms, in unicellular organisms such as the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum phagocytosis is the main mechanism for acquiring food. Dictyostelium amoebae exist as single cells in the soil, where they feed phagocytically upon bacteria. The molecular mechanisms that amoebae use to bind to and to ingest microorganisms are analogous to those found in multicellular organisms. They notably exhibit a cellular adhesion system composed of a surface receptor presenting features of integrin beta chains and binding to talin. Subsequent to recognition and binding, the microorganism is internalized, and ingested bacteria are killed by exposure to the harsh environment of the mature phagosomes, characterized by an acidic pH, the presence of proteolytic enzymes, and production of reactive oxygen species. Previous studies have shown that Dictyostelium can be attacked by a variety of bacterial pathogens. On the other hand, when confronted with non-pathogenic bacteria such as non-virulent Klebsiella pneumoniae or Bacillus subtilis, Dictyostelium cells use specific molecular mechanisms to kill different bacteria. In addition, large-scale transcriptional studies point to differential metabolic and signalling pathways being activated when Dictyostelium cells are grown in different sources of bacteria. It is thus likely that Dictyostelium recognizes various kinds of bacteria and adapts its physiology. To date, it is, however, not clear whether Dictyostelium amoebae simply adapt their metabolism to the nutrients that they can obtain from each bacteria, or if they specifically recognize and respond to each type of bacteria by modulating their physiology and gene expression. Several key elements allowing recognition of microorganisms in metazoans such as Toll receptors or NF-κB transcription factors are absent in Dictyostelium. On the other hand, some proteins like CD36 that have been shown to participate in microorganism recognition in metazoans have clear orthologues in Dictyostelium, although it remains to be seen if they play equivalent roles. In this study we investigated if and how Dictyostelium cells specifically recognize bacteria and respond to their presence. Our results indicate that at least two distinct mechanisms allow recognition of K. pneumoniae bacteria by Dictyostelium, one sensing the folate produced by bacteria, the other one responding to bacterial capsule. Results FspA, a protein essential for D ictyostelium growth in the presence of K lebsiella pneumoniae The fspA KO cell line described in this work was isolated from a population of random insertion Dictyostelium mutants based on their inability to grow on a lawn of K. pneumoniae bacteria. We used for this initial screen a non-pathogenic, non-capsulated laboratory strain of K. pneumoniae. Wild-type Dictyostelium cells were able to ingest bacteria and to form phagocytic plaques in a lawn of K. pneumoniae. On the contrary, fspA KO cells grew very poorly in the presence of Kp, although they grew as well as WT cells in rich liquid medium. The mutagenic plasmid inserted in the genome of fspA KO cells was recovered with its flanking regions, and the site of insertion sequenced, revealing that the fspA KO was caused by the insertion of the mutagenic vector 98 nucleotides downstream from the start codon of the DDB_G0277237 gene. Fig 1 fspA KO cells are defective for growth on K. pneumoniae.A. Schematic representation of growth of D ictyostelium cells on a lawn of bacteria. Cells growing on bacteria form a phagocytic plaque.B. Growth of WT and fspA KO cells was tested on different strains... To confirm that the phenotype of the KO cells was indeed due to this insertion in the fspA gene, we disrupted the gene by homologous recombination in WT cells and observed the same growth defect in three independent fspA KO clones, which were used for all further analysis. To further characterize fspA KO cells, we assessed their growth on a large array of bacteria, including representatives of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. KO cells were able to grow on all Gram-positive bacteria tested. They also grew on several non-pathogenic Gram-negative bacteria, but not on the laboratory strain of K. pneumoniae or on a mucoid strain of E. coli. Growth of fspA KO cells on K. pneumoniae bacteria was restored by introducing in the KO cells a plasmid expressing FspA tagged with a Flag epitope. The predicted FspA protein is 333 aminoacids long, and it exhibits one putative signal peptide and potentially nine transmembrane domains. The C-terminal segment of the protein contains a putative di-lysine ER retention motif. FspA is conserved inside the Amoebozoa group, but no clear homologues can be readily detected outside this group by primary sequence similarity searches. However, similarity searches using AmiGO server revealed a weak similarity with the SRE-19 protein of C. elegans, a chemosensory G protein-coupled receptor from the nematode serpentine family. Phylogenetic analysis was conducted using orthologues from the C. elegans SRE family and orthologues from rhodopsin-like olfactory receptors from diverse metazoans. According to this analysis, amoebozoan FspA orthologues lie closer to the nematode SRE family. In addition, a search for protein domains at PROSITE webserver returned a low confidence hit to GPCRs family 1. The low levels of similarity among members of the GPCR superfamily are a known feature, and classification of proteins into the group often relies on traits other than the primary sequence. Prediction of protein function using specific dedicated webservers for GPCR signature profiling confirmed FspA protein as a potential putative GPCR. Collectively, these observations suggest that FspA may indeed play a role in intracellular signalling, although given the low degrees of similarity observed, their functional significance remains unclear. Fig 2 FspA structure and evolutionary history.A. Hydrophobicity plot and predicted structure of the FspA protein. Based on primary sequence analysis, FspA exhibits a signal peptide and 9 transmembrane... fspA KO cells ingest and kill bacteria efficiently The same defective growth observed for fspA KO cells, i.e. a specific inability to grow on the laboratory K. pneumoniae strain and on the mucoid E. coli B/r strain, has been previously reported for two other Dictyostelium KO cells unable to kill ingested K. pneumoniae bacteria. This led us to investigate if fspA KO cells can efficiently internalize and process K. pneumoniae. We first tested the ability of fspA KO cells to engulf different types of particles. Ingestion of latex beads, dead FITC-labelled or live GFP-expressing K. pneumoniae was not affected in fspA KO cells compared with WT cells, indicating that the KO cells retained their competence to ingest bacteria. fspA KO cells were also able to kill ingested K. pneumoniae bacteria as efficiently as WT cells, demonstrating that the defective growth phenotype was not linked to impaired killing. Fig 3 fspA KO cells internalize and kill bacteria efficiently.A. Internalization of 1 μm latex beads, live Kp or dead Kp was measured by flow cytometry. Values were normalized to 100% of WT. Phagocytosis... Further characterization of the endocytic and phagocytic pathways did not reveal any other phenotypic anomaly. Notably, endosomal acidification, ingestion and recycling of fluid-phase, proteolysis of ingested substrates, and intracellular targeting of lysosomal enzymes were not significantly different between WT and fspA KO cells. Together these results suggested that the inability of fspA KO cells to grow in the presence of K. pneumoniae was not caused by a defect in the function of the phagocytic pathway or in the ingestion and intracellular processing of phagocytosed bacteria. Sensing of K. pneumoniae and of folate is defective in fspA KO cells The impaired growth of fspA KO cells in the presence of K. pneumoniae could be linked to a defective recognition of the bacteria by the mutant cells. To test this, we developed a sensing assay based on the observation that WT Dictyostelium cells respond to the presence of different types of bacteria by significantly increasing their random migration speed. A similar method has been used previously to assess the activation state of Dictyostelium cells upon exposure to different compounds. WT cells exposed to K. pneumoniae or to Bacillus subtilis bacteria migrated 2 to 3 times faster than unstimulated cells. Strikingly, in the same assay fspA KO cells failed to respond to the presence of K. pneumoniae, while they still reacted to B. subtilis. Fig 4 Sensing of K. pneumoniae and folate is defective in fspA KO cells.A. Trajectories of WT and fspA KO cells migrating for 30 min in the absence or presence of K. pneumoniae. Axes represent distance in μm.B. Average speed... It has been known for several years that bacteria secrete folate, which acts as a chemoattractant for Dictyostelium. Folate and its analogue methotrexate also act as general activators of Dictyostelium and can induce a variety of cellular responses, notably an increase in random cell migration in WT cells. Unlike WT cells, fspA KO cells did not respond to folate or to methotrexate, and this phenotype was restored in KO cells expressing FspA-Flag. To verify the specificity of this phenotype, we also assessed the ability of kil2 KO cells to respond to K. pneumoniae or folate. As expected, kil2 KO cells are able to sense both K. pneumoniae and folate, indicating that recognition and killing of K. pneumoniae are two processes involving different cellular pathways. In order to test whether folate was a major K. pneumoniae factor stimulating Dictyostelium cells, we attempted to produce folate-depleted Kp by incubating them in the presence of sulfathiazole, an antibiotic that inhibits bacterial folate biosynthesis by preventing the formation of the precursor dihydropteroate. WT Dictyostelium cells did not respond to folate-depleted K. pneumoniae, suggesting that in these conditions, Dictyostelium cells may respond to the presence of K. pneumoniae bacteria mostly through folate sensing. We named the FspA protein on the basis of its essential role in folate sensing. To further characterize the cell response to folate in WT and fspA KO cells, we analysed the transcriptional response of several genes after 1 h of incubation in phosphate buffer in the presence or absence of folate. The 50 genes analysed here were chosen partly based on microarray studies of Dictyostelium cells growing in the presence of bacteria, but also included genes potentially involved in intracellular signalling, such as GPCRs. In WT cells, only 3 genes were induced more than fourfold upon exposure to folate: grlC, grlD, and grlM. In fspA KO cells exposed to folate, the expression levels of these three genes were 35–65% lower than in WT cells. This result also points to an inefficient response of fspA KO cells to folate. D ictyostelium cells sense K. pneumoniae capsule in an FspA-independent manner The laboratory strain of K. pneumoniae used in this study is characterized by its lack of pathogenicity, as well as by the lack of a visible capsule. Measurement of capsule content also revealed no detectable capsule production. Most clinical or environmental isolates of K. pneumoniae exhibit a capsule, which represents one of the key virulence factors of K. pneumoniae. In order to check if the presence of a capsule affects interactions between K. pneumoniae and Dictyostelium, we tested the ability of WT and fspA KO cells to grow in the presence of LM21, a well-characterized capsulated strain of K. pneumoniae. Surprisingly, both WT as well as fspA KO Dictyostelium cells were able to grow in the presence of LM21. Fig 5 An FspA-independent pathway allows sensing of K. pneumoniae capsule.A. Electron micrographs of K. pneumoniae bacteria. A capsule is visible at the surface of LM21, but not... To determine the nature of this FspA-independent growth in the presence of LM21 K. pneumoniae, we tested several LM21 mutant strains, impaired in the production of different exopolysaccharides, capsule and LPS. LM21 Δ wza and Δ wzx, both devoid of capsule, did not support growth of fspA KO cells, indicating that the presence of a capsule is necessary and sufficient to allow growth of fspA KO cells in the presence of K. pneumoniae. Accordingly, both WT as fspA KO cells presented increased motility in the presence of LM21 K. pneumoniae, but only WT cells could respond to the capsule mutants. To further characterize the effect of capsule, we assessed the ability of cells to respond to purified capsule extracted from an LPS-deficient strain : both WT and fspA KO cells responded to the presence of an LPS-free capsule extract. Together these results suggest that an FspA-independent mechanism allows Dictyostelium to sense K. pneumoniae capsule, and that this activation is sufficient to support growth of fspA KO cells in the presence of K. pneumoniae. Intracellular localization of FspA Since Flag-tagged FspA restored a wild-type phenotype in fspA KO cells, 4 C), at least part of this tagged protein was presumably correctly localized within the cell. When assessed by immunofluorescence, the bulk of FspA-Flag appeared colocalized with PDI, a marker of the endoplasmic reticulum. No significant colocalization was seen with a marker of endosomal compartments, contractile vacuole, or plasma membrane. Fig 6 FspA localizes mostly in the endoplasmic reticulum.A. Colocalization of FspA-Flag with markers for endosomal compartments, plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum. FspA colocalizes extensively with ER. Scale bar: 5 μm.B. To... However, we could not exclude based on immunofluorescence that a small fraction of FspA might be present at the cell surface. In order to investigate this point, the surface of intact cells was biotinylated and the presence of FspA-Flag was assessed among the purified biotinylated proteins. A small fraction of the FspA protein was biotinylated, corresponding to less than 1% of the total protein. This was however higher than detected for a cytosolic protein or a resident ER protein. This result suggests that, while a major part of FspA localizes in the ER, a fraction of it may be present at the cell surface. This surface localization of FspA is however tentative, since accidental rupture of a few cells during biotinylation can result in artefactual biotinylation of a small percentage of intracellular proteins. Discussion D ictyostelium sensing of bacterial-secreted folate In metazoan organisms, recognition of pathogens is mostly mediated by cellular receptors that detect bacterial components and trigger specific signal transduction pathways. Environmental amoebae, such as Dictyostelium discoideum, rely on bacteria present on the soil as food source. To achieve this aim they must forage, internalize, kill and digest bacteria. Dictyostelium is able to grow on many different types of bacteria, and specific transcriptional responses have been observed in different conditions. However, most of these studies analysed steady-state situations, and to date it is still not clear if Dictyostelium specifically recognizes different types of bacteria and triggers defined adaptation pathways, or if the specific response occurs at a metabolic level, as an a posteriori adaptation to the different intracellular levels of available metabolites. In this study, we show that at least two distinct signalling pathways allow recognition of K. pneumoniae by Dictyostelium cells: one involves sensing of bacterial capsule, while the other relies on the detection of folate secreted by the bacteria. Fig 7 Distinct pathways allow D ictyostelium amoebae to recognize bacteria. Our results suggest that D ictyostelium cells are able to recognize K. pneumoniae bacteria through at least two distinct pathways, one sensing bacterial capsule, and the other sensing... The isolation and characterization of fspA KO cells allowed us to show that, in order to grow in the presence of K. pneumoniae, Dictyostelium must specifically recognize these bacteria. When Dictyostelium is exposed to a laboratory, non-capsulated strain of K. pneumoniae, the sole activation pathway at play involves sensing of folate secreted by bacteria, and the FspA protein is an essential element for the activation of this pathway. The FspA-dependent folate-sensing pathway regulates the immediate response of Dictyostelium to folate, a rapid transcriptional response, and it is essential for sustained growth in the presence of bacteria. Note that, when analysing transcriptional responses, we focused on relatively short-term responses, and it thus seems likely that we are measuring the primary response of Dictyostelium to folate, rather than a long-term adaptation process. This is in stark difference to most published studies that analysed cell response to bacteria after longer exposure times, and may account for the fact that none of the genes identified in these previous studies was upregulated upon short exposure to folate. To date, our results do not allow us to define the exact role of FspA in folate sensing. Based on the phenotype of fspA KO cells, FspA may act as a folate receptor acting either at the cell surface or in the endoplasmic reticulum, where we detected most of the Flag-tagged FspA protein. This would be compatible with the observation that FspA is a polytopic membrane protein homologous to C. elegans GPCR chemosensory receptors. Alternatively FspA may represent another essential element in the folate-sensing pathway, acting either as a regulator of another, unidentified, receptor, or in the regulation of the intracellular signal relay. It is known that the response of Dictyostelium cells to folate induces increases in cGMP content, indicating that the response is modulated by heterotrimeric G proteins, notably via Gα4. Transcriptional response to folate includes a strong induction of a few GPCRs, and FspA is partially involved in this response. FspA might be a first-line signal transducer, further activating other GPCR proteins also capable of sensing folate. It is also worth noting the striking phenotypic similarity between fspA KO cells and two other KO cells previously isolated in our laboratory, the killing-deficient mutants kil2 and phg1a KO cells. The three cell lines have a very specific defective growth on E. coli B/r and the laboratory K. pneumoniae strain, but as discussed above the molecular mechanisms mediating growth impairment are different. This suggests the existence of a Klebsiella -adaptation module, in which FspA, Kil2 and Phg1A play different roles in sensing and killing. Dictyostelium sensing of bacterial capsule Our results imply that folate sensing is critical for sustained growth of Dictyostelium in the presence of a laboratory, non-capsulated strain of K. pneumoniae. However, fspA KO cells grew efficiently in the presence of LM21, a capsulated strain of K. pneumoniae. Analysis of LM21 mutants indicates that the presence of a capsule makes LM21 permissive for growth of fspA KO cells. The fact that fspA KO cells are unable to grow on, and also unable to respond to, capsule-deficient bacteria points to a dual recognition mechanism of K. pneumoniae by Dictyostelium : in the absence of capsule, Dictyostelium relies solely on folate sensing for detecting bacteria, and this recognition is mediated via FspA. On the other hand, recognition of capsule is achieved by an alternative FspA-independent pathway. In K. pneumoniae, the capsule is one of the key virulence determinants, and it is often related to reduced ability of mammalian host cells to phagocyte bacteria. In Dictyostelium amoebae, capsule-defective mutants of the capsulated Kp52145 were also killed more efficiently than the corresponding WT bacteria. When comparing the ability of Dictyostelium cells to grow on the capsulated LM21 strain or on its isogenic capsule mutants, WT Dictyostelium cells grew faster on the latter: it took 5–6 days for WT Dictyostelium to form a phagocytosis plaque on WT K. pneumoniae, but only 2–3 days on capsule-defective bacteria. This observation indicates that bacterial capsule plays a dual role in the interaction between K. pneumoniae and Dictyostelium : on the one hand it increases resistance of bacteria to intracellular phagocytosis and killing; on the other hand Dictyostelium has evolved a recognition system that allows it to sense the capsule and to modulate its response when facing these bacteria. Further genetic screens will be necessary to identify FspA-independent mechanisms allowing sensing of K. pneumoniae capsule or of Gram-positive bacteria. Altogether, these results indicate that amoeba cells use a variety of mechanisms to sense different bacterial components and to grow in the presence of bacteria. This is in accordance with the ecological niche that amoebae occupy: given the diversity of available food in the soil, cells should be able to recognize different bacterial components and to respond accordingly. Although previous studies, focused on transcriptional changes, already highlighted how the metabolism of amoebae adapts to different food sources, this study goes one step further with the identification of the molecular pathways involved on bacterial recognition. Experimental procedures Screening for growth-deficient D ictyostelium mutants Mutants unable to grow on a laboratory strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae bacteria were selected by restriction enzyme-mediated integration mutagenesis as described previously. Mutants in which the plasmid insertion was in a coding region were selected, re-transfected with the recovered knockout plasmid and analysed again for defective growth. One mutant proved to be defective after this second screening round and was selected for further characterization. Cell culture, plasmids and bacterial strains All Dictyostelium strains used in this study were derived from the subclone DH1–10 of the DH1 strain, referred to as wild-type for simplicity. Cells were grown at 21°C in HL5 medium and subcultured twice a week to maintain a maximal density of 10 6 cells ml −1. A knockout vector was obtained during the mutagenesis, consisting of the REMI vector flanked by genomic regions comprising fspA gene. The ClaI-digested plasmid was introduced into WT cells by electroporation, transfected cells were selected in the presence of 10 μg ml −1 blasticidin, and individual clones were screened by PCR. Three independent KO clones were generated and analysed in this study, and presented identical phenotypes. An expression vector carrying a tagged version of the fspA gene was constructed by introducing a C-terminal Flag epitope into the FspA cDNA coding sequence and transfected in WT and fspA KO cells by electroporation; transfected cells were selected in the presence of 10 μg ml −1 G418. The full list of bacterial strains used in this study is presented in Table S2. In all experiments, bacteria were grown in SM medium supplemented with 1% glucose. For the study of bacteria morphology by electron microscopy, bacteria were fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde and post-fixed in 2% osmium tetroxide, dehydrated and embedded in Epon resin and processed for conventional electron microscopy as previously described. For capsule quantification, capsular polysaccharides were extracted from an overnight bacterial culture growing in DW medium and quantified by measuring uronic acid concentration. To produce folate-depleted K. pneumoniae, cells growing in exponential phase were washed twice in phosphate buffer and incubated for 2 h with 250 μg ml −1 sulfathiazole. Growth of D ictyostelium on bacteria and intracellular killing The procedure to test growth of Dictyostelium cells on a bacterial lawn has been described previously. Briefly, 10 3 Dictyostelium cells were deposited on a bacterial lawn and allowed to grow until the WT cells form a phagocytic plaque. The number of days for such depends on the bacteria tested: Bs, Ml, Sa, As, PT531, DH5α, EcBr, Kp, LM21, LM21 Δ wza, LM21 Δ wzx, and LM21 Δ wecA. Killing of bacteria was also assessed as described previously. Briefly, 2 × 10 6 Dictyostelium cells were mixed with 2 × 10 4 Kp bacteria, and incubated at 21°C for up to 5 h. After 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 h of incubation, a 10 μl aliquot of the suspension was collected and diluted in 100 μl of 0.1% Triton X-100, plated in LB agar and the number of colonies counted to assess the number of live bacteria remaining. Chemokinetic assay For chemokinetic measurements, 5 × 10 5 Dictyostelium cells were allowed to attach on glass bottom 35 mm fluorodishes for 20 min in phosphate buffer with or without addition of folate or methotrexate, purified capsule or bacteria. Cells were then imaged for 30 min in a wide-field inverted Zeiss Axiovert 100 M, with a Plan-Neofluar 10× objective. The time series images were acquired with a Hamamatsu CCD cooled camera and assembled into a movie using Metamorph. Particle tracking application for Metamorph was used to track the individual trajectories and total distance of at least 15 cells per experiment. Endocytic pathway assessment The internalization of phagocytic particles was measured as follows: 10 5 cells were incubated at 21°C in HL5 medium containing 1 μl ml −1 of 1 μm diameter FITC-fluorescent latex beads or 10 7 fluorescent Kp, harvested after 30 min, washed with ice-cold HL5 containing 0.1% sodium azide, and analysed by flow cytometry. Endosomal pH was measured by flow cytometry as described previously. The activity of lysosomal enzymes was measured using a colorimetric assay and the kinetics of phagosomal proteolytic activity using the un-quenching of DQ Green BSA-tagged beads. Fluorescence microscopy To perform immunofluorescence, 10 6 cells were incubated on a glass coverslip for 3 h at 21°C, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.07% Triton X-100 and labelled as already described. Cells were visualized with an LSM700 confocal microscope. Mouse monoclonal antibodies against the endosomal marker p80 and the plasma membrane protein H36 and a rabbit antiserum against the contractile vacuole marker Rh were described previously. Endoplasmic reticulum marker PDI was detected using 221-64-1, a mouse monoclonal antibody. Mouse monoclonal anti-Flag antibody was from Sigma-Aldrich, and fluorescent secondary goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit IgG from Molecular Probes. Surface biotinylation To detect biotinylated FspA-Flag at the cell surface, 3 × 10 7 cells were washed twice in ice-cold phosphate buffer containing 120 mM sorbitol, resuspended and incubated for 10 min in ice-cold phosphate buffer with 120 mM sorbitol containing 0.5 mg ml −1 sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin, then washed once in phosphate buffer containing 100 mM glycine and 4 times in phosphate buffer containing 120 mM sorbitol. Cells were lysed 15 min in lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors, and the supernatant was incubated overnight with Neutravidin Ultralink beads. Beads were incubated 15 min in 6 M urea, washed 3 times in lysis buffer, heated at 60°C, and the eluate resuspended in 2× sample buffer. Biotinylated proteins were separated on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, detected with a primary mouse anti-Flag antibody and a secondary HRP-coupled goat anti-mouse IgG and revealed using a chemiluminescence imager. As a positive control, a cell surface protein was analysed. Cytoplasmic actin and ER-resident PDI were used as negative controls. RT-PCR 5 × 10 6 Dictyostelium cells were incubated for 1 h in phosphate buffer with or without addition of 2 mM folate. Cells were then harvested and RNAs purified with a Qiagen RNeasy kit. cDNA was synthesized from 1 μg of total RNA using random hexamers and Superscript II reverse transcriptase. Amplicons were designed using the program PrimerQuest with parameters adjusted for GC content and maximum T M difference. Oligonucleotide sequences were aligned against the Dictyostelium coding sequence database by blast to ensure that they were specific for the gene tested. Oligonucleotides were obtained from Invitrogen, and Table S1 shows a list of all genes analysed. PCR reactions contained SYBR Green Master Mix, diluted cDNA and 500 nM of forward and reverse primers, and were analysed in a StepOnePlus cycler with the following parameters: 95°C for 20 s, 40 cycles of 95°C/3 s and 60°C/30 s. Raw C T values were imported into Excel, and fold changes were calculated as, where ΔC T = C T − C T and Δ = ΔC T − ΔC T. Sequence and phylogenetic analysis Sequence similarity analyses were performed using BlastP program against the protein databases deposited at NCBI, AmiGO and DictyBase servers. Signal peptide and transmembrane domains were detected using, respectively, SignalP and TMHMM. Protein domains and motifs were scanned using InterPro and PROSITE, and prediction of primary sequences as GPCR proteins done via GPCR-pred, PCA-GPCR and GPCR-CA webservers. For phylogenetic analyses, protein sequences were aligned with CLUSTALX 2.0 program. Maximum likelihood trees were computed by using MEGA 5.0, with the WAG+F model, and parameters for invariable sites and gamma-distributed rate heterogeneity. One hundred bootstrap replicates were executed and bootstrap values drawn up on the consensus ML-tree. Statistical analysis Unless otherwise specified, for quantified data, the values represent the arithmetical mean and s.e.m. of at least three independent experiments. Statistical comparisons were done with Student's t -tests. 