 Mutations in the tumor suppressor gene PTEN are associated with a significant proportion of human cancers. Because the human genome also contains several homologs of PTEN, we considered the hypothesis that if a homolog, functionally redundant with PTEN, can be overexpressed, it may rescue the defects of a PTEN mutant. We have performed an initial test of this hypothesis in the model system Dictyostelium discoideum, which contains an ortholog of human PTEN, ptenA. Deletion of ptenA results in defects in motility, chemotaxis, aggregation and multicellular morphogenesis. D. discoideum also contains lpten, a newly discovered homolog of ptenA. Overexpressing lpten completely rescues all developmental and behavioral defects of the D. discoideum mutant ptenA −. This hypothesis must now be tested in human cells. Introduction PTEN is one of the most commonly mutated tumor suppressor genes in the progression of human cancers –. It has been demonstrated to play a prominent role in several cellular behaviors, including basic cell motility, chemotaxis and invasion –. PTEN functions as a phosphatase that regulates the signal transduction molecule phosphatidylinositol-3, 4, 5-triphosphate. There are three homologs of the PTEN gene in the human genome –. In addition, Poliseno et al., found that a PTEN pseudogene, PTENP1, regulates the level of PTEN protein and acts as a growth suppressor. The presence of PTEN homologs in the human genome, therefore, raises the possibility that one of them may be able to substitute functionally for a mutated PTEN under inducing conditions, thus suppressing tumorigenesis, a possibility heretofore not tested. The amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, an exceptional model for studying the regulation of human cell motility and chemotaxis –, contains the gene ptenA, an ortholog of the human PTEN gene. Deletion of ptenA in D.discoideum causes major defects in lateral pseudopod suppression, motility, chemotaxis and natural aggregation –. As is the case for human PTEN, PtenA in D.discoideum dephosphorylates phospahtidylinositol -trisphosphate to form phophatidylinositol -bisphosphate, and mediates PIP 3 oscillations –, which correlate with actin polymerization and pseudopod extension, –. PtenA was originally thought to be the sole phosphatase for the dephosphorylation of PIP 3 to PIP 2 in D. discoideum. However, after global stimulation of ptenA − cells with the chemoattractant cAMP, the concentration of PIP 3 increases, but then declines, indicating that PIP 3 is degraded to PIP 2 in the absence of PtenA, presumably by another phosphatase. Moreover, Hoeller and Kay demonstrated that when suspensions of ptenA − cells were pulsed with cAMP to induce chemotactic responsiveness, they were able to undergo efficient chemotaxis. However, unlike earlier studies in which the concentration of the cAMP gradient, generated in vitro was in the range of that estimated for the gradient in the front of a natural cAMP wave, Hoeller and Kay employed a cAMP gradient generated in a concentration range 10 times higher than that employed in the prior studies of ptenA − chemotaxis, and, therefore, 10 times higher than that estimated for the natural cAMP wave that induces chemotaxis in natural populations. The studies of PIP 3 degradation in ptenA − cells after global cAMP stimulation and chemotaxis of ptenA − cells in high cAMP concentration gradients, suggested to us that there might be an alternative PIP 3 phosphatase that could substitute for ptenA. We therefore searched the D.discoideum database and found a second ortholog of human PTEN and homolog of ptenA,, which we named lpten because it contained unique LIM domains. Here we show that cells of the lpten deletion mutant, lpten −, exhibit defects in behavior similar to those in ptenA − cells, but the defects are far weaker. To test for redundant function, we overexpressed lpten in a ptenA − background. Overexpression resulted in the complete normalization of the defective behaviors of ptenA − cells. The ptenA − defects that were normalized included the following: abnormal aggregation, the absence of multicellular morphogenesis, the loss of lateral pseudopod suppression, increased turning, decreased cellular velocity, aberrant chemotaxis in a cAMP gradient generated in the standard concentration range and aberrant natural aggregation. We further show that pulsing ptenA − cells with cAMP, which induces chemotactic competency in a high cAMP concentration gradient, is accompanied by up-regulation of lpten expression. We therefore conclude that lpten plays a similar, but less prominent in pseudopod suppression, motility and chemotaxis role than its homolog ptenA, but when overexpressed in the ptenA − mutant, rescues all of the ptenA − defects. This raises the question of whether any of the homologs of human PTEN might also be induced to function redundantly in cancer cells carrying mutations in PTEN. Material and Methods Strain maintenance, growth and development The ptenA − strain DBS0252655 and the parental wild type strain Ax2 were provided by the Dictyostelium stock center. Methods for growing cells, initiating development and obtaining aggregation-competent amoebae have been described previously in detail, –. In brief, development was initiated by washing growth phase cells with buffer and distributing them on filterpads or on HAB04700 nitrocellulose filter pads saturated with buffered salts solution, as previously described,,. DNA, RNA purification, cloning and sequencing Isolation, purification, amplification and sequencing of all the genomic DNA, RNA and cDNA fragments from D. discoideum Ax2, mutant strains and plasmids was done as previously described. Plasmids and competent cells were obtained from Life Technologies,. For RNA, recombinant RNasin Ribonuclease was added to inhibit RNA degradation. RNA was additionally purified from residual genomic DNA by using RNAeasyPlus according to the manufacturer's instructions. The primers used in this study are listed in a Table S1. Transformants were generated as described and selected for using either 10 µg/ml Blasticidin S and/or 20–70 µg/ml G418. For clonal growth selection of the ptenA − / lpten oe and lpten − / lpten oe strains, cells were sorted by FACS as described. Generation of a Dictyostelium discoideum knock out strain A plasmid was generated that contained a bsr resistance cassette containing the gene coding for blasticidin deaminase flanked by lpten genomic fragments, as described by Torija et al and diagrammed in Figure 1. In brief, a genomic fragment containing the lpten open reading frame and upstream and downstream regions was cloned and incubated in the presence of a PvuII-digested EZTN-plasmid, which contained a transposon bearing the Blasticidin S resistance marker. Transposase was used to insert the transposon carrying the bsr gene into the lpten -containing plasmid. Transformed bacteria were selected for by tetracyclin and kanamycin. Bacterial colonies bearing the plasmid that had a transposon within the genomic fragment were identified using primer M13, T7 and EZTN-R. For D. discoideum Ax2, transformation, a fragment of the plasmid carrying the insert containing the bsr -resistance cassette close to the 5′ end of the lpten coding region was amplified as described by Torija et al., except for the use of Expand Long Template PCR Polymerase. Selection was done with increasing Blasticidin S concentrations. Surviving cells were clonally plated on nutrient plates in the presence of 30 µg/ml Blastidicin S and Klebsiella aerogenes. Colonies were harvested using MasterAmp Buccal Swab DNA extraction solution and subjected to D. d iscoideum colony PCR,. Figure 1 Lpten is a homolog of ptenA and an ortholog of human PTEN. Generation of lpten overexpression constructs To obtain an RFP-Lpten fusion, we amplified and cloned the coding region of lpten into the extrachromosomal plasmid pDM354. Cloning and recombination of the lpten cDNA were performed as described. Transformed bacterial clones were identified by colony PCR. RNA expression analyses To study expression levels, RT-PCR was performed using the LongRange 2Step RT-PCR Kit. 2 µg of total RNA, pretreated at 65°C for 5 min, underwent the reverse transcription reaction in a total volume of 20 µl using OligodT primer supplied by the manufacturer. The resulting cDNA was amplified using the Long Range Expand Polymerase Kit and primer P1 and P2. RNA expression levels were quantified under subsaturation conditions as described, using the densitometry function of the 2D-DIAS software program. Analyses of basic cell behavior and chemotaxis For analyses of basic motility in the absence of chemoattractant and during chemotaxis, cells were harvested from developmental filters at the onset of aggregation, when velocity and chemotactic responsiveness were maximal. For basic behavior in buffer, cells were analyzed on the glass wall of a Sykes-Moore chamber perfused with the buffer BSS according to methods previously described, –. The methods for measuring chemotaxis in a Zigmond chamber have also been described in detail elsewhere –. For a “low cAMP concentration” gradient, the source well contained 1 µM cAMP. For a “high cAMP concentration” gradient, the source well contained 10 µM cAMP. 2D- and 3D-DIAS analyses of cell behavior Cell images were digitally acquired using iStopMotion software and converted to QuickTime format for edge detection, perimeter reconstruction and motion analysis of cell behavior with 2D-DIAS software, as previously described,. Descriptions of motility and chemotaxis parameters are presented in table S2,,. For 3D reconstruction, cells were optically sectioned and analyzed as previously described,,, –, except that the resulting QuickTime movies of optical sections were exported into jpeg files and converted into JDIAS movies using an up-graded version of 3D-DIAS. The in-focus perimeters were automatically outlined in each optical section using a pixel complexity algorithm,. Pseudopods were manually traced. Analyses of cell behavior in a natural wave Natural waves were relayed in populations of cells aggregating on a plastic surface in submerged cultures in 35 mm Petri dishes. Cell behavior was recorded and motion analyzed as previously described,,,. Cell behavior in this case was analyzed using JDIAS 4.1. cAMP-pulsing of cells in suspension Cells were pulsed as described by Hoeller and Kay. In brief, 2×10 7 cells from a growth culture were washed free of nutrients, shaken in a suspension culture for 1h in buffered salts solution, and subsequently pulsed with 80 nM cAMP at 6 min intervals for 6 h, until aggregate formation was visually observed. Results Lpten is a homolog of ptenA PtenA of D. discoideum, contains two functionally important and conserved domains, which are present in human PTEN, a CDC14-dual specificity phosphatase, found in members of the protein tyrosine phosphatase superfamily, and the lipid-C 2 -binding domain, Pten-C2. A database search of the genome sequence of D. discoideum revealed a second ortholog of the human PTEN gene, lpten,, which encodes a protein that also contains the conserved CDC14 dual specificity phosphatase domain and the lipid-C2 binding domain. In addition, this homolog contains five LIM domains that together contain a total of 38 putative zinc-binding sites. Because of the LIM domains, we have named this ortholog lpten. The amplified cDNA of lpten encodes a putative protein of 114 KDa. Expression of lpten The ptenA expression was previously shown to be low during D. discoideum growth and to increase during the preaggregative period of development,. A reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was employed to assess lpten expression in parental Ax2 cells during growth and at the end of the preaggregative period preceding chemotaxis, using a 300 bp probe that spanned exons 3 and 4, as diagrammed in Figure 1B. Lpten was expressed in log phase cells at a very low level and was dramatically up-regulated, approximately ten fold or more in developing cultures at the onset of aggregation. Disruption of lpten and mutant rescue To disrupt lpten, Ax2 cells were transformed with an integrative construct, as diagrammed in Figure 1C. Integration was confirmed by PCR, using primers P5 and P6 to generate fragment F2, as diagrammed in Figure 1C. To further confirm integration, a portion of the disrupted lpten gene was amplified with primers P7 and P6, to generate fragment F3. Sequencing of the product F3 confirmed integration. In contrast to ptenA − cells, which exhibited a major increase in generation time from 9 to 14 hours,, lpten − cells exhibited a generation time of approximately 8 hours, similar to that of the parental strain Ax2 cells. And in contrast to ptenA − cells, which do not complete aggregation, lpten − cells underwent aggregation and multicellular morphogenesis, forming fruiting bodies. The lpten − mutant was rescued by transformation with a plasmid containing lpten fused to rfp under the regulation of the actin 15 promoter. The complemented mutant strain, lpten − /lpten oe, grew with the same generation time as parental Ax2 cells, aggregated and formed fruiting bodies. Therefore, deleting lpten resulted in no measurable growth or obvious developmental defect. lpten − cells exhibit a minor defect in basic cell motility Using computer-assisted 2D and 3D reconstruction and motion analysis systems, we previously demonstrated that aggregation-competent ptenA − cells perfused with a K + -based buffer, lacking chemoattractant exhibited a 50% decrease in velocity, a major increase in turning and a four-fold increase in lateral pseudopod formation. Using the same computer-assisted methods, we found that lpten − cells exhibited basic behavioral defects similar to those of ptenA − cells, in instantaneous velocity, percent cells with velocities ≥9 µm per minute and turning. However, the defects although significant, were less pronounced. The defects were evident in comparisons of computer-reconstructed cell perimeter tracks, when compared to those of parental Ax2 cells or complemented lpten − /lpten oe cells. 3D reconstructions performed with 3D-DIAS software,, revealed that lpten − cells, like ptenA − cells, formed lateral pseudopods, which initiate turns, at frequencies higher than Ax2 and lpten − /lpten oe. 2D measurements of the frequency of lateral pseudopods formed by reconstructed control cells, lpten − cells and lpten − /lpten oe cells, supported this conclusion. The frequency of the mutant was over twice that of Ax2 and lpten − /lpten oe cells. Figure 2 lpten − cells translocating in buffer in the absence of chemoattractant exhibit defects in velocity, turning and the suppression of lateral pseudopod formation. lpten − cells undergo normal cAMP chemotaxis, but still are defective in suppressing lateral pseudopod formation We previously demonstrated that ptenA − cells undergoing positive chemotaxis in a spatial gradient of cAMP generated in the concentration range estimated for the front of a natural wave, exhibited approximately a 50% decrease in velocity and a similar decrease in directional persistence. Moreover, the efficiency of chemotaxis, measured by the chemotactic index, was reduced by more than 50%. Under identical conditions, lpten − cells moved with an average velocity, average directional persistence, average chemotactic index and percent cells with a positive CI, statistically indistinguishable, using the student T-test, from that of parental Ax2 cells and complemented lpten − /lpten oe cells. Computer-reconstructed perimeter plots revealed similar directionality up a low cAMP concentration gradient, but lpten − cells were still defective in suppressing lateral pseudopod formation, as is evident when the perimeter tracks of mutant cells are compared to those of Ax2 and lpten − /lpten oe cells. This was demonstrated in the analysis of the frequency of lateral pseudopod formation. 3D reconstructions revealed that the majority of the excess lateral pseudopods in cAMP gradients were formed by lpten − cells off the substratum, as was evident in buffer in the absence of cAMP. Lateral pseudopods that contact the substratum force turns. Hence, the formation of excess lateral pseudopods off the substratum did not result in a significant increase in turning, which may explain why there was no significant decrease in the CI. Figure 3 lpten − cells undergo normal chemotaxis in the low cAMP concentration gradient generated in the estimated for that of the natural wave. Generating a ptenA − /lpten oe strain The similarities between the strong behavioral defects of the ptenA − mutant and the weaker defects of the lpten − mutant, suggested that the two homologs may play overlapping roles in basic cell motility and chemotaxis. We therefore tested whether overexpressing lpten in the ptenA − mutant would partially alleviate, or even rescue, the severe defects exhibited by ptenA − cells. The ptenA − mutant was transformed with an expression plasmid in which the cloned lpten coding region was placed under regulation of the strong actin15 promoter and fused in frame at its 3′ end with red fluorescent protein. Expression of the entire 3.7 Kb lpten − rfp mRNA was verified using RT-PCR with primers P8 and P9. Upon achieving chemotactic responsiveness, aggregation-competent cells of the transformed line ptenA − /lpten oe expressed approximately 10 times as much lpten mRNA as the untransformed ptenA − mutant. Overexpression of lpten rescued the developmental defects of the ptenA − mutant, resulting in normal aggregation and the formation of normal fruiting bodies. Figure 4 Overexpressing lpten − in the ptenA − mutant. Overexpression of lpten rescues the basic behavioral and chemotactic defects of ptenA − cells As previously demonstrated,, cells of the ptenA − mutant originally generated by Iijima and Devreotes, did not undergo morphogenesis on filter pads saturated with a K + -based buffer. Furthermore, when incubated on pads saturated with K + -based buffer to attain chemotactic competence and then assessed for basic motile behavior on the glass surface of a chamber perfused with K + -based buffer lacking cAMP, these cells crawled at less than half the average velocity of control cells and with less than half the directional persistence. These same characteristics were observed in the ptenA − mutant used here, which was generated by Hoeller and Kay. The abnormal behavior of ptenA − cells was obvious, when computer-reconstructed perimeter tracks of control and ptenA − cells translocating in buffer were compared. The ptenA − cells translocating in buffer also formed lateral pseudopods at frequencies close to twice that of control cells, as was the case for the lpten − strains. Overexpression of lpten in ptenA − /lpten oe cells rescued every motility defect in the basic behavior of cells migrating in buffer in the absence of chemoattractant, resulting in normal perimeter tracks and restored suppression of lateral pseudopod formation. Figure 5 Overexpression of lpten rescues the basic behavioral defects of ptenA − cells that are translocating in buffer, and both the behavioral and chemotactic defects in a cAMP gradient generated in the concentration range of the natural wave. And, as previously demonstrated, ptenA − cells exhibited the same motility defects in a low cAMP concentration gradient, as they did in buffer alone, as well as a dramatic decrease in chemotactic responsiveness,. Overexpression of lpten in ptenA − /lpten oe cells rescued every motility and chemotaxis defect, resulting in directed motility tracks up a gradient and restored suppression of lateral pseudopod formation. Overexpression of lpten rescues the ptenA − defect in natural aggregation Finally, as Wessels et al. demonstrated, ptenA − cells are defective in natural aggregation. In a natural aggregation territory, parental Ax2 cells moved in a highly directed and cyclic fashion towards aggregation centers, increasing velocity in the front of each relayed, outwardly moving, non-dissipating wave of cAMP. This resulted in centroid tracks that were directed at the source of chemotactic waves. Cells decreased velocity in the back of each wave, then reassessed directionality at the onset of the front of each wave, adjusting for deviations in direction during the translocation phase,. To assess aggregation centers in ptenA − cell populations, which do not complete normal aggregation, we retrospectively identified the point in each putative aggregation territory to which cells made net directional progress. Although the ptenA − cells on average did make net progress towards the interpreted aggregation centers and exhibited cyclic behavior, their centroid tracks were stunted and far less directional and cycling was more erratic. ptenA − cells tended to undergo far more directional changes than control cells, resulting from sharp turns away from the interpreted aggregation center. Overexpression of lpten in ptenA − /lpten oe cells restored normal behavior in a natural aggregation territory. Cells surged in the front of each wave and moved in a relatively directed fashion, with far fewer sharp turns, towards the aggregation center, in a manner similar to that of parental Ax2 cells. Figure 6 Overexpression of lpten rescues the behavioral defects exhibited by homogeneous populations of ptenA − cells undergoing chemotaxis in natural aggregation territories in submerged cultures on glass. Pulsing ptenA − cells up-regulates lpten and rescues chemotaxis in high, but not low, cAMP concentration gradients In performing this study, one apparent controversy had to be resolved. In three previous studies of ptenA − cell behavior,,, similar defects in velocity were described, but there was a lack of consensus on the capacity of mutant cells to assess a spatial gradient of cAMP generated in vitro. In all three studies, data were provided for cells that were induced to acquire chemotactic competence by a similar method of pulsing with cAMP,, rather than incubating them on pads saturated with buffer, as performed for the experiments reported here. All three studies employed buffers in the in vitro chemotaxis assays that contained concentrations of cations that facilitated cAMP chemotaxis,,,. However, the studies differed in the concentration range of the cAMP gradients used. Iijima and Devreotes analyzed responsiveness in a gradient of cAMP generated by releasing 1µM cAMP from a micropipette. They observed that ptenA − cells exhibited reduced velocity and a loss of chemotactic orientation. Wessels et al. analyzed chemotactic responsiveness in a gradient generated in a chamber,, in which the source well was filled with 1 µM cAMP. They observed a 40% reduction in velocity and a 60% reduction in the chemotactic index. The gradients in these two studies were estimated, using the methods of Postma and Van Haastert, to be approximately 0.5 and 0.4 nM per µm and in the concentration range of the gradient estimated for the front of a natural wave in an aggregation territory. In contrast, Hoeller and Kay analyzed responsiveness in a cAMP gradient generated by releasing 10 µM cAMP from a micropipette. The gradient generated was estimated to be approximately 5 nM per µm, steeper and in a concentration range 10 times higher than gradients tested by Iijima and Deveotes and Wessels et al.,. Hoeller and Kay observed no difference in chemotactic efficiency between Ax2 and ptenA − cells, but did report a defect in velocity. Table 1 Chemotactic behavior of ptenA − cells pulsed with cAMP to achieve chemotactic competence: a comparison of four different studies involving either “low cAMP concentrations” in the estimated range for natural cAMP waves or “high... These results suggested to us the possibility that pulsing ptenA − cells with cAMP might up-regulate expression of lpten to a level that provides them with the capacity to assess the gradient in the high cAMP concentration range, but not the gradient in the low cAMP concentration range. To explore this hypothesis, we analyzed the behavior of cAMP-pulsed parental cells and cells of the ptenA − strain of Hoeller and Kay, in gradients generated in a gradient chamber,,. Behavior was analyzed in low cAMP concentration gradient, in which the source well contained 1 µM cAMP and in a high cAMP concentration gradient, in which the source well contained 10 µM cAMP. Figure 7 ptenA − cells pulsed in suspension with cAMP to induce chemotactic competence are defective in assessing the direction of a low cAMP concentration gradient in the range of a natural wave, but they can efficiently assess the direction of a cAMP... In the low cAMP concentration gradient, cAMP-pulsed parental Ax2 cells underwent chemotaxis with high velocities and high chemotactic indices. And as previously reported, and shown here in Figure 5, both the instantaneous velocity and the CI of ptenA − cells were dramatically reduced. In a high concentration gradient, cAMP-pulsed parental Ax2 cells underwent chemotaxis, but velocity was reduced by 25% and chemotactic efficiency by 35%, reductions similar to those previously reported by us using the same conditions thirty years ago. However, in a high cAMP concentration gradient, ptenA − cells moved with a chemotactic index similar to that of Ax2 cell in a low concentration gradient, with slightly reduced velocity, as previously reported by Hoeller and Kay. To test whether cAMP pulsing caused an increase in lpten expression in ptenA − cells, the level of the lpten transcript was compared between Ax2 and ptenA − cells by RT-PCR prior to pulsing, after six hours of pulsing with cAMP and after 6 hours of pulsing with buffer alone. Both in Ax2 cells and ptenA − cells, cAMP pulsing up-regulated lpten expression at least 5 fold over that of the initial vegetative cell preparation. Pulsing ptenA − cells with buffer alone also up-regulated lpten expression, but to a lesser degree than pulsing with cAMP. These results demonstrate that pulsing with cAMP up-regulates lpten expression, and, by correlation, may explain why cAMP-pulsed ptenA − cells can undergo chemotaxis in a high cAMP concentration gradient. The increased levels of expression of lpten − in cAMP-pulsed Ax2 and ptenA − cells were still several fold lower than the levels attained in strain ptenA − /lpten oe cells developed on pads. This may explain why pulsing does not rescue the chemotaxis defect in a low cAMP concentration gradient. Discussion Mutations in the human PTEN gene are the most common of the tumor suppressor genes associated with human cancer,,,. Interestingly there are two additional PTEN homologs, TPTE and TPIP located on different chromosomes, and a secreted PTEN,, –, as well as a pseudogene of PTEN, PTENP1. However, there have been, to our knowledge, no reported studies to test whether any of the human PTEN homologs, when overexpressed, can rescue the behavioral defects caused by a human mutant PTEN cell, a question relevant to cancers that involve this mutation. Here, we report for the first time that D. discoideum contains not only the human PTEN ortholog ptenA, as previously demonstrated,, but also a second ortholog, lpten. Both PtenA and Lpten contain the two conserved domains of human PTEN, the dual-specificity phosphatase domain and PTEN-C2, the lipid-C2-binding domain. In addition, Lpten contains five LIM domains, which presumably play a role in protein-protein interactions,. Both ptenA and lpten are up-regulated in the period of the D.discoideum developmental program following the onset of starvation and preceding aggregation. Deletion of ptenA causes major defects in chemotaxis and development,,. The ptenA − cells cannot undergo natural chemotaxis, aggregation or morphogenesis. However, deletion of lpten does not block aggregation or development, and does not decrease the efficiency of chemotaxis in a gradient of cAMP generated in vitro in the concentration range of the cAMP gradient in the front of the naturally relayed cAMP wave. Deletion of lpten does, however, affect the suppression of lateral pseudopod formation, which is also the case for the ptenA − mutant. The mutant phenotype of lpten −, therefore, exhibits a weak phenocopy of ptenA −. Here we have considered the possibility that there may exist at least parallel functions, or partial redundancy of Pten and Lpten. This has led us to test whether overexpressing lpten in a ptenA − mutant might rescue the defects of the ptenA − mutant. We therefore placed the coding region of lpten under the control of the strong actin 15 promoter in a plasmid and introduced it into the ptenA − mutant to create ptenA − /lpten oe. Aggregation-competent cells of ptenA − /lpten oe expressed the lpten transcript at over 10 times the level observed in wild type or ptenA − cells, and close to two orders of magnitude higher than in vegetative cells. We found that overexpression rescued every developmental, cell motility and chemotaxis defect exhibited by mutant ptenA − cells. The rescued ptenA − defects included the following: 1) a prolonged preaggregative period; 2) abnormal or no aggregation in submerged cultures or on a filter pad substrate; 3) lack of a multicellular developmental program, including lack of fruiting body formation; 4) decreased velocity during basic motile behavior in buffer alone, or during chemotaxis in a shallow gradient of cAMP generated in the concentration range estimated for the front of a natural wave 5) an increased frequency of lateral pseudopod formation and turning; 6) a dramatic decrease in chemotactic efficiency in a low cAMP concentration gradient, in the estimated range for the front of the natural wave; and 7) a dramatic decrease in orientation in the front of relayed cAMP waves in a natural aggregation territory. The complete rescue of the ptenA − mutant phenotype by overexpression of the homolog lpten, raises the possibility that overexpressing a human PTEN homolog might suppress the behavioral defects of a mutant PTEN thus suppressing tumorigenesis. Supporting Information Table S1 Primers used in this study. Click here for additional data file. Table S2 2D-DIAS parameters. Click here for additional data file. 