 Actomyosin is an important molecular motor, and the binding of actin and myosin is an essential research target in biophysics. Nevertheless, the physical factors driving or opposing the binding are still unclear. Here, we investigate the role of water in actin-myosin binding using the most reliable statistical-mechanical method currently available for assessing biomolecules immersed in water. This method is characterized as follows: water is treated not as a dielectric continuum but as an ensemble of molecules; the polyatomic structures of proteins are taken into consideration; and the binding free energy is decomposed into physically insightful entropic and energetic components by accounting for the hydration effect to its full extent. We find that the actin-myosin binding brings large gains of electrostatic and Lennard-Jones attractive interactions. However, these gains are accompanied by even larger losses of actin-water and myosin-water electrostatic and LJ attractive interactions. Although roughly half of the energy increase due to the losses is cancelled out by the energy decrease arising from structural reorganization of the water released upon binding, the remaining energy increase is still larger than the energy decrease brought by the gains mentioned above. Hence, the net change in system energy is positive, which opposes binding. Importantly, the binding is driven by a large gain of configurational entropy of water, which surpasses the positive change in system energy and the conformational entropy loss occurring for actin and myosin. The principal physical origin of the large water-entropy gain is as follows: the actin-myosin interface is closely packed with the achievement of high shape complementarity on the atomic level, leading to a large increase in the total volume available to the translational displacement of water molecules in the system and a resultant reduction of water crowding. Introduction Actomyosin, consisting of actin and myosin, is one of the most extensively studied molecular motors. Actomyosin drives muscle contraction by the actin-myosin interaction, which is coupled with the ATP hydrolysis cycle. The mechanism of actin-myosin binding and the effects of ATP and ADP on it need to be elucidated to gain understanding of the muscle contraction. It has been revealed by experiments involving actin and a myosin head that the enthalpic and entropic components of the binding free energy are both positive, irrespective of the presence of a nucleotide, which implies that the binding is entropically driven. By contrast, several results from molecular dynamics simulations have suggested that the binding is energetically driven. Lorenz and Holmes have obtained an atomic structural model of rigor -binding actomyosin using an MD simulation based on an electron microscopy map of the actomyosin complex and the crystal structures of actin and myosin monomers. Their results suggest that electrostatic attractive interaction and hydrogen bonds between actin and myosin stabilize the complex. Okazaki et al. performed in silico titration by employing a coarse-grained actomyosin model with the Debye-Hückel solvent model and claimed that the binding is driven by actin-myosin electrostatic attractive interaction. Várkuti et al. calculated the binding free energy using the molecular mechanics Poisson-Boltzmann surface area method. Their results also indicate that salt bridges and hydrogen bonds between actin and myosin play important roles in the binding. In those studies, the proteins are modeled as coarse-grained beads, or water is treated as a dielectric continuum. On the other hand, there are two example studies based on all-atom MD simulations modeling the proteins on the atomic level. Though they are performed with explicit water, the emphasis in the analysis is placed on direct interactions between myosin and actin, such as hydrogen bonds, salt bridges, and electrostatic and van der Waals attractive interactions. Taken together, none of the simulation results is in accord with the experimental observations mentioned above, and it is still controversial whether the actin-myosin binding is driven by the energetic component or the entropic one. Further, the physical origins of these components have not yet been clarified. The problem shared by the earlier studies described above is that hydration, in particular, the water-entropy effect, is not suitably taken into account or analyzed. In our opinion, calculating the changes in thermodynamic quantities upon binding, as well as their physically insightful components, is vitally important. A statistical-mechanical analysis is far more suited than the MD simulation to this type of calculation. In our earlier studies, we showed that water entropy plays a pivotal role in the molecular recognition. Peptide-RNA aptamer binding or peptide-protein binding accompanies a large gain of water entropy. The gain originates primarily from an increase in the number of accessible configurations of water, which is brought about by an increase in the total volume available to the translational displacement of water molecules. All of the water molecules in the system contribute to the entropic gain. This water-entropy effect is reasonably taken into account only by a molecular model for water. It is presumable that the large water-entropy gain occurs in actin-myosin binding as well. In this study, we investigate actin-myosin binding in the rigor state using our statistical thermodynamic method. In the rigor state treated, no nucleotide is bound to myosin. Binding of an actin trimer and myosin S1 is considered, and the trimer, S1, and their complex are regarded as actin, myosin, and actomyosin, respectively. This simplified treatment still captures the essential physics, because the actin-myosin interface in the real complex is successfully mimicked. Molecular models are adopted for water, and the protein structures are taken into account on the atomic level. We use the structure of actomyosin available as the input but perform an MD simulation with explicit water to sample its fluctuating structures in water. Two MD simulations with explicit water are also independently performed for isolated actin and isolated myosin, respectively, to take into account the fluctuation of actin and myosin structures in water. Sufficiently many snapshot structures of actomyosin, actin, and myosin are thus generated. We examine two processes. In process 1, only the snapshot structures of actomyosin are employed, and the structures of actin and myosin are obtained simply by separating them in the complex, with no structural changes. In process 2, the snapshot structures of not only actomyosin but also isolated actin and isolated myosin are employed to account for the structural changes of actin and myosin upon binding. We then calculate the binding free energy and decompose it into energetic and entropic components. The calculation is carried out for the two processes. The theoretical tools are molecular mechanics, the three-dimensional reference interaction site model theory, and the angle-dependent integral equation theory combined with our recently developed morphometric approach. The 3D-RISM theory and ADIET are statistical-mechanical theories for molecular liquids and hydration of solutes. The 3D-RISM theory has been applied to important problems in biophysics and biochemistry such as the hydration of peptides and proteins, receptor-ligand binding, association of protein molecules, and discrimination of the relative propensities of proteins to aggregate. However, it is known that the 3D-RISM theory underestimates the change in hydration entropy upon binding, whereas the hydration energy remains quantitatively reliable. We therefore use the 3D-RISM theory only for calculating the hydration energy. The hydration entropy is calculated by the ADIET combined with the MA. The combined theory has recently been developed by us so that the ADIET can be applied to a complex biomolecule with a drastic reduction in the computational load. The high reliability of the combined theory has been demonstrated in solving a variety of important problems related to protein folding and denaturation, protein-protein binding, and receptor-ligand binding where the water-entropy effect plays a pivotal role. The combined and 3D-RISM theories are best suited to calculations of the hydration entropy and energy, respectively. With a hybrid of the two theories, the changes in thermodynamic quantities upon binding can be decomposed into physically insightful components interaction, the electrostatic interaction, and the excluded-volume effect). The hybrid theory has been quite successful in analyzing the binding between an RNA aptamer and a partial peptide of a prion protein and in elucidating the mechanism of one-to-many molecular recognition by the extreme C-terminal peptide region of the tumor suppressor p53 protein, p53CTD. Our findings are as follows. The change in system energy upon actin-myosin binding is positive; the binding is driven by a large gain of configurational entropy of water, which predominates over the conformational entropy loss of actin and myosin; and these results hold true irrespective of the consideration of the structural changes of actin and myosin upon binding. The physical origins of the positive change in system energy and the large water-entropy gain are analyzed in detail. We then comment on actin-myosin binding in the weak state. Further, we discuss the universality of our results by considering the general protein-protein binding processes and the lock-key, induced-fit, and one-to-many molecular recognitions. In particular, it is emphasized that the water entropy always plays a pivotal role, and that our view on the “hydrophobic effect” is substantially different from the conventional one. Materials and Methods Modeling of actin, myosin, and actomyosin We consider the binding of actin and myosin of Dictyostelium discoideum, which forms actomyosin in the rigor state. As the initial structure in the MD simulation for actomyosin, we employ the model constructed by Várkuti et al.. The model consists of myosin S1 and an actin trimer. In myosin S1, the lever-arm portion and two light chains are removed. Each actin monomer contains one ADP. Hereafter, the actin trimer, myosin S1, and their complex are referred to as actin, myosin, and actomyosin, respectively. Figure 1 Structural image of the actomyosin complex. Myosin S1 and the actin trimer are drawn using a cartoon model. ADPs are drawn using the space-filled model. This image was prepared by the program PyMOL. To see this figure in color, go online.... The MD simulation of actomyosin is performed using the program Gromacs combined with the Amber99SB force field. For ADP, the force field determined by Meagher et al. is adopted. Actomyosin is solvated in a water box of SPC/E water and 0.15 mol/L NaCl. The water buffer size is 30 Å. A 90-ns equilibration is conducted with the NPT ensemble at 298.15 K. After the equilibration, a 10-ns production run is performed with the NPT ensemble at 298.15 K. From the trajectory, snapshot structures are stored every 100 ps and used in the calculation of thermodynamic quantities. More details of the MD simulation are described in Molecular Dynamics Simulation in the Supporting Material. Subsequently, two MD simulations are independently carried out for isolated actin and isolated myosin, respectively, to obtain the monomeric structures of actin and myosin. Their initial structures are prepared simply by separating the initial structure of actomyosin. The strategy of each MD simulation is the same as that for the simulation of actomyosin. Snapshot structures are stored every 100 ps in the 10-ns production run, yielding 100 structures for the calculation of thermodynamic quantities. Calculation of binding free energy and its physically insightful components In general, the hydration free energy is independent of the solute insertion condition, isochoric or isobaric, whereas the hydration energy and entropy are not. However, in the case of actin-myosin binding, we find that the hydration entropy and energy under the isochoric conditions are almost equal to the hydration entropy and enthalpy under the isobaric conditions. A more detailed description is given below in Comparison between Theoretical and Experimental Values of Binding Free Energy. The free-energy function, F, for a solute molecule immersed in water at infinite dilution is defined as F = E intra + μ, where E intra and μ are the intramolecular energy and the hydration free energy of the solute, respectively. E intra is calculated on the basis of the Amber99SB force field using the AMBER12 program. E intra is defined as E intra = E intra,B + E intra,LJ + E intra,ele. Here, E intra,B is the bonded energy, comprising the bond-stretching, angle-bending, and torsional terms; E intra,LJ is the LJ interaction energy; and E intra,ele is the electrostatic interaction energy. The HFE is decomposed into the hydration energy, E hyd, and entropy, S hyd : μ = E hyd − T S hyd, where T is the absolute temperature. E hyd represents the solute-water interaction energy generated upon solute insertion, as well as the energy change due to the structural reorganization of water, especially near the solute. S hyd is the change in water entropy of the system upon solute insertion. E hyd can be further decomposed as E hyd = E hyd,LJ + E hyd,ele, where E hyd,LJ and E hyd,ele are the LJ and electrostatic contributions to E hyd, respectively. Substituting Eqs. 2–4 into Eq. 1. yields F = E total − T S hyd, E total = E intra,B + +, where E total is the system energy comprising E intra,B and the LJ and electrostatic components denoted by and, respectively. The change in a thermodynamic quantity, X, upon actin-myosin binding is defined as X of actomyosin –. For example, the binding free energy is defined as Δ F ≡ F Actomyosin − F Actin − F Myosin. Here, the superscripts Actomyosin, Actin, and Myosin identify the values for actomyosin, actin, and myosin, respectively. We note that the conformational-entropy loss of actin and myosin upon binding is not incorporated in Δ F. The contribution from the conformational entropy is discussed below in Comparison between Theoretical and Experimental Values of Binding Free Energy. We employ the 3D-RISM theory with the Kovalenko-Hirata closure for calculating E hyd. The SPC/E model is employed for water with a correction in terms of the LJ potential parameters for the hydrogen sites. The HFE μ is calculated using thermodynamic integration. When the hypernetted-chain closure is coupled with the Ornstein-Zernike relation, thermodynamic integration can be performed simply by integration of the solute-water correlation functions. The hydration entropy, S hyd, is evaluated through the numerical differentiation of μ with respect to T under the isochoric condition : S hyd = − V. The hydration energy, E hyd, is then obtained as E hyd = μ + T S hyd. A more detailed description of the 3D-RISM theory is provided in Calculation of Hydration Energy in the Supporting Material. E hyd,LJ can be calculated using a hypothetical solute whose partial charges are all switched to zero. The electrostatic contribution is then obtained as E hyd,ele = E hyd − E hyd,LJ. We calculate the hydration entropy using the ADIET combined with the MA. A water molecule is modeled as a hard sphere with diameter d S = 0.28 nm in which a point dipole and a point quadrupole of tetrahedral symmetry are embedded. Though the ADIET with the multipolar model water has been applied to analyses on hydrophobic and hydrophilic hydrations with great success, the application of the ADIET to a large solute molecule with complex polyatomic structure is quite difficult due to the mathematical complexity. Fortunately, since the hydration entropy is fairly insensitive to the solute-water interaction potential, only the geometric characteristics of the solute become essential in calculating S hyd. As a consequence, the hydration entropy of a protein can be calculated by combining the ADIET with the MA. In the MA, S hyd of a solute is expressed as the linear combination of the four geometric measures: S hyd / k B = C 1 V + C 2 A + C 3 X + C 4 Y, where k B is the Boltzmann constant, V is the EV generated by the solute, A is the water-accessible surface area, and X and Y are the integrated mean and Gaussian curvatures of the water-accessible surface, respectively. The MA takes account of the solute shape through V, A, X, and Y. Once C 1 – C 4 are determined, S hyd of a protein with any structure is obtained directly from Eq. 6 only if its four geometric measures are calculated. C 1 – C 4 are determined by calculating S hyd for solutes possessing much simpler geometries: isolated hard-sphere solutes with various diameters. The ADIET with the multipolar model water is employed in the calculation. More detailed descriptions of the ADIET, MA, and their combination are given in Calculation of Hydration Entropy in the Supporting Material. Results and Discussion Thermodynamics of actin-myosin binding—Process 1: neglecting effects of structural changes of actin and myosin upon binding In process 1, the structures of actin and myosin remain unchanged in the binding. Thermodynamic quantities for actomyosin, actin, and myosin are averaged over the 100 structures obtained from the MD simulation for actomyosin. Table 1 presents the free-energy function and its energetic and entropic components. The difference represents the change in each quantity upon binding. The change in system energy is positive, so that it cannot be the driving force of binding. By contrast, the entropic component, which arises solely from the water-entropy gain, takes a very large negative value. The binding is driven by this water-entropy gain. The changes in energetic and entropic components can further be decomposed into physically insightful components, as displayed in Table 1. We discuss the physical meaning of each component in detail below. Table 1 Free-Energy Functions and Their Energetic and Entropic Components for Actomyosin in Process 1 The change in intramolecular bonded energy, E intra,B, is definitely zero, because no structural changes of actin and myosin occur in process 1. Binding leads to large gains of actin-myosin LJ and electrostatic attractive interactions. The contact of unlike-charged portions of actin and myosin is responsible for the gain of electrostatic attractive interaction. These gains bring an energy decrease. However, the binding is unavoidably accompanied by even larger losses of actin-water and myosin-water LJ and electrostatic attractive interactions, as illustrated in Fig. 2 a. Since oxygen and hydrogen atoms of water carry negative and positive partial charges, respectively, the binding is accompanied by the loss of electrostatic attractive interactions between portions of actin and myosin and water. Only roughly half of the energy increase due to the losses is cancelled out by the energy decrease arising from structure reorganization of the water released upon binding : Δ E hyd,LJ > 0 and Δ E hyd,ele > 0. The remaining energy increase is still larger than the energy decrease due to the gains mentioned above. Hence, the net change in system energy is positive, which opposes binding. Figure 2 Cartoons illustrating the dehydration and the overlap of the excluded spaces accompanying the binding of two solute molecules. A gain of solute-solute attractive interaction occurs upon binding. At the same time, the binding is unavoidably accompanied... As explained in Physical Origin of the Large Water-Entropy Gain, below, the actin-myosin interface needs to be packed as closely as possible to increase the water entropy. Closer packing leads to lower actin-myosin van der Waals interaction energy, which is in favor of the water-entropy effect. As a result, Δ E intra,LJ + Δ E hyd,LJ becomes negative. However, closer packing does not necessarily result in closer unlike-charged portions and more separated like-charged portions, causing imperfect electrostatic complementarity. Consequently, Δ E intra,ele + Δ E hyd,ele becomes positive. Due to the energetic dehydration effect, the change in system energy eventually becomes positive. Physical origin of the large water-entropy gain Solute insertion into water causes an increase in the restriction of translational and rotational freedoms of water molecules. The resultant water-entropy loss comprises the translational and rotational contributions. We have shown that the translational contribution is much larger than the rotational one. Hence, our discussion is focused on the translational contribution, although both of the contributions are incorporated in the hydration entropy we calculate. The large water-entropy gain upon binding can be interpreted as follows. As shown in Fig. 2 b, solute molecules generate spaces that the centers of water molecules cannot enter. Upon binding, the two EVs overlap, and the total EV decreases by this overlapped volume, leading to a corresponding increase in the total volume available to the translational displacement of water molecules in the system. The increase is followed by a larger number of accessible configurations of water. This effect is referred to as the entropic EV effect. Importantly, the presence of a water molecule also generates an EV for the other water molecules, and all of the water molecules are entropically correlated. This entropic correlation in the bulk is referred to as water crowding. The decrease in the total EV upon solute-solute binding reduces water crowding, and this reduction is the principal component of the entropic EV effect. Using Eq. 6, S hyd can be decomposed into two terms: S hyd,EV / k B = C 1 V, S hyd,WAS / k B = C 2 A + C 3 X + C 4 Y. S hyd,WAS is dependent only on the water-accessible surface and represents the contribution from the water molecules near the protein surface. S hyd,EV, depending only on the EV, which represents the contribution from the water molecules in the bulk, is relevant to the entropic EV effect. As shown in Table 1, the entropic component − T Δ S hyd,EV takes a large negative value, whereas − T Δ S hyd,WAS takes a large positive value. Therefore, the large water-entropy gain upon binding originates primarily from the entropic EV effect. Actin and myosin possess polyatomic structures. The large contribution of the entropic EV effect suggests that the actin-myosin interface is closely packed with the achievement of high shape complementarity on the atomic level. The physical interpretation for the positive value of − T Δ S hyd,WAS or negative Δ S hyd,WAS is as follows. First, we consider a protein immersed in aqueous solution and its hydration entropy, S hyd, comprising S hyd,EV and S hyd,WAS as expressed by Eqs. 7a and 7b, respectively. In the right side of Eq. 7b, the first term is much larger than the other two terms at normal temperature and pressure. When some water molecules contact the protein surface, the translational displacement of these water molecules is more constrained, that is, they undergo an entropic loss. This loss is approximately in proportion to the number of water molecules contacting the protein surface and the WAS area. However, the EVs generated by the protein and by these water molecules overlap. This overlap leads to an increase in the total volume available to the translational displacement of the other water molecules, that is, an entropic gain is conferred on the other water molecules. This gain is approximately in proportion to the net overlapped volume and therefore to the number of water molecules contacting the protein surface and the WASA. We have shown that effect 2 is larger than effect 1 and that S hyd,WAS is positive. In this sense, a larger WASA is more favorable. In general, however, a larger WASA leads to a larger EV enhancing water crowding through negative S hyd,EV, with the result that the protein structure stabilized at normal temperature and pressure is considerably compact with small EV. This argument is also applicable to protein-protein binding. Since the total WASA decreases upon binding, the number of water molecules contacting the protein surface becomes smaller, leading to an entropic gain arising from effect 1 and an entropic loss due to effect 2. However, the loss is larger than the gain and the net change in S hyd,WAS, Δ S hyd,WAS, becomes negative. The consideration of effect 2 is crucially important in elucidating the pressure denaturation of a protein: See Mechanism of Pressure Denaturation of a Protein in the Supporting Material. For more details, refer to our earlier publications, where the hydration entropy is decomposed into a protein-water pair and many-body correlation components and each component is further decomposed into two terms that are dependent on the EV and the WAS, respectively. These decompositions, which yield a total of four constituents, are quite useful in clarifying how the water-entropy or hydrophobic effect works. The many-body correlation is crucially important, and in our view, the reduction in water crowding upon a self-assembly process is the dominant factor in the hydrophobic effect. In this sense, the actin-myosin binding is driven by the hydrophobic effect. It is experimentally known that the structures formed by the hydrophobic effect are collapsed by the application of high pressure and that the power of forming the structures by the hydrophobic effect becomes considerably weaker at low temperatures. These pressure and temperature dependences of the hydrophobic effect can be elucidated by analyzing the pressure and temperature dependences of the four constituents of the hydration entropy mentioned above. The differences between the widely accepted concept of the hydrophobic effect and our concept are discussed under Dominant Physical Factor of the Hydrophobic Effect in the Supporting Material. Thermodynamics of actin-myosin binding—Process 2: accounting for effects of structural changes of actin and myosin upon binding In the real system, actin and myosin undergo structural changes upon binding as in process 2. Table 2 presents the free-energy function and its energetic and entropic components. As in Table 1, the binding is accompanied by an increase in system energy and a large gain of water entropy. The LJ component of the conformational-energy change and that of the hydration-energy change are compensating, and the electrostatic components of the two changes are also compensating. However, the system-energy increase, as well as the water-entropy gain, becomes larger, and the absolute value of the binding free energy becomes smaller. Table 2 Free-Energy Functions and Their Energetic and Entropic Components for Actomyosin, Actin, and Myosin in Process 2 The change in intramolecular bonded energy, E intra,B, is negative. Accounting for the effects of structural changes of actin and myosin upon the binding gives rise to increases in Δ E intra,LJ + Δ E hyd,LJ and Δ E intra,ele + Δ E hyd,ele. Consequently, the total change in system energy takes a larger positive value, which opposes the binding more strongly. This result arises primarily from the increase in | E hyd | for actin: When actin is isolated, it takes a structure that is more strongly hydrated than that in the complex. The values of − T S hyd of actin and myosin in their isolated states are larger and smaller, respectively, than those of actin and myosin taken from the complex and simply separated, with no structural changes. This implies that the structures of actin and myosin become more compact and less compact, respectively, upon binding. In fact, the EVs of actin and myosin in their isolated states divided by d S 3 are 10136.5 ± 2.2 and 6990 ± 1.4, respectively, and those of actin and myosin taken from the complex and simply separated, with no structural changes, are 10089.4 ± 1.9 and 7012.5 ± 1.5, respectively. Since the contribution from the structural change of actin is larger than that of myosin, the water-entropy gain becomes larger. Thus, the structures of actin and myosin exhibit significant changes, having nontrivial effects on the energetic and entropic components. However, the qualitative aspects of our conclusions are not altered by these structural changes. Comparison between theoretical and experimental values of binding free energy Although the theoretical calculations are made under the isochoric condition, the experimental measurements are performed under the isobaric condition. As described in Relation between Theoretically Calculated Entropy and Energy Changes and Experimentally Measured Entropy and Enthalpy Changes in the Supporting Material, however, the changes in thermodynamic quantities under the isobaric condition are almost the same as those under the isochoric condition in the case of actin-myosin binding. Of course, for the binding free energy, we can compare the theoretical value, Δ F, presented in Table 2, with the experimental value, Δ G exp, which ranges from −8 to −9 kcal/mol. We note that Δ G exp is not equivalent to Δ F, since the standard state for Δ G exp is 1 mol/L and the activity coefficient is set at unity, whereas the standard state for Δ F is the infinite dilution. Furthermore, it is required that Δ F be substantially lower than Δ G exp, because the conformational-entropy loss of actin and myosin upon binding is not incorporated into Δ F. Δ F = −64.12 kcal/mol is low enough to meet this requirement. It is very difficult to claim quantitative agreement between theoretical and experimental values of the binding free energy without using any fitting parameter. This is primarily because there is no reliable method of evaluating the conformational-entropy loss mentioned above with sufficient accuracy. It is definite, however, that the quantitative discrepancy between the two values comes from the neglect of the conformational-entropy loss. The loss, Δ S conf, could be estimated in the following manner. We consider the stable contact pairs of interface residues lying on the actin-myosin interface. Two residues are assumed to be in contact with each other if their interresidue distance is <4.5 Å. Here, the interresidue distance is the shortest interatomic distance between nonhydrogen atoms belonging to the two different residues. The contact of an intermolecular residue pair is considered to be stable when it is maintained in >95% of the snapshot structures along the MD trajectory for actomyosin. Fig. 3 shows the interface residues in stable contacts identified in the 10-ns production run. Upon binding, the interface residues in stable contacts lose the flexibility of their side chains, causing a significantly large conformational-entropy loss. On the other hand, the backbones exhibit essentially no flexibility even before the binding, because isolated actin and isolated myosin possess well-defined structures. We find that the number of the interface residues in stable contacts is 50. Setting the contribution from the side chains at 1.7 k B per residue, in accordance with the suggestion by Doig and Sternberg, we obtain − T Δ S conf ≅ 50 kcal/mol. When this conformational-entropy loss is taken into account, the agreement between Δ F − T Δ S conf ≅ −14.12 kcal/mol and Δ G exp is significantly improved. In any case, our theoretical results are not unreliable, even in a quantitative sense, and at least the qualitative aspects of our conclusions are not likely to be vitiated by the uncertainty of Δ S conf. Figure 3 Interface residues in stable contacts determined throughout the 10-ns MD trajectory of actomyosin. Interface residues in myosin and actin are colored in red and blue, respectively. The images are prepared by the program PyMOL. Side view of actomyosin... Comment on weak binding of actin and myosin There are two types of actin-myosin binding. One of them is rigor binding, in which no nucleotide or ADP is bound to myosin, and the other is weak binding, in which ATP or ADP + Pi is bound to myosin. Experimental data for the two types of binding have shown the following. The binding entropy and enthalpy between myosin S1 and actin are both positive, and therefore, the binding is entropically driven. In addition, the absolute values of binding entropy and enthalpy for the weak binding are considerably smaller than those for the rigor binding. Our result for the rigor binding is consistent with the experimental data. A possible reason for the smaller binding entropy in the weak binding is that when ATP is bound to myosin, tight packing of myosin and ATP occurs and the structure of myosin undergoes a large change. As a result, a cleft is formed near the actin-myosin interface. Due to the cleft, the decrease in the total EV for water molecules upon actin-myosin binding becomes smaller, leading to a smaller gain of water entropy. Still, the binding could be driven by the water-entropy gain. We intend to analyze the weak binding in a future study to examine whether we can reproduce the smaller absolute values of binding free energy, entropy, and energy and verify qualitatively the same essential roles of water. Discussion of general protein-protein binding The general protein-protein binding processes have been investigated rather extensively. The prevailing view is that protein-protein binding is largely driven by the hydrophobic effect, but that protein-protein electrostatic attractive interaction, hydrogen bonds, and ion pairs are also essential. We agree that the hydrophobic effect is dominant, but in our view it is implemented through the reduction of water crowding rather than through contact of nonpolar groups. As for protein-protein electrostatic attractive interaction, hydrogen bonds, and ion pairs, they are unavoidably accompanied by energetic dehydration: they cannot always be powerful enough to promote binding. However, we never claim that protein-protein electrostatic attractive interaction, hydrogen bonds, and ion pairs are unimportant. They are required to compensate for the dehydration occurring upon binding. When the protein-protein interface is more closely packed, the water entropy and the protein-protein van der Waals interaction energy become higher and lower, respectively. However, the protein-protein electrostatic interaction energy does not necessarily become lower. This is because the closer packing does not always lead to closer unlike-charged groups and more separated like-charged groups. Although electrostatic complementarity is required to compensate for the energy increase due to dehydration, it is often imperfect. The protein-protein interface must be characterized by sufficiently high shape complementarity on the atomic level as the first priority together with as much electrostatic complementarity as possible. In other words, the binding interface is chosen so that such complementarities can be achieved. If they are not achievable, binding does not occur. We believe that the protein-protein binding is always favorable in terms of the water entropy. However, the water-entropy gain is not necessarily larger than the sum of the factors opposing the binding such as the conformational-entropy loss for proteins and the possibly poor electrostatic complementarity. The above discussion can be extended to molecular recognition. There are several types of molecular recognition. It is obvious from Fig. 2 that the lock-key binding leads to a remarkable increase in the water entropy and that the molecular recognition is attributable to the lock-key shape complementarity on the atomic level, which provides the largest decrease in the total EV. In the induced-fit binding, the lock structure exhibits a slight structural change so as to acquire the shape complementarity. On the other hand, we have studied the binding between an RNA aptamer and a partial peptide of a prion protein and the one-to-many molecular recognition by the extreme C-terminal peptide region of the tumor suppressor p53 protein, p53CTD. In the former, the partial peptide exhibits a large structural change during binding. In the latter, four different targets are considered and p53CTD forms a target-dependent structure in the complex. Interestingly, the results from those studies conflict with the prevailing view and are quite similar to those obtained in this study. In the prevailing view, the driving force is also target dependent : binding is driven by the factors between the p53CTD-target pair, such as salt bridges, van der Waals attraction interaction, or contact of hydrophobic portions. We intend to deal with additional different binding processes to examine the universality of the binding mechanism. Conclusions We have investigated the binding of an actin trimer and myosin S1. The complex is in the rigor state. Changes in thermodynamic quantities upon binding are calculated using a hybrid of statistical-mechanical theories. We calculate the hydration energy by the 3D-RISM theory and the hydration entropy by the ADIET combined with the MA. This hybrid theory possesses the following merits. The binding free energy can be decomposed into physically insightful components, and thereby, the factors driving or opposing the binding can be identified. Since only advantageous aspects of each of the 3D-RISM, ADIET, and MA are utilized, the computational load is not heavy at all, even for very large biomolecules, and the results are quantitatively reliable. We began to use the hybrid just about two years ago, and it has not yet been employed by any other group. We hope that it will become a popular method for analyzing a variety of self-assembly processes. This study provides, to our knowledge, a significant first theoretical approach to actin-myosin binding, in which protein structures are considered on the atomic level and hydration is taken into account to its full extent with molecular models for water. Contrary to the previously reported view, which claims that binding is driven by the actin-myosin electrostatic attractive interaction, we find that water plays a pivotal role. We have found that actin-myosin binding is driven by a large gain of configurational entropy of water. The gain, which predominates over the conformational-entropy loss of actin and myosin, originates from an increase in the total volume available to the translational displacement of water molecules in the system. The actin-myosin interface is closely packed with the achievement of high shape complementarity on the atomic level, which is accompanied by a large reduction of water crowding. It is true that binding brings a large gain of actin-myosin electrostatic attractive interaction, which is consistent with previously reported MD simulation results. However, it is accompanied by an even larger loss of actin-water and myosin-water electrostatic attractive interactions. About half of the energy increase due to this loss is cancelled out by the energy decrease arising from structural reorganization of the water released upon binding, but the remaining energy increase is still larger than the energy decrease due to the gain mentioned above: The electrostatic component of system energy, which is positive, opposes binding. This is because electrostatic complementarity within the actin-myosin interface cannot always be assured by the close interface packing. The formation of salt bridges or hydrogen bonds between residues of actin and myosin is not perfect, though it is required to compensate for the energy increase due to dehydration. A similar discussion can be made for actin-myosin, actin-water, and myosin-water LJ attractive interactions, but the net change in the LJ component of the system energy is lower than that in the electrostatic component. This suggests that the actin-myosin LJ interaction energy can be lowered more readily by the close interface packing. Eventually, the actin-myosin complex is destabilized in terms of the change in system energy. The qualitative aspects of these results hold true irrespective of the consideration of structural changes of actin and myosin upon binding. However, the structural changes need to be taken into account for the quantitative agreement between the theoretical and experimental values of binding free energy. It is found that the structures of actin and myosin become more compact and less compact, respectively, upon binding. Upon binding, some of the residues are closely packed within the actin-myosin interface, giving rise to the freezing of flexibility of their side chains followed by a conformational-entropy loss. We have provided an estimation of the loss, by which our calculated value becomes much closer to the experimentally measured value for the binding free energy. Independent of the incorporation of the conformational-entropy loss, it is definite that Δ E total > 0, Δ S conf < 0, and Δ S hyd > 0, and that Δ S hyd is substantially larger than |Δ S conf |, demonstrating the robustness of our conclusion described above: The system energy opposes the binding; the water entropy drives the binding. In our view, the reduction in water crowding upon a self-assembly process is the dominant factor of the hydrophobic effect. In this sense, the actin-myosin binding is driven by the hydrophobic effect. According to the prevailing view, the major factor driving the binding is dependent on the two solutes bound to each other; the attention is paid mainly to direct interactions between the two solutes and the effect of water is taken into account only through the contact of nonpolar groups on the basis of a conventional popular view of the hydrophobic effect. The results obtained in this study are consistent not with the prevailing view but with our results for the binding between an RNA aptamer and a partial peptide of a prion protein and the one-to-many molecular recognition by the extreme C-terminal peptide region of the tumor suppressor p53 protein, p53CTD. This strongly suggests that a variety of binding and molecular recognition problems can be solved in a unified manner within the same theoretical framework on the basis of the water-entropy effect. We intend to examine actin-myosin weak binding in the near future. Finally, in this study, we use the complex structure and identify the physical factors stabilizing or destabilizing it, or equivalently, those driving or hindering the actin-myosin binding. To fully elucidate the binding mechanism, we have to compare an ensemble comprising both specific and nonspecific complexes. It is interesting to generate such an ensemble ) and apply our theoretical method to it, thus calculating the binding free energy and its entropic and energetic components. Works in this direction are in progress. Author Contributions H.O. and M.K. designed the research; H.O. performed all of the calculations; H.O., T.H., and M.K. analyzed the calculation results; H.O. wrote the first draft of the article, and all of the authors discussed it and completed the final version. 