 Intracellular calcium-permeable channels have been implicated in thermogenic function of murine brown and brite/beige adipocytes, respectively transient receptor potential melastin-8 and transient receptor potential vanilloid-4. Because the endo-lysosomal two-pore channels have also been ascribed with metabolic functionality, we studied the effect of simultaneously knocking out TPC1 and TPC2 on body composition and energy balance in male mice fed a chow diet. Compared with wild-type mice, TPC1 and TPC2 double knockout animals had a higher respiratory quotient and became obese between 6 and 9 months of age. Although food intake was unaltered, interscapular brown adipose tissue maximal temperature and lean-mass adjusted oxygen consumption were lower in Tpcn1/2 −/− than in wild type mice. Phosphorylated hormone-sensitive lipase expression, lipid density and expression of β-adrenergic receptors were also lower in Tpcn1/2 −/− BAT, whereas mitochondrial respiratory chain function and uncoupling protein-1 expression remained intact. We conclude that Tpcn1/2 −/− mice show mature-onset obesity due to reduced lipid availability and use, and a defect in β-adrenergic receptor signaling, leading to impaired thermogenic activity, in BAT. Obesity is a major cause of insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes, and metabolic syndrome, and its incidence worldwide is increasing. However, therapeutic options are limited due to significant gaps in our understanding of the signaling pathways and molecular mechanisms controlling adiposity and lipid metabolism. Although intracellular calcium homeostasis is known to be important in regulating white adipose tissue mass, the mechanisms by which it mediates this process are poorly understood. This could be due partly to the large number of Ca 2+ -permeable intracellular channels and their cell-autonomous effects. An important influence on WAT mass that is regulated by intracellular Ca 2+ signals is nonshivering thermogenesis by brown adipose tissue. Intracellular cation channels have been implicated in thermogenic function of murine brown and brite/beige adipocytes, respectively transient receptor potential melastin-8 and transient receptor potential vanilloid-4. Chronic administration of the TRPM8 agonist menthol to animals on either a standard chow or high-fat diet increased BAT thermogenesis via uncoupling protein-1, leading to increased oxygen consumption and preventing diet-induced obesity and glucose intolerance in wild-type, but not in Trpm8 −/−, mice at 7 months. Interestingly, TRPV4, another TRP family member, appears to regulate thermogenesis in a different manner to TRPM8, specifically by negative regulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator-1 and UCP1, which is cell autonomous to brite/beige adipocytes in WAT. Thus, Trpv4 −/− male mice and those treated with TRPV4 antagonists showed resistance to diet-induced obesity from 9 weeks on a high-fat diet. The Ca 2+ -permeable intracellular channels ryanodine receptor ryanodine receptor 1 and RyR2 have also been implicated in the regulation of WAT mass by thermogenesis in mice. Thus, RyR1-mediated and RyR2-mediated Ca 2+ leaks are important in sarco-endoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ /ATPase pump-activated NST in mouse muscle. The other Ca 2+ -permeable intracellular channel class reported to have a role in WAT mass regulation is the inositol 1,4,5 triphosphate receptor, which, like RyR1 and RyR2, controls Ca 2+ release from the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol. In Drosophila, mutant or absent IP 3 R leads to adult-onset obesity, by a dual effect of hyperphagia and alterations in the size of lipid droplets stored. The more recently discovered endo-lysosomal two-pore channel 1 and TPC2 have also been ascribed with metabolic functionality in murine cell types, namely insulin secretion in pancreatic β-cells, coupling cellular metabolic status to endo-lysosomal function in bone-marrow-derived macrophages, and susceptibility to fatty liver disease. Pyridine nucleotides have recently been hypothesized to be essential for sensing oxygen levels and metabolite availability. One of these, nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate is the most potent intracellular Ca 2+ mobilizer identified to date. Numerous lines of evidence have implicated TPC1 and TPC2 as nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate-regulated Ca 2+ channels. However, 2 recent studies have reported that TPCs can act as sodium channels regulated by the endo-lysosomal form of the phosphoinositide PIP 2. To ascertain whether TPC1 and TPC2 play a role in whole-organism metabolism, we generated TPC1 and TPC2 double knockout mice and compared body mass, body composition, and energy balance with WT mice from 3 weeks through maturity on a standard chow diet. Materials and Methods Animals A Tpcn1/2 −/− mouse line was derived from dihybrid crosses between Tpcn1 −/− and Tpcn2 −/− animals. This Tpcn1/2 −/− mouse line has no detectable expression of either Tpcn1A, Tpcn1B, or Tpcn2 mRNA, as determined by RT-PCR. In this study, Tpcn1/2 −/− were compared with WT mice of the same age, sex, and background strain. Mice were bred in specific pathogen-free conditions. After weaning at 5 weeks, male mice were transferred to the indirect calorimetery facility, where they were housed in cages of 4–5 animals with soft wood-chip bedding, controlled temperature, humidity and illumination, and ad libitum access to water and standard laboratory chow. They were weighed at regular intervals from 3 weeks to 9 months. The same animals were used throughout, with the exception of an additional set of 6-month animals for mitochondrial function analysis. Animals were killed by cervical dislocation at 6 or 9 months and tissues collected as described in the relevant sections. All experiments and procedures were reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Santiago de Compostela, in accordance with European Union guidelines for the use of experimental animals. Infrared imaging of BAT The upper back and back of the neck of each animal were shaved 24 hours before imaging with a FLIR E60bx camera as described previously. Three images per mouse were taken and analyzed for maximal temperature within the area of skin corresponding to BAT, using FLIR Tools version 3.1. Mice were imaged at 6 and 9 months. Body composition, locomotor activity, and indirect calorimetry Oxygen consumption, respiratory quotient, and LA were measured at 6 and 9 months, as previously described, using an indirect calorimetry system. Food intake was ascertained by manual weighing at the beginning and end of each 48-hour period. Body composition was measured using magnetic resonance in a Whole Body Composition Analyzer. Western blotting and image quantification Total protein was extracted as previously described. Briefly, total protein lysates from interscapular BAT or liver were subjected to immunoblotting, as previously described, and probed with antibodies against the following antigens: PGC1α, cell death-inducing DNA fragmentation factor-α-like effector-a, positive regulatory domain containing-16, β-3 adrenergic receptor, UCP1, fibroblast growth factor-21, hormone-sensitive lipase, pHSL-Ser-660, cytochrome c oxidase subunit-4, and type 2 deiodinase. Protein levels were normalized to antiglyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase for each BAT sample or to heat shock protein-90 for liver samples, and quantified using ImageJ. Table 1. Antibodies Used for Western Blotting Quantitative RT-PCR Total RNA was extracted and real-time PCR was performed as previously described. The following forward primers, reverse primers, and probes were used : βAdrR1 5′-GTGGATCGCTATGTTGCTATCACA-3′, 5′-AGGTACACGAAGGCCATGATG-3′, and 5′-TCGTCCGTCGTCTCCTTCTACGTGC-3′ ; βAdrR2 5′-CACCGCTCAACAGGTTTGATG-3′, 5′-CACTCGGGCCTTATTCTTGGT-3′, and 5′-CGCCCTTCAAGTACCAGAGCCTGCT-3′ ; βAdrR3 5′-TCCTCACTGACGCCGACAT-3′, 5′-CCCAGAAGTCCTGCAAAAACG-3′, and 5′-ACGTGAAGGGCCGTGAAGATCCAGC-3′ ; and hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferase 5′-AGCCGACCGGTTCTGTCAT-3′, 5′-GGTCATAACCTGGTTCATCATCAC-3′, and 5′-CGACCCTCAGTCCCAGCGTCGTGAT-3′. Serum nonesterified fatty acid levels Whole-trunk blood was spun for 15 minutes at 3000 g and 4°C. Serum NEFA levels were assessed using a commercial kit based on a colorimetric method. Mitochondrial respiratory chain complex activities Whole-tissue homogenates were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until processing. All mitochondrial enzyme complex activities were measured at 30°C in a Uvikon XL spectrophotometer. Before assay, all sample homogenates were subjected to 3 freeze-thaw cycles in order to disrupt the mitochondrial membranes and allow substrates access to the active sites of the enzymes. Activities of complex I, complex II–III, and complex IV, as well as citrate synthase were determined. All activities were assayed as previously described. Because CS is a mitochondrial marker enzyme, all complex activities were expressed as a ratio of CS to compensate for differences in mitochondrial enrichment in the cell samples. Hematoxylin-eosin staining and light microscopy BAT, WAT, and liver samples were fixed in 10% buffered formalin for 24 hours and then dehydrated and embedded in paraffin by a standard procedure. Sections of 4 μm were cut with a microtome and stained using a standard hematoxylin-eosin alcoholic procedure according to the manufactureŕs instructions. Sections were then rinsed with wash buffer and distilled water, and dried for 30 minutes at 37°C. They were then mounted with permanent mounting media, and evaluated and photographed using a BX51 microscope equipped with a DP70 digital camera. Oil Red O staining Liver biopsies were frozen at −80°C, and 8-μm sections cut with a cryostat, and stained in filtered Oil Red O for 10 minutes. Sections were washed in distilled water, counterstained with Mayer's hematoxylin for 3 minutes, and mounted in aqueous mountant. Electron microscopy BAT was immersion-fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde/0.1M phosphate buffer and prepared for EM by standard methods. Briefly, tissues were postfixed in osmium tetroxide stained with uranyl acetate, dehydrated through increasing concentrations of ethanol and acetone and embedded in Spurr resin. Ultrathin sections were prepared using a Reichert Ultracut S microtome and mounted on 200-mesh nickel grids. Sections were lightly counterstained with lead citrate and uranyl acetate and examined with a Jeol transmission EM. For analyses of lipid storage and mitochondrial number, 6 regions of 1000 μm 2 per animal were randomly selected and photographed at a magnification of ×300 with a digital camera. Images were analyzed using Axiovison, version 4.5, and the analyst was blind to the sample code. The parameters calculated were lipid droplet diameter, area and number, and mitochondrial number. High-power images were also taken. Statistical analysis and data presentation Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. mRNA and protein data are expressed in relation to WT tissues. Statistical significance was determined using Student's t test to compare 2 normally distributed groups or the nonparametric Mann-Whitney test for any distribution that was not normal ; P <.05 was considered significant. Results Loss of TPC1 and TPC2 expression leads to a higher RQ and obesity No differences in body mass were seen between WT and Tpcn1/2 −/− male mice up to and including 6 months. Between 6 and 9 months, however, body mass increased more rapidly in Tpcn1/2 −/− animals, with a very significant difference being evident at 9 months. This difference was due to a more rapid increase in fat mass in the TPC1 and TPC2 double knockout than in the WT between 6 and 9 months and was reflected in a strong tendency towards a higher percentage of fat in the DKO. Although in absolute terms the DKO had also gained lean mass more rapidly in the same period, lean tissue made up a smaller proportion of body mass in the DKO than in the WT at 9 months. RQ was higher in the DKO at 6 months, and this difference was greater at 9 months. Figure 1. Body mass and composition. WT shown by solid line or bar, Tpcn1/2 −/− by dashed line or empty bar, unless otherwise indicated; all values are mean ± SEM. A and B, Each time point shows n = 8–17 WT, n = 8–12... Obese TPC1/2 DKO mice consume the same amount of food, but less oxygen, than WT animals Food intake was not altered in Tpcn1/2 −/− animals at either 6 or 9 months when compared with WT. Oxygen consumption was also unaltered in absolute terms at each time point. However, lean-mass adjusted oxygen consumption was significantly lower in Tpcn1/2 −/− than in the WT at 9 months, during the dark phase, and this alteration was sufficient to impact on the 24-hour total. At 6 months, Tpcn1/2 −/− showed higher LA than did the WT, in lean-mass adjusted terms. At 9 months, however, LA was no longer significantly different from the WT; this was due to a significant reduction in the 6- to 9-month interval, in Tpcn1/2 −/− only. Figure 2. Energy balance before and during obesity. Six-month time point shows n = 8 WT, n = 8 Tpcn1/2 −/− ; 9-month time point shows n = 17 WT, n = 11 DKO; all values are mean ± SEM. A, WT shown by solid bar, DKO by empty bar; bar chart... Thermogenesis by interscapular BAT is impaired in TPC1/2 DKO mice Because LA could not explain the lower energy expenditure in Tpcn1/2 −/− mice at 9 months, we next evaluated the contribution of BAT thermogenic function to oxygen consumption. First, we measured T max of interscapular BAT by thermal imaging. At 6 and 9 months, BAT T max in the Tpcn1/2 −/− was significantly lower than in the WT, showing that thermogenic activity was altered before the mice became overtly obese and remained altered in obesity. Figure 3. Thermogenic activity in interscapular BAT; FGF21 expression in liver. WT shown by solid bar, Tpcn1/2 −/− by empty bar, unless otherwise indicated; all values are mean ± SEM. A, Bar chart showing T max of skin over interscapular... TPC1/2 DKO BAT shows significant differences in gene expression patterns To seek a biochemical explanation for the lower T max in Tpcn1/2 −/− BAT, we investigated protein expression for genes known to regulate BAT function, once obesity had been established at 9 months. Western blotting accordingly showed that βAdrR3 and FGF21 were expressed at lower levels in BAT of the Tpcn1/2 −/− than the WT. However, UCP1 was significantly higher in the Tpcn1/2 −/−. BAT D2 protein levels, however, were unaltered in the Tpcn1/2 −/−. To further investigate β-adrenergic signaling in BAT, we also carried out quantitative real-time-PCR on βAdrR1, βAdrR2, and βAdrR3. Each of these receptors was substantially down-regulated in the DKO, as compared with WT. Finally, as the liver is also an important source of FGF21, we carried out Western blotting of its protein in the liver. By contrast to BAT, however, FGF21 liver protein levels were higher in the DKO than in the WT. MRC function is unaltered, but lipid use reduced in Tpcn1/2 −/− interscapular BAT Due to the discrepancies between BAT T max and expression levels of the known thermogenic protein UCP1, we investigated the functional status of BAT mitochondria, by assaying the activities of the MRC enzyme complexes I–IV. We did this at 6 months, when T max was already lower in the Tpcn1/2 −/− than in the WT, and compared BAT with skeletal muscle, in which MRC function has been more thoroughly investigated. Activities of all MRC complexes were unaltered in the Tpcn1/2 −/−, in both BAT and skeletal muscle, suggesting that the oxidative phosphorylation machinery was intact in both tissues. Western blot analysis of Cox4 protein confirmed that protein levels of this key MRC enzyme were unaltered in DKO vs WT BAT. We therefore hypothesized that the problem with BAT thermogenesis was reduced nutrient availability for OXPHOS and carried out further immunoblotting, for HSL and pHSL, in BAT at 9 months. Although HSL levels were similar in WT and Tpcn1/2 −/−, levels of its active phosphorylated form were significantly lower in the Tpcn1/2 −/− than in the WT. These findings indicated that lipid use is compromised in Tpcn1/2 −/− BAT. In keeping with this, serum levels of NEFAs were also significantly lower in Tpcn1/2 −/− than in WT animals, showing lower lipid availability. Table 2. Activities of MRC Enzymes in BAT and Skeletal Muscle Table 3. Concentration of NEFAs in Serum TPC1/2 DKO interscapular BAT has smaller lipid droplets and lower lipid density, with no alteration in numbers of mitochondria To further investigate the cause of the reduced lipid use in the DKO BAT, we investigated morphology and distribution of lipid droplets within the brown adipocytes, with a quantitative EM analysis in the 9-month animals. This showed that DKO BAT lipid was less dense, due to individual droplets being substantially smaller in terms of both area and diameter. High-power images, moreover, provided evidence to suggest that the droplets had a more heterogeneous ultrastructure, possibly consisting of an abnormal membrane. By contrast, and as expected from the mitochondrial functional analysis, mitochondrial number was unaltered, and ultrastructure appeared to be similar between WT and DKO. Thus, while mitochondrial number and function were unaltered, lipid availability to the mitochondria was lower in the DKO, suggesting that this is the reason for the impairment in thermogenesis. Figure 4. Ultrastructure of interscapular brown adipocytes, showing alterations in lipid droplets during obesity. A and B, WT shown by solid bar, DKO by empty bar); quantification of lipid droplets... Table 4. Parameters of BAT Lipid and Mitochondrial Content Obtained From Electron Micrographs Light microscopy at 9 months confirmed that BAT lipid density was much lower in the DKO than the WT, with brown adipocytes containing a much higher proportion of very small lipid droplets. WAT, on the other hand and as expected in obesity, had a higher lipid density in the DKO than in the WT, with adipocytes being noticeably larger in the DKO. Liver morphology was unaltered, in terms of both lobule structure and lipid content, showing that obesity in the DKO did not involve steatosis. Figure 5. Light microscopy of principal lipid-storing tissues during obesity; representative 9-month WT tissues on left and Tpcn1/2 −/− tissues on right. A–F, Hematoxylin-eosin-stained 4-μm... Discussion BAT is a specialized organ responsible for thermogenesis, a process required for maintaining body temperature and therefore body weight. Because previous reports have demonstrated that BAT is also present in adult humans, there is an increasing enthusiasm for targeting BAT as a potential antiobesity therapy. In this sense, intracellular cation channels, such as TRPM8 and TRPV4, have been implicated in thermogenic function in rodents. The current study is the first to have metabolically phenotyped mice lacking the endo-lysosomal ion channels TPC1 and TPC2. The main finding was that Tpcn1/2 −/− male mice showed mature-onset obesity, established by 9 months, on a chow diet and without any alterations in food intake. The increased body weight in mice lacking TPC1 and TPC2 was due to lower thermogenic activity in interscapular BAT, which appears to be caused by lower lipid availability to the mitochondria. Although fat mass was increased, relative lean mass was significantly less in Tpcn1/2 −/− than in WT animals. RQ, moreover, was higher in the Tpcn1/2 −/−, not only once the animals were obese at 9 months but at least 3 months previously, when no differences in body mass were seen, showing that the lack of TPC1 and TPC2 favored the storage of lipids even before obesity. The lower lean-mass adjusted oxygen consumption in the Tpcn1/2 −/− at 9 months could also be accounted for by its lower BAT thermogenic activity. Therefore, we focused our biochemical analysis on interscapular BAT in the 9-month obese animal, determining relative protein expression of genes known to regulate brown adipocyte cell identity and thermogenic function. Unexpectedly, only βAdrR3 and FGF21 showed lower protein levels in the Tpcn1/2 −/− than in the WT, whereas UCP1 was actually higher in the Tpcn1/2 −/−. Because mRNA expression of βAdrR1, βAdrR2 and βAdrR3 was also decreased in Tpcn1/2 −/− BAT, relative to WT, it seems likely that Tpcn1/2 −/− mice have a defect in β-adrenergic receptor signaling in BAT. The UCP1 data, however, appeared to be at odds with the in vivo finding that the Tpcn1/2 −/− had a lower BAT T max than did the WT. However, while UCP1 is undoubtedly a key thermogenic marker, it is also true that in some cases impaired NST is caused by alterations in UCP1-independent parameters, including D2 deficiency, presence or absence of purine nucleotides and NEFAs, adipogenesis, and lipid turnover within BAT. We found D2 protein levels in to be unaltered in Tpcn1/2 −/− BAT. This indicates that the effects reported herein are unlikely to be mediated by alterations in TH bioavailability in BAT and therefore suggests that the thyroid is not directly involved in the thermogenic function of TPC1 and 2 in BAT. Because FGF21 from the liver is an important regulator of energy expenditure and has been shown to stimulate UCP1 expression in murine BAT, we also measured protein levels of FGF21 in the liver. Intriguingly, Tpcn1/2 −/− liver showed elevated levels of FGF21. Not only does this suggest that hepatic FGF21 is not involved in the reduced energy expenditure of the Tpcn1/2 −/− mice, but it might actually help to explain the elevated levels of UCP1 protein in their BAT. Moreover, it might indicate a mechanism to compensate for the reduced energy expenditure of these mice. Next, we investigated lipid availability for OXPHOS in BAT and found that levels of pHSL were lower in the Tpcn1/2 −/− than in the WT. PHSL is a widely acknowledged marker of lipolysis in several tissues, including BAT, and its phosphorylation by protein kinase A is regulated by Ca 2+. There is disagreement as to whether BAT is a significant contributor or not of serum NEFAs, so we cannot be sure whether the lower serum NEFA levels in the Tpcn1/2 −/− also indicated that lipolysis within BAT was impaired. However, the lower serum levels support the notion that lipid availability was impaired in BAT. Accordingly, both light and EM showed that lipid density was lower in Tpcn1/2 −/− than in WT BAT, with quantification of electron micrographs revealing that mean area and diameter of lipid droplets were substantially lower in Tpcn1/2 −/− BAT. High-power electron micrographs, moreover, showed that individual lipid droplets in Tpcn1/2 −/− BAT were ultrastructurally more heterogeneous than those in the WT, with apparent surface irregularities, further supporting the idea that lipid availability to the mitochondria was compromised. In conclusion, while BAT thermogenic function is an acknowledged regulator of obesity in rodents and humans, the current study is the first to show that absence of Ca 2+ -permeable intracellular channels can lead to impaired BAT thermogenesis and thus to obesity. The mechanism of the impairment resides in reduced lipid use within BAT, which is not associated with dysfunctional OXPHOS or altered mitochondrial number. Rather, it is attributable to reduced availability of lipid substrate and a defect in β-adrenergic receptor signaling. Because lipid droplets are closely related to lysosomes, a particular focus of future studies should be on a potential dysfunction in endo-lysosomal trafficking and homeostasis in Tpcn1/2 −/− BAT, as recently implicated in an increased susceptibility for fatty liver disease in TPC2-deficient mice fed a high-cholesterol diet. Although elucidation of TPC function in lipid metabolism will necessitate further detailed analyses of signaling pathways and the individual roles of TPC1 and TPC2, the Tpcn1/2 −/− male mouse demonstrates a therapeutic potential for controlling obesity via manipulation of these proteins to influence regulation of brown adipocyte activity. Based on the current and previous reports of UCP1-independent mechanisms of NST, it is also intriguing to hypothesize that BAT might be found to be as functionally complex a tissue as WAT has proven to be. 