 Little is known about the population structure of social microorganisms, yet such studies are particularly interesting for the ways that genetic variation impacts their social evolution. Dictyostelium, a eukaryotic microbe widely used as a developmental model, has a social fruiting stage in which some formerly independent individuals die to help others. To assess genetic variation within the social amoeba Dictyostelium purpureum, we sequenced ~4000 base pairs of ribosomal DNA from 37 isolates collected in Texas, Virginia, and Japan. Our analysis showed extensive genetic variation between populations and clear evidence of phylogenetic structure. We identified three major phylogenetic groups that were more different than other accepted species pairs. Tests using pairs of clones showed that both sexual macrocyst and asexual fruiting body formation were influenced by genetic divergence. Macrocysts were less likely to form between pairs of clones from different groups than from the same group. There was also a correlation between the genetic divergence of a pair of clones and their degree of mixing within fruiting bodies. These observations suggest that cryptic species might occur within D. purpureum and, more importantly, reveal how genetic variation impacts social interactions. Keywords: Cellular slime molds, cryptic species, macrocysts, population structure, rDNA gene tree, social evolution Group-living organisms like the social insects have provided a wealth of insights into social evolution. Recent work has extended the study of social evolution to microbes. Most of these behaviors are likely to be influenced by the genetic distribution of individual cells or their population structure. If genetically identical cells occur in close proximity in the wild and form social groups, then cooperation benefits close relatives. However, if nonrelatives co-occur in nature on a very small scale and are likely to interact, then cheating or conflict can arise within the social group. The life cycle of social amoebae presents an opportunity to study the dynamics of group formation and social living. Widely used as a model for the study of multicellular development, these eukaryotic microbes possess an unusual social life cycle in which they achieve multicellularity via aggregation of cells, rather than through a single-cell bottleneck as in most multicellular organisms. Social amoebae usually exist as single-celled, amoeboid predators on bacteria. However, when sufficient densities of social amoebae starve, thousands of individual amoebae aggregate to form a multicellular slug that differentiates into a fruiting body. This fruiting body is composed of two basic cell types, the fertile spores and the dead stalk cells, which hold aloft the spores for dispersal by passing invertebrates. Thus, stalk cells, much like social insect workers, forgo their own reproduction to help others reproduce, and it is this level of cooperation for which a better understanding of group formation is needed. An alternative to asexual fruiting body formation is sexual mating or macrocyst formation, which also happens under starving conditions but additionally requires darkness and high moisture. Haploid amoeboid cells of two mating types fuse to form a giant cell that engulfs thousands of other amoebae nearby. Then, the macrocyst forms, produces a cellulose wall, undergoes meiosis, and eventually releases offspring. This sexual stage has been studied in several dictyostelid species, and depending on the species, has been found to occur between strains of the same as well as different mating types. Fruiting body morphology and development have traditionally been used to classify the dictyostelids. However, a recent study reconstructed the phylogeny of the Dictyostelia using molecular data and showed a surprising amount of genetic differentiation among dictyostelid species: as much as from hydra to human. This work allows a macroevolutionary analysis of the origins of social traits. Our study has a similar motivation at a more microevolutionary level. We seek to understand how much variation might occur among clones previously assigned to the same species and how this is related to social interactions. Schaap et al. included two clones of several species in their analysis, and these were sometimes quite divergent, for example in Dictyostelium purpureum. Genetic divergence at this level is likely to determine the suitability of partners for both sexual and cooperative interactions, although in different ways. In particular, interactions between species are fundamentally different from those within species. Accordingly, the objectives of this study were to examine intraspecific genetic variation of the social amoeba D. purpureum by sequencing regions of the nuclear ribosomal DNA, to examine the potential for macrocyst formation among differently related clones, and to determine whether the genetic distance between pairs of clones correlates with their degree of mixing within individual fruiting bodies given that kin discrimination has been documented to occur in this species. For both asexual fruiting body formation and sexual macrocyst formation, we predicted that distantly related pairs ought to be less compatible than closely related pairs. However this prediction is complicated by the fact that macrocysts usually have the additional constraint that they only occur between different mating types. With sex, selection often favors associating with more distantly related clones. However, if clones are too distantly related, then reproductive incompatibility is likely to occur. For altruistic behavior, if clones can recognize relatives, selection should favor associating with closely related clones within the species. Methods SAMPLES, DNA PREPARATION, AND SEQUENCING We used 37 D. purpureum isolates from five locations around the United States and Japan: Two isolates from Mountain Lake, Virginia, Two isolates from Japan, 22 isolates from Houston, Texas, and the remaining 11 clones from suburbs within 30 miles of Houston, eight isolates from Pasadena, Texas and three isolates from Webster, Texas. Each isolate was frozen as a pure culture for permanent storage. In addition, we included a published sequence of D. purpureum. Samples of Dictyostelium discoideum, Dictyostelium citrinum, and Dictyostelium macrocephalum served as outgroups. We used standard methods for clonal growth, DNA extraction, and sequencing. Primer pairs used to amplify the rDNA are found in the Supporting material. Sequences have been deposited in GenBank under accession numbers } FJ424826-FJ424862. PHYLOGENETIC AND SEQUENCE ANALYSES We assembled contigs for individual clones in SeqMan and aligned sequences using ClustalW in BioEdit version 7.0.0. We then grouped individual clones into haplotypes. Table 1 Dictyostelium purpureum unique haplotypes. Symbols refer to geographic locations of clones as shown in Figure 1. To reconstruct the rDNA gene tree, we used Bayesian, maximum-likelihood, maximum-parsimony, and neighbor-joining approaches. For the Bayesian tree, we used MrBayes to estimate a phylogenetic tree of unique haplotypes based on the GTR + I + Γ substitution model. Four Metropolis-coupled Markov chains were run for 250,000 burn-in generations followed by 1.75 × 10 6 generations of data collection. We used GARLI to infer the maximum-likelihood bootstrap tree with 1000 bootstrap replicates under the GTR + I + Γ substitution model. We generated the maximum-parsimony bootstrap tree using PAUP * with 1000 bootstrap replicates, tree bisection-reconnectiion branch swapping, 100 random addition sequences per replicate, no limit to MaxTrees, and gaps treated as missing data. The neighbor-joining tree of unique haplotypes was constructed using MEGA4. Bootstrap values were based on 1000 replicates. We estimated evolutionary divergence between various phylogenetic groups by calculating the number of base differences per site using MEGA4. All positions containing alignment gaps and missing data were eliminated only in pairwise sequence comparisons. There were a total of 5264 positions in the final dataset for 38 D. purpureum sequences. To test for population differentiation, we calculated F ST with the rDNA sequence data using an analysis of molecular variance approach implemented in Arlequin 2.0. MATING EXPERIMENTS We performed one 12-clone and two 11-clone round robin macrocyst experiments, in which each clone was paired with other clones as well as with itself. Thus, 210 trials were carried out. We assigned clones to experiments based on their position in the gene tree and their geographical location; each of the three experiments consisted of clones that spanned the entire tree and clones collected from both the same and different geographical locations. In addition, we repeated Experiments 1 and 2 to confirm the repeatability of our results. Details on mating experiments are shown in the Supporting material. We predicted that paired clones that are more closely related to one another should mate more readily than paired clones that are more distantly related, unless they are of the same sex in which case we did not expect successful mating. In some cases, one replicate produced macrocysts between clones and the other replicate did not. We considered a pair as capable of forming macrocysts if they did so in any replicate. If replicate experiments had macrocysts form at different times, we used the earliest time in our Fisher’s exact test analysis and the averaged time in our correlation analyses. We also tested whether genetic distance of a given pair of clones correlates with their degree of mixing in fruiting bodies by sequencing isolates from pairwise experiments reported in Mehdiabadi et al.. This study showed strong kin discrimination in 12 of 14 experiments: individual fruiting bodies were predominantly clonal, although cells of two D. purpureum isolates were plated in equal proportions at the start of pairwise experiments. We conducted correlation analyses in the same way as for the macrocyst data. Results MOLECULAR GENE TREE We identified 20 unique rDNA haplotypes from the 37 sequenced isolates. Of the 5263 sites aligned in all samples, 809 were variable and 517 were parsimony informative. Bayesian analysis of the unique haplotypes produced the phylogenetic tree shown in Figure 1. We identified three major groups of haplotypes within D. purpureum. The deepest bifurcation separates groups A and B from C. Almost all of the Pasadena clones, three Houston clones, and one Webster clone form group A, resulting from nine haplotypes for 10 samples. Group B comprises the two Japan isolates and one Houston haplotype, which clearly differed in rDNA sequence relative to other Houston clones. Group C includes most of the Houston clones, two Webster clones, two Virginia clones, and two Pasadena clones for a total of nine haplotypes for 24 samples. Figure 1 Bayesian tree of 21 unique haplotypes of D. purpureum. Published sequences of D. macrocephalum, D. citrinum, and D. discoideum served as outgroups. Houston clone QSpu10 is not shown, but could belong to either haplotype number 19 or 20. Nodes with posterior... The results of the maximum-likelihood, maximum-parsimony, and neighbor-joining analyses were similar to those of the Bayesian analyses. These trees had the same basic topology as the Bayesian-gene tree and there were similar levels of nodal support. However, there were two differences: The Japan clones branched off more basally on the neighbor-joining tree compared to the Bayesian, maximum-likelihood, and maximum-parsimony trees, and group B is a well-supported clade in the Bayesian tree, but not as well resolved within the larger subclade, which includes Group A, in the maximum-likelihood and maximum-parsimony trees. We measured genetic distances between major phylogenetic groups by calculating the number of base differences per site and found large genetic distances between the major phylogenetic groups, larger than some recognized species pairs. The average genetic distance between D. purpureum and outgroup taxa is 0.098, 0.036 between outgroups D. discoideum and D. citrinum, and ranged from 0 to 0.054 within D. purpureum. Group A is fairly divergent from the rest of the other clones; this group’s average pairwise sequence divergence from Group B is 0.040, and is 0.050 from Group C. Similarly, average between-group genetic distances are just as high between Group B and Group C. To understand whether this level of genetic variability between the major phylogenetic groups of D. purpureum is extraordinarily high, we took a subset of our rDNA sequence data that corresponded to the sequence used to reconstruct the phylogeny of the Dictyostelia and calculated the pairwise genetic distance between taxa that are recognized as closely related but distinct species. For five closely related species pairs, pairwise genetic distances were as follows: D. citrinum and D. dimigraformum : 0.009; D. clavatum and D. longosporum : 0.003 D. brunneum and D. giganteum : 0.004; D. mucoroides and D. phaerocephalum : 0.001; and D. capitatum and D. pseudobrefeldianum : 0.003. After recalculating the average between-group sequence divergence for the major D. purpureum phylogenetic groups, we found that the major clades within D. purpureum are more divergent than all five species pairs and are more than twice as distinct as four of them. Although clones from Houston are represented in all three groups, the sequence data reveal some level of population structure in this species, and the overall F ST estimate shows highly significant population differentiation for D. purpureum. For pairwise comparisons between all five populations, we found that population pairwise F ST s were significant for Pasadena, TX versus Houston, TX, Pasadena, TX versus Japan, and Houston, TX versus Japan. Other comparisons were not significant. MATING EXPERIMENTS These findings of high genetic variation and phylogenetic structure suggest that D. purpureum may actually consist of multiple, reproductively isolated populations. To test the hypothesis that groups A, B, and C represent two or three cryptic species, we performed pairwise matings with clones from the same and different groups in three sets of experiments. In all three experiments, we found that only two clones were homothallic and 32 clones were heterothallic, which confirmed previously published findings that this species consists of both homothallic and heterothallic strains. In addition, nine of the 34 clones did not form macrocysts in any combination. In each of the three experiments, we had a total of 12 of 66, 19 of 78, and 2 of 66 pairwise combinations of clones form macrocysts, respectively. However, excluding matings with homothallic strains, we found 17% of “within” group matings were successful and 2% of “between” group matings were successful. This resulted in at least six mating types for this species: at least six in each of Experiments 1 and 2 and four in Experiment 3. We defined mating types to be mutually exclusive. We also investigated whether the time to macrocyst formation correlated with genetic divergence between pairs of clones but found no significant relationship despite nonindependence of the data. Nevertheless, the data confirmed our hypothesis: there were significantly more successful “within” than “between” group matings for groups A–C whether we analyze macrocyst formation after the standard one week of scoring or after four weeks of scoring. GENETIC DISTANCE AND COOPERATION To test whether the degree of mixing between pairs of clones correlates with genetic distance, we examined whether genetic divergence of the clones explains the propensity to cooperatively make fruiting bodies. For the 14 pairwise mixing experiments performed in Mehdiabadi et al., we did not find a significant relationship between a pair of clones’ genetic divergence and relatedness within fruiting bodies. However, if we restrict our test to only the 13 pairs involving clones from within the major groups A–C; that is, only pairs presumably within a “species”, we find a significant association. Removal of that point makes the data normal. We find that a quadratic regression is significant and a better fit than a linear model. Furthermore, we still find a significant positive relationship between a pair of clones’ genetic divergence and relatedness within fruiting bodies when using nonparametric tests, indicating the result is not sensitive to the assumption of normality. Figure 2 Relationship between genetic distance of a given pair of clones and the average relatedness in fruiting bodies arising from their pairwise mixture for 13 within phylogenetic group experiments. Genetic distance or pairwise... Discussion The monophyletic group of clones we sequenced was clearly differentiated from the outgroup. Within D. purpureum there are three distinct groups, which are as distant as some closely related but distinct Dictyostelium species. We found this phylogenetic structure in D. purpureum had some basis in geography. The two samples collected from Virginia were from Group C. The two Japanese isolates shared the same haplotype. Although most samples from Houston, Texas were found in Group C, there were exceptions, including the QSpu4 haplotype, which was in Group B and QSpu1, QSpu6, and QSpu21, which were in Group A. The genetic variation among the Houston samples was as high as the genetic variation found between taxa that are recognized as closely related but distinct species. Genetic differentiation in D. purpureum is further supported by our finding of reduced sexual compatibility between members of the three groups. However, there were also several inconsistent and ambiguous results, which are not uncommon for such macrocyst studies. First, apparently homothallic clones did not produce macrocysts in all pairwise experiments, though they should have. This could be due to imperfect environmental conditions for all possible pairwise matings. It is also possible the isolates that some homothallic clones were paired with in their unsuccessful matings produced inhibitory compounds to prevent macrocyst formation. This could provide an explanation for why QSpu2 formed macrocysts in almost all combinations except those with the Japan clones. Second, as previous work has shown in various dictyostelids, we also found that several strains did not form macrocysts in any mating combination and that there were a few inconsistent mating reactions between replicates. Clones that are more diverged may also be less likely to form chimeric fruiting bodies in contrast to genetically different clones within species, at least for D. discoideum. We have demonstrated that D. purpureum preferentially forms groups with its own clonemates and forms predominantly clonal-fruiting bodies. In that study, the degree of mixing between pairs of clones differed in the 14 experiments. We can now show that within the three lineages, more closely related clones are more likely to mix. Similar patterns have also been found using microsatellite loci in another dictyostelid, D. discoideum. Here, we found a curvilinear relationship between genetic distance and the degree of mixing within fruiting bodies for D. purpureum. Such a relationship suggests that only close relatedness matters, and that beyond this threshold of relatedness, isolates exclude one another in fruiting bodies to about the same degree. Such studies on social microorganisms are particularly interesting for the ways that genetic variation impacts social interactions. Two related but different responses are shown in this study. First, macrocyst formation was less likely to occur between pairs of clones from different groups than between pairs from the same group. This sexual incompatibility seems consistent with the presence of cryptic species in D. purpureum, or at least with partially isolated lineages. Second, D. purpureum shows another kind of social incompatibility. More distant clones are less likely to cooperate in social development. This could be another manifestation of incompatibility through isolation, but in this case the effect is seen at a much finer genetic scale, as might be expected if the effect is driven by kin selection for restricting altruism to close relatives. Supplementary Material Sup1 Click here to view. 