 The Nramp protein family is widespread in bacteria and eukaryotes, and mediates transport of divalent metals across cellular membranes. The social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum has two Nramp proteins. Nramp1, like its mammalian ortholog, is recruited to phagosomal and macropinosomal membranes, and confers resistance to pathogenic bacteria. Nramp2 is located exclusively in the contractile vacuole membrane and controls, synergistically with Nramp1, iron homeostasis. It has long been debated whether mammalian Nramp1 mediates iron import or export from phagosomes. By selectively loading the iron-chelating fluorochrome calcein in macropinosomes, we show that Dictyostelium Nramp1 mediates iron efflux from macropinosomes in vivo. To gain insight in ion selectivity and the transport mechanism, the proteins were expressed in Xenopus oocytes. Using a novel assay with calcein, and electrophysiological and radiochemical assays, we show that Nramp1, similar to rat DMT1, transports Fe 2+ and manganese, not Fe 3+ or copper. Metal ion transport is electrogenic and proton dependent. By contrast, Nramp2 transports only Fe 2+ in a non-electrogenic and proton-independent way. These differences reflect evolutionary divergence of the prototypical Nramp2 protein sequence compared to the archetypical Nramp1 and DMT1 proteins. KEY WORDS: DMT1, Nramp1, Nramp2, Iron homeostasis, Macropinocytosis, Bacterial infection Summary: The Dictyostelium Nramp1 transporter confers resistance to pathogenic bacteria by mediating iron efflux from phagosomes. Nramp1 and the related NrampB display differences in metal selectivity, electrogenicity and H + dependence. INTRODUCTION The Nramp family of metal transporters plays a major role in transition-metal ion homeostasis from bacteria to humans. In prokaryotes, three phylogenetically distinct groups of manganese transporters are related to the Nramp proteins, and the crystal structure for one of them has been recently determined. Two Nramp homologs in yeast, Smf1 and Smf2, are also manganese transporters, whereas a third one, Smf3, probably transports iron from the vacuole to the cytosol. Plant Nramp homologs are essential for seed germination when soil manganese or iron availability is limited. The Nramp homolog in Drosophila, the Malvolio protein, regulates Mn 2+ and Fe 2+ homeostasis, affecting taste behavior. In mammals, the SLC11A family includes two genes, NRAMP1 and DMT1. NRAMP1 is expressed exclusively in late phagosomes of macrophages, and plays an important role in innate immunity to bacterial infection. Polymorphic variants in or around the Nramp1 gene have been correlated with tuberculosis and leprosy. The paralog DMT1 is the major iron transporter at the apical membrane of intestinal cells, enabling dietary iron uptake in the duodenum. A differentially spliced DMT1 isoform, expressed at the cell surface and in endosomes, facilitates transferrin-independent iron uptake in most peripheral tissues. Mutations in DMT1 have been correlated with microcytic anemia in human and rat. Altered DMT1 expression leads to iron deposition in neuronal cells and neurodegenerative disorders. Functional studies of yeast Smf1 and mammalian DMT1 in Xenopus oocytes have shown that both mediate proton-dependent metal ion transport. DMT1 acts as an electrogenic symporter of several metals and protons, with the proton gradient providing the energy for transport. Mammalian NRAMP1 also transport iron, manganese and copper together with protons, but the directionality of transport has long been a matter of debate, with one group of scientists favoring an antiporter mechanism, and another group supporting a symporter mechanism. The genome of the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum contains two Nramp genes, encoding Nramp1 and Nramp2. Similar to its mammalian ortholog, D. discoideum Nramp1 is recruited to phagosomes, and its inactivation enhances susceptibility to Mycobacteria and Legionella. D. discoideum Nramp2 is instead localized in the membrane of the contractile vacuole, a tubulo-vesicular network regulating osmolarity, and contributes to iron homeostasis in synergy with Nramp1. In contrast to most species harboring two or more Nramp homologs, Dictyostelium is unique in that Nramp1 and Nramp2 differ considerably in their amino acid sequence. Dictyostelium Nramp1 belongs to the archetypical Nramp subfamily, which includes all metazoan Nramp proteins, whereas Nramp2 is closer to prototypical Nramp proteins of some aquatic protists, fungi and to the proteobacterial MntH Cα subclass. Functional studies on Dictyostelium Nramp1 might thus shed novel insights on the mechanism of action of the mammalian ortholog, whereas similar studies on Nramp2 might pioneer research on the role of the homologous proteins in protists, and the potential function of the contractile vacuole in divalent metal homeostasis. Despite the divergent sequences and distinct intracellular location of Nramp1 and Nramp2, both proteins colocalize with the v-H + ATPase in their respective compartments, suggesting that divalent metal transport is coupled in both cases to proton transport, as shown for other members of this family. For Nramp1, iron uptake assays with purified phagosomes suggested a vacuolar-ATPase-dependent transport. Similar assays for Nramp2 are not possible owing to breakdown of the tubular contractile vacuole network following cell lysis and the difficulty of obtaining sufficiently pure and fully functional vacuole vesicles. It would be of interest, however, to know whether Nramp2 is involved in iron influx or efflux across the vacuole, and whether Nramp1 and Nramp2 differ in their metal transport specificity and regulation. By exploiting macropinocytic uptake of the iron-sensitive fluorescent probe calcein, we show in this paper that iron is efficiently exported from in vivo macropinosomes of both wild-type and the Nramp2-knockout, but not Nramp1-KO, mutants. We also show that both Dictyostelium Nramp proteins can be functionally expressed in Xenopus laevis oocyte plasma membrane. Xenopus oocytes are particularly suited for heterologous expression and characterization of transporters, as they have a very low metal ion uptake background. We also show for the first time that calcein can be used in this system to study iron transport with a simple and highly sensitive assay. Taken together, the results reveal that Dictyostelium Nramp1 is closer to mammalian Nramp1 and DMT1 than to Dictyostelium Nramp2 in metal ion transport properties as well as protein sequence, suggesting different origin or evolutionary divergence of the two Dictyostelium nramp genes. RESULTS Nramp1 mediates, and is essential for, macropinosomal iron efflux in vivo Dictyostelium Nramp1 has been shown to be recruited to macropinosomes and phagosomes and to facilitate iron transport in purified phagosomes. To assess its activity in vivo, we used the metal-sensitive fluorochrome calcein for continuous monitoring of divalent metal transport. Given that vegetative cells of axenic strains, such as AX2, display intense macropinocytic activity to engulf liquid food from culture medium, we exploited the membrane impermeability of calcein to load the fluorescent probe specifically in macropinosomes, as shown by rapid uptake of the fluorochrome in macropinocytic cups and vesicles, where calcein colocalizes with TRITC–dextran, a marker of macropinosomes. In agreement with Nramp1 recruitment in phagosomes and macropinosomes, vesicles of engulfed calcein were mostly decorated with Nramp1 in cells expressing Nramp1–RFP, whereas no colocalization was observed with Nramp2–RFP, which is found exclusively in the membrane of the contractile vacuole, a tubulo-vesicular network located at the bottom of cells adhering to a substratum. As shown in Fig. 1 C, this structure is visible in lower confocal stacks, whereas calcein-filled macropinosomes are evident in upper stacks, and these are totally distinct from the contractile vacuole network. Calcein fluorescence is stable at pHs between 5 and 7, but fades significantly at a pH below 4, and is selectively quenched by several divalent metal ions, but unaffected by monovalent ions. This was confirmed by measuring fluorimetrically the fluorescence intensity of a calcein solution and its quenching by increasing concentrations of FeCl 3, FeCl 2, CuCl 2 or MnCl 2. Quenching was partially pH dependent. Fe 2+ and copper efficiently quenched calcein at all pHs tested, Fe 3+ was effective at pH 5.0 and required higher concentrations with increasing pH, whereas the opposite occurred for manganese, which was quite insensitive at pH 5.0 but quenched at pH above 6.0. Fig. 1. Calcein is taken up by macropinocytosis and colocalizes with TRITC–dextran in vesicles decorated with Nramp1. Exponentially growing wild-type or Nramp1-KO cells were washed, resuspended in low fluorescence medium and plated on glass... Fig. 2. Iron-chelated calcein is de-quenched in macropinosomes of wild-type or Nramp2-KO, but not Nramp1-KO, cells. Quantification of calcein fluorescence quenching by divalent metals. Calcein dissolved in NaOH was diluted in 0.1 M... We reasoned that upon incubating cells in growth medium with calcein and iron, or other quenching metals at saturating concentrations, macropinocytosis would lead to the uptake of the metal-quenched calcein into macropinosomes; efflux of the metals through Nramp1 should then result in recovery of calcein fluorescence, allowing the detection of differences between Nramp1-KO mutant and the wild-type AX2 parental strain. It is worth mentioning that iron, and possibly other divalent metals, are very likely taken up by axenic lab strains only by macropinocytosis, whereas in wild-type strains living on soil and growing on bacteria the major if not unique iron source would be the bacteria, which are engulfed by phagocytosis. When incubated with Fe 2+ -quenched calcein, fluorescent spots indicative of calcein fluorescence de-quenching were observed within 15 min in confocal images of AX2 cells, and their number and intensity increased during the subsequent 45 min. By contrast, no calcein de-quenching occurred in Nramp1-KO cells. Flow cytometry assays confirmed the qualitative data: compared to control cells incubated with calcein alone, calcein de-quenching was minimal in the Nramp1-KO mutant and did not increase over time, whereas it increased steadily in AX2 and Nramp2-KO cells. Remarkably, incubating cells with calcein and either FeCl 2 or FeCl 3 did not affect the outcome: both were exported from macropinosomes in AX2 and Nramp2-KO, but not in Nramp1-KO, mutant cells. Even when cells were incubated with calcein at non-saturating iron concentrations, fluorescence recovery was still significantly lower in Nramp1-KO, and Nramp1 and Nramp2 double-KO mutants than in Nramp2-KO or AX2 control cells. The possibility that calcein is not dequenched in Nramp1-KO mutant due to a stronger and prolonged acidification of the macropinosomes in this mutant can be excluded because no differences in the extent and timing of acidification are found between the mutant and the parental AX2 strain. In addition, no significant differences between AX2, Nramp1- or Nramp2-KO cells were found when Mn 2+ or Cu 2+ were tested in place of iron, even at a tenfold higher concentration. Thus we conclude that Nramp1 is required for iron efflux from macropinosomes in vivo, whereas other transporters in place of Nramp1 mediate transport of copper and possibly manganese. Concerning the latter, however, it cannot be excluded that the apparent calcein fluorescence recovery might be solely due to macropinosome acidification leading to detachment of manganese from calcein. Fe 2+, but not Fe 3+, is transported in Xenopus oocytes expressing Dictyostelium Nramp1 or Nramp2 The previous experiments have shown that Nramp1 is essential for iron export from macropinosomes and that both Fe 3+ and Fe 2+ are prima facie exported from macropinosomes. To better characterize the iron transport properties of Dictyostelium Nramp1 or Nramp2, we expressed the proteins in the membrane of Xenopus oocytes. Injecting unmodified cRNAs resulted in a very low level of functional expression, which was not surprising as both Nramp1 and Nramp2 are not plasma membrane proteins. To increase expression in the plasma membrane, the N and C-termini of both proteins were replaced with the N- and C-termini of rat DMT1, according to the scheme in supplementary material Fig. S2. Rat DMT1, which has been successfully expressed in Xenopus oocytes, was used as internal control. The chimeric Nramp1 and Nramp2 containing the short rDMT1 termini were named c-Nramp1 and c-Nramp2. We introduced a novel assay based on metal-induced changes in calcein fluorescence. Oocytes transfected with cRNA coding for c-Nramp1, c-Nramp2 or rDMT1 were microinjected with calcein, incubated with divalent metals, and the dynamics of fluorescence quenching was checked by confocal microscopy. In the absence of external metals, calcein fluorescence in control oocytes or oocytes expressing the transporters was basically unaltered. In the presence of metals, the fluorescence ratio F:F0 in control oocytes oscillated within the range 1–1.15 for all the length of the experiment. In oocytes expressing c-Nramp1, c-Nramp2 or rDMT1 and incubated with FeCl 2, the fluorescence intensity decreased rapidly, as shown in confocal images of representative oocytes and in the quantitative data of Fig. 3. Fe 2+ strongly quenched calcein fluorescence in c-Nramp1- and rDMT1-expressing oocytes, with an ∼50% reduction of F:F0 after 3 and 6 min of incubation for c-Nramp1 or DMT1, respectively. In c-Nramp2-expressing oocytes Fe 2+ led to fluorescence quenching but at a lower rate. Mn 2+ also lowered calcein fluorescence in c-Nramp1- and rDMT1-, but was ineffective in c-Nramp2-expressing oocytes. Interestingly, when incubated with Fe 3+ or Cu 2+, calcein fluorescence did not decrease, but increased linearly in c-Nramp1-expressing oocytes, reaching an F:F0 value of 1.5 after 6 min. In some experiments, calcein was co-injected with Fe 2+ to further reduce calcein fluorescence, and the oocytes were then incubated with FeCl 3. In addition, in this case Fe 3+ led to increased calcein fluorescence. A similar effect was observed for Fe 3+, but not for Cu 2+, in c-Nramp2-expressing oocytes, but the results were highly variable from experiment to experiment. In oocytes transfected with rDMT1, Fe 3+ also led to a slight increase in F:F0, which was, however, not significantly different from non-injected eggs. Thus, it appears that Dictyostelium Nramp1, like rDMT1, transports Fe 2+ and Mn 2+, but not Fe 3+ or Cu 2+, whereas it is the latter two ions that interact, at least with Nramp1, in a way that favors release of calcein-quenching metals from the cytoplasm, thus increasing calcein fluorescence. Iron and copper, in particular, are enriched in the animal pole of Xenopus oocytes. c-Nramp2 differs from c-Nramp1 and rDMT1 in that only Fe 2+ is transported, though at a reduced rate, and only Fe 3+ leads to increase in calcein fluorescence. Fig. 3. Live imaging of divalent metal transport in Xenopus oocytes using calcein fluorescence. Xenopus oocytes expressing c-Nramp1, c-Nramp2 or rDMT1 were injected with calcein and perfused with a solution containing or not the indicated metal. Confocal series... Nramp1-mediated, but not Nramp2-mediated, metal transport elicits pH-dependent electrogenic currents To further characterize the Dictyostelium transporters, the oocytes were tested electrophysiologically to verify the presence of transport currents associated with metal transport. First, the c-Nramp1-expressing oocytes were clamped at a constant voltage of −40 mV in a sodium solution at pH 6 and perfused with 0.01 to 0.1 mM FeCl 2 or MnCl 2. At all concentrations of substrates tested, c-Nramp1 elicited inward currents of ∼9 nA compared to ∼20 nA in rDMT1 oocytes. The similarity of the currents elicited by FeCl 2 or MnCl 2 led us to use the latter, being more stable, for testing the pH dependence of the currents. As shown in Fig. 4 B, in c-Nramp1- and rDMT1-expressing oocytes the currents became smaller with increasing pH, apparently switching to being outwardly at pH 7.6 only in the case of c-Nramp1. This latter change did not occur in tetramethylammonium chloride solution at the same pH, where the currents were similar in c-Nramp1 and rDMT1. The behavior of c-Nramp1 resembles that of the yeast Smf1p transporter expressed in Xenopus oocytes, and can be explained by divalent ions blocking a Na + slippage current, as proposed previously. Further investigation at pH 7.6 and in the absence of divalent metal ions confirmed that sodium or lithium elicited a large slippage current in c-Nramp1, but not in rDMT1, which could be partially blocked by lowering the pH. Fig. 4. Fe and Mn elicit pH-dependent transport currents in oocytes expressing c-Nramp1 or rDMT1. Oocytes expressing c-Nramp1 or rDMT1 were clamped at a constant voltage of −40 mV in sodium solution at pH 6.0 or at different pH,... The largest transport current, in the absence of sodium is recorded for c-Nramp1 at pH 5.5, similar to rDMT1. Under these conditions, 0.1 mM Fe 2+, Mn 2+, Cd 2+ or Co 2+ elicited inward currents, and Ni 2+, Pb 2+ and Zn 2+ elicited small inward or outward currents in TMA or sodium solution, respectively. This discrepancy can be explained by the presence of the already mentioned Na + -slippage current, that is present also at pH 5.5. Cu 2+ induced outward currents in both sodium and TMA solutions, confirming that it is not transported by Nramp1 but interacts and alters the transporter in some way. In rDMT1-expressing oocytes, the transport currents elicited by the divalent metals tested were larger, particularly by Cu 2+, and only Pb 2+ induced an outward or no current in Na + or TMA solution, respectively. In contrast to c-Nramp1 and DMT1, c-Nramp2 did not elicit any measurable transport current, either in sodium or in TMA solution, irrespective of the different holding potential tested, the pH of the bath solution, or the presence of Fe 2+ ion outside or inside the oocyte. Fig. 5. Differential effects on transport currents by metal ions in Xenopus oocytes expressing c-Nramp1 or rDMT1. Oocytes expressing c-Nramp1 or rDMT1 were clamped at a constant voltage of −40 mV and perfused with the indicated metal at a concentration... pH-dependence and specificity of iron transport by Nramp1 are confirmed by radiochemical uptake assay Xenopus oocytes were also tested for uptake of radiolabeled iron in the presence of ascorbic acid to maintain iron in the reduced form. Following incubation with 0.1 mM 55 FeCl 2, the oocytes were washed and lysed to measure intracellular radioactivity. Compared with control oocytes, a significant level of radioactivity was detected in c-Nramp1- or rDMT1-injected oocytes, which was inhibited in both cases by Mn 2+ addition. Absorption of radiolabeled iron was maximal at acidic pH, and inhibited not only by Mn 2+, but also by Cd 2+, Co 2+, Ni 2+, Cu 2+ and, to a lesser extent, Zn 2+. In the case of c-Nramp2, a low, though still significant, uptake of radiolabeled iron, was detected at pH 6.5, with a slight increase at pH 7.5. At pH 5.5, no difference could be detected compared with control oocytes. Fig. 6. Radiochemical uptake assays with Xenopus oocytes expressing c-Nramp1, c-Nramp2 or rDMT1. Control oocytes or oocytes injected with cRNA for c-Nramp1 or rDMT1 were incubated with 0.1 mM 55 Fe 2 in the presence or not... DISCUSSION We have shown for the first time that calcein can be successfully used to study iron transport in macropinosomes as well as in Xenopus oocytes. Calcein, a metallosensor consisting of fluorescein conjugated to an EDTA-like moiety, has been mostly used in the form of the membrane-permeant non-fluorescent precursor calcein-acetoxymethyl ester, to detect changes in cytosolic or mitochondria labile iron pool, following intracellular cleavage of the ester bond. In this paper we exploited, instead, the membrane impermeability of calcein and its uptake by macropinocytosis. By incubating cells with metal-chelated, thus non-fluorescent, calcein, fluorescence de-quenching in macropinosomes can be detected following metal release and efflux to the cytosol. We have shown that in the case of iron-chelated calcein, fluorescence de-quenching occurred in macropinosomes of wild-type or Nramp2-KO cells, but not in the Nramp1-KO mutant, indicating that Nramp1 is essential for, and mediates, iron efflux from macropinosomes. In Dictyostelium, macropinocytosis and phagocytosis are differentially regulated, but macropinosomes and phagosomes, once formed, share the same intracellular traffic pathway, characterized by rapid recruitment in their membrane of Nramp1 and v-H + ATPase and gradual import of lysosomal enzymes. We can therefore assume that the Nramp1-mediated iron efflux observed in macropinosomes occurs also in phagosomes. The finding that iron is exported from macropinosomes through Nramp1 adds an important piece of evidence concerning the mechanism of action of this protein and its mammalian ortholog. It is generally accepted that NRAMP1 is a proton-dependent iron transporter, but the directionality of transport has long been a matter of debate, with one hypothesis favoring proton-driven iron release from the phagosomes, thus starving the engulfed pathogens of an important element, and the alternative hypothesis favoring accumulation of iron in the phagosomal lumen with proton exchange, thus leading to formation of toxic oxygen radicals. By using purified phagosomes of Dictyostelium cells, we have previously shown that Nramp1 was essential for radiolabeled iron transport, which was imported into the phagosomes at a slightly acidic pH if a source of ATP was provided to activate the v-H + -ATPase. By using iron-chelated calcein, we have now shown in this paper that Nramp1 is also essential in vivo, and that it mediates iron efflux from macropinosomes to the cytosol, thus strongly supporting the notion that Nramp1 favors iron depletion from phagosomes. Phagocytosis is exploited by Dictyostelium cells to engulf bacteria that are the major, if not unique, source of food in the wild, and as such a potential entry for pathogenic bacteria. A few bacteria species, such as Legionella pneumophila, are taken up by macropinocytosis rather than phagocytosis. Dictyostelium Nramp1-KO mutants are more susceptible to infection by both Mycobacteria and Legionella, irrespective of their different uptake mechanism, but in agreement with the common function of Nramp1 in phagosomes and macropinosomes. Dictyostelium Nramp1 displays, therefore, both a nutritive and a protective function, favoring cytosolic accumulation of an essential element upon bacterial digestion and simultaneously starving pathogenic bacteria in phagosomes or macropinosomes from iron. Such a dual role is similar to that of the Nramp1 ortholog in macrophages, which recycles iron from ingested erythrocytes, while starving ingested pathogens from iron or manganese. Remarkably, Nramp1-dependent calcein de-quenching was observed in macropinosomes of cells upon incubation with both Fe 2+ - or Fe 3+ -quenched calcein. In the experiments with Xenopus oocytes, we have shown, however, that only Fe 2+ is transported by Nramp1. This suggests that Dictyostelium cells are able to reduce Fe 3+ in macropinosomes or phagosomes. In macrophages, phagosomal or endosomal Fe 3+ reduction is mediated by ferrireductases of the STEAP family. No STEAP homologs exist in the Dictyostelium genome, which harbors, however, three putative ferric reductase genes that could take over this function if they are recruited to the macropinosomal and phagosomal lumen. Preliminary experiments in our laboratory have shown that at least one of these ferric reductases is indeed recruited to phagosomes. For better characterization of the transport properties of both Nramp1 and Nramp2, we expressed the proteins in the plasma membrane of Xenopus oocytes. In addition to well-established radiochemical uptake assays and electrophysiological recording, we have developed a novel assay based on calcein injection into the oocyte and potential quenching of the fluorescence by imported divalent metals. We have shown that calcein fluorescence is stable in control oocytes, but is quenched within a few minutes by Fe 2+ in oocytes expressing chimeric Nramp1 and Nramp2 or rDMT1, a process that can be easily visualized by confocal microscopy and can be quantified. The calcein-quenching rate by Fe 2+ and Mn 2+ was roughly comparable in c-Nramp1- and rDMT1-expressing oocytes, suggesting a similar transport rate. It was instead reduced for Fe 2+ and undetectable for Mn 2+ in c-Nramp2 expressing oocytes. An unexpected interesting result was that Fe 3+ and Cu 2+ increased rather than decreased calcein fluorescence in c-Nramp1 expressing oocytes. These cations also failed to quench calcein in Nramp2- and rDMT1-expressing oocytes, suggesting that these metals are not imported, but nevertheless interact with the transporters, very likely favoring efflux of calcein-quenching metals from the oocyte. Interestingly, metal ion binding studies in crystals of the homolog ScaDMT have recently shown that Cu 2+ binds to the same location as Mn 2+ and Fe 2+, but at a slightly shifted position. This could explain why copper, and presumably also Fe 3+, are not transported, but could possibly make the channel leaky. To our knowledge, only one paper has been published so far on the characterization of metal transporters in Xenopus oocytes with fluorescent probes, namely for investigating DMT1 transport using Phen Green SK. Those authors showed that DMT1 transports Fe 2+ and Mn 2+, but not Fe 3+, Cu 2+, Cr 2+ or Cr 3+ among others. These results are in agreement with the present results with calcein for rDMT1. The radiochemical and electrophysiological analyses confirm that Dictyostelium Nramp1 is a proton-dependent Fe 2+ transporter that shares with mammalian DMT1 several features: both transport Fe 2+ and Mn 2+, in both cases transport is maximal at acidic pH, quite absent at neutral or basic pH, and is electrogenic, with the size of inward currents also depending on pH. Nramp1 differs from rDMT1 for a large Na + or H + slippage. In so far as Dictyostelium Nramp1 is the ortholog of mammalian NRAMP1, and both proteins are recruited to phagosomes in Dictyostelium cells as well as macrophages, the present results are clear-cut evidence in favor of the idea that these proteins mediate proton-driven iron efflux from these vesicles, challenging the hypothesis that they act as antiporters. Dictyostelium Nramp2 expressed in Xenopus oocytes differs from Nramp1 and DMT1 – it has a lower rate of Fe 2+ transport, undetectable Mn transport, independence from acidic pH, and very low, if not absent, charge movements. To what extent these differences are due to less-efficient Nramp2 expression in the oocyte membrane or to structural differences between Nramp2 and Nramp1 remains open. Sequence comparison of Dictyostelium Nramp1 and Nramp2 with mammalian Nramp1 and DMT1 reveals a high degree of conservation, yet with some interesting differences, which can be highlighted by comparing the proteins with the recently determined first crystal structure of a Slc11 transporter, the prokaryotic ScaDMT. Crystallography and functional topology studies show that two symmetrically oriented helics in the center of the membrane bilayer, formed by the second half of the first transmembrane α-helix are face-to-face with a symmetric half of the sixth α-helix, give rise to the ion channel and to the substrate-binding site. Four residues in both helices coordinate Mn 2+, Fe 2+ and Cd 2+, but not Ca 2+. These residues, as well as two histidine residues, presumably required for proton co-transport, are conserved in ScaDMT and mammalian NRAMP proteins as well as Dictyostelium Nramp1 and Nramp2. Of 15 amino acid residues whose mutations in human or murine DMT1 have been shown to affect uptake, substrate specificity, pH dependence of transport or leak current, only one is modified in Dictyostelium Nramp1, whereas three are significantly different in Nramp2. Interestingly, the equivalent mutations E87A, Q91D and G208R in rat DMT1 result in decreased metal uptake in Xenopus oocytes, and can thus explain the lower iron and manganese uptake reported in this paper for c-Nramp2. Fig. 7. Sequence alignment. Sequences of Dictyostelium Nramp1 and Nramp2, human Nramp1 and DMT1, rat DMT1 and Staphylococcus capitis DMT were aligned with ClustalW. Identical or homologous residues are shown in sky blue or light blue,... Remarkably, all these different amino acid residues of Dictyostelium Nramp2 are conserved in Nramp2 homologs of the other four Dictyostelid species sequenced so far. Thus, they are suggestive of basic different properties between Dictyostelid Nramp1 and Nramp2. In general, Nramp1 and Nramp2 are useful tools for deciphering the mechanism of action of archetypical versus prototypical proteins. Archetypical Nramp proteins are found, not only in Dictyostelids, but also in all higher eucaryotes from Arabidopsis to mammals, whereas prototypical Nramp proteins are found, in addition to Dictyostelids, in protists, such as Chlamydomonas and Volvox, some fungi and in a subgroup of proteobacteria. The Dictyostelids are the only species known so far, which harbor one archetypical and one prototypical protein. Given that Dictyostelium discoideum Nramp2 is a prototypical Nramp protein and is not the ortholog of mammalian DMT1, to avoid confusion the protein will be re-named from now on as NrampB. This change is effective in the organism database. In contrast to Nramp1, which is recruited to phago-lysosomes, both in Dictyostelium cells and in macrophages, Dictyostelium NrampB is localized in the membrane of the contractile vacuole network, which is also highly enriched with the v-H + -ATPase. Aside from its regulatory activity in water and Ca 2+ sequestration, little is known on the evolutionary origin and function of this complex structure, which is present in the social amoebae and in fresh-water protists, but absent in other eukaryotes. Although close homologs of Dictyostelid NrampB are present in the genomes of Chlamydomonas and Volvox, whether the proteins are localized in their contractile vacuoles as in Dictyostelium is not known. We have suggested that the contractile vacuole can act as a reservoir or sink for excess labile iron and other divalent metals, which can be excreted, upon vacuole fusion with the plasma membrane, or mobilized back to the cytosol, depending on cell need. Future site-directed mutagenesis studies will help to elucidate the mechanism of action of NrampB and shed insights on both iron transport across the contractile vacuole membrane and the function of the contractile vacuole in divalent metal homeostasis. MATERIALS AND METHODS Xenopus oocyte solutions The oocyte solutions had the following composition, ND96: NaCl 96, KCl 2, MgCl 2 1, CaCl 2 1.8, HEPES 5, pH 7.6; MBS: NaCl 88, KCl 1, NaHCO 3 2.4, HEPES 15, pH 7.6, Ca 2 0.30, CaCl 2 0.41, MgSO 4 0.82, penicillin 10 µg/ml, streptomycin sulfate 10 µg/ml, gentamycin sulfate 100 µg/ml, nystatin 10 U/ml. The external control solution contained in mM: NaCl or TMACl, 98; MgCl 2, 1; CaCl 2, 1.8, HEPES or MES 5. The final pH values of 6.0, 5.5 or 7.5 were adjusted with HCl and NaOH. Dictyostelium cell cultures The Dictyostelium discoideum parental strain AX2 was used. Single and double Nramp1- and Nramp2-KO mutants or cells expressing Nramp1– or Nramp2–GFP were generated previously and are as described by Peracino et al.. For generating RFP-fused Nramp1 and Nramp2 proteins, the corresponding genes were cloned in the EcoRI site of the 389-2 vector. All strains were cultured axenically in AX2 medium in Erlenmeyer flasks under shaking at 150 rpm and 22°C on a gyratory shaker in a climatic cabinet as described previously. Blasticidin at a concentration of 0.01 mg/ml was added to the knockout mutants. Cells expressing GFP-fused proteins were cultured in the presence of 0.01 to 0.03 mg/ml G418. Preparation of chimeric cDNA and cRNA and expression in Xenopus oocytes Chimeric cDNAs and RNAs were prepared as described previously. Briefly, for generating cDNAs, the restriction sites Eco47III at the N-terminus and HpaI at the C-terminus were inserted by PCR amplification in cDNA coding for the proteins in pGEMT. Rat dmt1 in pSport was mutagenized by site-directed mutagenesis with overlapping primers to insert the Eco47III site and the NsiI site. The plasmids were digested and joined according to the scheme shown in supplementary material Fig. S2. The chimeric constructs were fully sequenced before mRNA transcription. For mRNA transfection, the cDNA encoding the desired protein cloned into the pSPORT-1 vector was linearized with NotI, and cRNA synthesized in vitro in the presence of Cap Analog and 200 units of T7 RNA polymerase. All enzymes were supplied by Promega. Oocytes were obtained from adult females of Xenopus laevis. The frogs were anaesthetized in 0.10% MS222 solution in tap water and portions of the ovary were removed through an incision on the abdomen. The oocytes were treated with 1 mg/ml collagenase in ND96 calcium-free solution for at least 1 h at 18°C. After 24 h at 18°C in modified Barth's saline solution, the healthy looking oocytes were injected with 25 ng of cRNA in 50 nl of water, using a manual microinjection system. The oocytes were then incubated at 18°C for 3–4 days in MBS before electrophysiological or transport studies. The experiments were carried out according to institutional and national ethical guidelines. Metal-sensitive fluorophore transport assay in Dictyostelium macropinosomes and in Xenopus oocytes, and confocal fluorescence imaging For detecting calcein in macropinosomes, exponentially growing Dictyostelium cells expressing Nramp1– or Nramp2–GFP were incubated with 0.025 mM calcein, diluted in growth medium, for 30 min under shaking; they were then washed, resuspended in 0.017 M Soerensen Na-K phosphate buffer pH 6.0 and plated on 6×6 cm glass coverslips. For colocalization studies, cells were incubated with 1 mg/ml TRITC–dextran and 0.025 μM calcein in suspension. After 30 min, cells were washed in Soerensen phosphate buffer and plated on a 6×6 cm glass coverslip. Confocal series images were taken on an inverted Zeiss LSM510 microscope equipped with a 100× Neofluar 1.3 oil immersion objective, using a multi-track configuration as follows. Track 1 excitation was with a 543-nm band from a helium-neon laser line, emission collected with a 620 nm long-pass filter for TRITC. Track 2 excitation was with a 488-nm band from an argon-ion laser line and emission collected with a 510–525 nm bandpass filter for FITC. The scanning interval time was reduced to 1.9 s. For monitoring metal transport in Dictyostelium macropinosomes, cells were incubated with increasing amounts of divalent metals and 0.025 mM calcein in axenic growth medium for 30 min, washed in Soerensen phosphate buffer and incubated on glass coverslips. For continuous loading experiments, exponentially growing control or mutant cells were washed, resuspended in low fluorescence medium and plated on a 6×6 cm glass coverslip equipped with a 5-cm diameter Plexiglas ring. After gently adding calcein, chelated or not with FeCl 3 or FeCl 2, consecutive images of single cells were taken every 2.9 s on the confocal microscope. For metal transport in Xenopus oocytes, control oocytes and oocytes transfected with cRNA encoding c-Nramp1, c-Nramp2 or rDMT1 were injected with a 50 nl drop of 0.025 mM calcein dissolved in intracellular solution. The nominal volume of a 1.2-mm diameter oocyte is 1 µl; therefore, a 50-nl drop will be diluted 20 times. The exact dilution factor is, however, difficult to establish because not all the theoretical volume will necessarily be available for free diffusion. Following calcein injection, the oocytes were placed in TMA solution at pH 5.5 containing or not divalent metals at a final concentration of 0.1 mM and observed at the confocal microscope equipped with a 5× Plan Neofluar 0.15 objective. Images of single oocytes were taken every 10 s for a total of 10 min, by using excitation at 488 nm and emission at 505–550 nm. For F:F0 quantification, the fluorescence intensity at time 0 and at subsequent times was calculated in the entire area of the oocytes using ImageJ. Changes in fluorescence intensity in the entire oocyte or in selected areas were proportionally linear with time. Flow cytometry measurement of divalent metal transport in Dictyostelium cells Wild-type or Nramp mutant Dictyostelium cells were incubated with 0.025 mM calcein and increasing amount of divalent metals for 30 min, washed in Soerensen phosphate buffer, placed on ice and then analyzed on a FACScan. Cells were identified based on forward and side scatter. FITC fluorescence was measured in the FL1 channel, and the mean fluorescence was determined for at least 20,000 cells. Background cell autofluorescence was subtracted from every value. To quantify the calcein fluorescence recovery, the fluorescence mean values of samples in the presence of divalent metals were normalized to the maximal fluorescence values of corresponding samples in the absence of metals and expressed as the percentage of maximal fluorescence. Electrophysiology and data analysis The two-electrode voltage-clamp technique was used. Intracellular glass microelectrodes were filled with 3 M KCl and had tip resistances between 0.5–4 MΩ. Agar bridges connected the bath electrodes to the experimental chamber. The holding potential was −40 mV. Recording was conducted at a fixed voltage. WinWCP version 4.4.6 or Clampex 10.2 was used to run the experiments. Data were analyzed using Clampfit 10.2, and figures were prepared with Origin Pro 8.0. Transport currents were determined by subtracting the records in the absence of a substrate from the corresponding ones in its presence. Radiochemical uptake assay Uptake experiments with oocytes were performed 4 days after cRNA injection. The uptake solution contained the indicated concentration of 55 FeCl 2 and 100 mM NaCl, 1.8 mM KCl, 0.6 mM CaCl 2, 0.6 mM MgCl 2, 10 mM Mes or Hepes at pH 5.5, 6.5, 7.5 or 8.0. 1 mM ascorbic acid was added to maintain iron in the reduced form unless otherwise indicated. Groups of 8–10 oocytes were incubated for 60 min in uptake solution, washed in ice-cold uptake solution devoid of FeCl 2, dissolved in 10% SDS solution and counted in a liquid scintillation counter. Figures show mean±s.e.m. values for groups of 8–10 oocytes in three independent experiments. For statistical analysis, Student's t -test was applied. Supplementary Material Supplementary Material: Click here to view. Acknowledgements We thank Annette Mueller-Taubenberger for the 389-2 vector, Paola Marciani for the r-DMT1-pSport1 plasmid and the Dictybase team. Footnotes Competing interests The authors declare no competing or financial interests. Author contributions S. Buracco designed and conducted the experiments with Dictyostelium, acquired and analyzed the data; B.P. generated the Dictyostelium KO mutants and the plasmids for GFP-fused proteins, conducted the confocal microscopy studies with oocytes and analyzed the data; R.C. and F.I. prepared the plasmids for chimera protein expression in oocytes, were responsible for the oocyte cultures and worked, together with A.V., on acquisition, analysis and interpretation of electrophysiological data, E.S. performed the radiochemical assays and analyzed the data; M.C., E.B. and S. Bozzaro conceived, designed and supervised the study and wrote the paper; S. Buracco, B.P., F.I. and E.B. prepared and revised the figures, all approved the paper. Funding The work was supported by a research grant from the Compagnia San Paolo and University of Torino. Deposited in PMC for immediate release. Supplementary material Supplementary material available online at Article information J Cell Sci. 2015 Sep 1; 128: 3304–3316. doi: 10.1242/jcs.173153 PMCID: PMC4582194 PMID: 26208637 Simona Buracco, 1, * Barbara Peracino, 1, * Raffaella Cinquetti, 2 Elena Signoretto, 3 Alessandra Vollero, 2 Francesca Imperiali, 2 Michela Castagna, 3 Elena Bossi, 2 and Salvatore Bozzaro 1, ‡ Simona Buracco 1 Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Torino, AOU S. Luigi, Orbassano 10043, Italy Find articles by Simona Buracco Barbara Peracino 1 Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Torino, AOU S. Luigi, Orbassano 10043, Italy Find articles by Barbara Peracino Raffaella Cinquetti 2 Department of Biotechnology and Life Sciences, University of Insubria, Via J. H. Dunant 3, Varese 21100, Italy Find articles by Raffaella Cinquetti Elena Signoretto 3 Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Trentacoste 2, Milano 20133, Italy Find articles by Elena Signoretto Alessandra Vollero 2 Department of Biotechnology and Life Sciences, University of Insubria, Via J. H. Dunant 3, Varese 21100, Italy Find articles by Alessandra Vollero Francesca Imperiali 2 Department of Biotechnology and Life Sciences, University of Insubria, Via J. H. Dunant 3, Varese 21100, Italy Find articles by Francesca Imperiali Michela Castagna 3 Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Trentacoste 2, Milano 20133, Italy Find articles by Michela Castagna Elena Bossi 2 Department of Biotechnology and Life Sciences, University of Insubria, Via J. H. Dunant 3, Varese 21100, Italy Find articles by Elena Bossi Salvatore Bozzaro 1 Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Torino, AOU S. Luigi, Orbassano 10043, Italy Find articles by Salvatore Bozzaro 1 Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Torino, AOU S. Luigi, Orbassano 10043, Italy 2 Department of Biotechnology and Life Sciences, University of Insubria, Via J. H. Dunant 3, Varese 21100, Italy 3 Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Trentacoste 2, Milano 20133, Italy * These authors contributed equally to this work ‡ Author for correspondence Received 2015 Apr 16; Accepted 2015 Jul 21. Copyright © 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed. Articles from Journal of Cell Science are provided here courtesy of Company of Biologists 