 Background and Purpose Identifying and characterizing potential new therapeutic agents to target cell proliferation may provide improved treatments for neoplastic disorders such as cancer and polycystic diseases. Experimental Approach We used the simple, tractable biomedical model Dictyostelium to investigate the molecular mechanism of naringenin, a dietary flavonoid with antiproliferative and chemopreventive actions in vitro and in animal models of carcinogenesis. We then translated these results to a mammalian kidney model, Madin-Darby canine kidney tubule cells, grown in culture and as cysts in a collagen matrix. Key Results Naringenin inhibited Dictyostelium growth, but not development. Screening of a library of random gene knockout mutants identified a mutant lacking TRPP2 that was resistant to the effect of naringenin on growth and random cell movement. TRPP2 is a divalent transient receptor potential cation channel, where mutations in the protein give rise to type 2 autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Naringenin inhibited MDCK cell growth and inhibited cyst growth. Knockdown of TRPP2 levels by siRNA in this model conferred partial resistance to naringenin such that cysts treated with 3 and 10 μM naringenin were larger following TRPP2 knockdown compared with controls. Naringenin did not affect chloride secretion. Conclusions and Implications The action of naringenin on cell growth in the phylogenetically diverse systems of Dictyostelium and mammalian kidney cells, suggests a conserved effect mediated by TRPP2. Further studies will investigate naringenin as a potential new therapeutic agent in ADPKD. Linked Articles This article is part of a themed section on the pharmacology of TRP channels. To view the other articles in this section visit Keywords: polycystic kidney disease, polycystin-2, naringenin, Dictyostelium, polyphenol, cell growth Introduction The development of new treatments for a disease requires knowledge of the molecular target of those treatments. The social amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum, is a simple biomedical model commonly used to study developmental and cellular biology. Dictyostelium has recently been used in early drug development studies and to identify molecular pathways regulating drug action. In its natural forest-floor habitat, Dictyostelium exists in its amoeboid state and feeds on bacterial cells by phagocytosis. When nutrients are scarce, cells aggregate to form fruiting bodies containing spores that are dormant and resistant to desiccation. Growth and development are controlled by a range of separate signalling pathways that can be probed at the molecular level by screening libraries of insertional mutants, constructed by restriction enzyme-mediated integration. This approach has provided new insights into how current therapeutic agents regulate cellular function, for example, in identifying common signalling pathways targeted by lithium and valproic acid in the treatment of bipolar disorder, and is increasingly being used to identify cellular mechanisms controlling drug targets using growth and development or cell movement as phenotypic readouts. Naringenin is a member of the flavonone subclass of flavonoids, a large family of plant polyphenols. Naringenin is ingested mostly as naringin and is available at relatively high doses in grapefruit juice. Naringenin is bioavailable after reasonable doses; for example, a dose of 139–265 mg naringenin yielded 0.7–14.8 μM of the aglycone in the blood after absorption. After phase 2 metabolism, naringenin glucuronides and sulphates are detected in low micromolar concentrations. In common with many flavonoids, naringenin inhibits growth in tumour cells by a number of mechanisms, including cell cycle arrest and p53-dependent apoptosis. Naringenin also suppresses colon cancer in rats and inhibits metastasis and tissue invasion. The chemopreventive actions of naringenin may include activation of certain cytochrome P450 isozymes and phase 2 enzymes involved in the detoxification of potential carcinogens. Figure 1 Structure of naringenin. Since a previous study had shown that naringenin blocked Dictyostelium cell growth, we sought to identify the molecular mechanism of naringenin function in this model. By screening a library of Dictyostelium REMI mutants, it was possible to identify genes conferring resistance to naringenin. We then used the appropriate mammalian system to study the role of the identified gene product in mediating the actions of naringenin on cell growth. Our data have identified a new candidate for naringenin-mediated cell function: polycystin-2, a Ca 2+ permeable non-selective cation channel implicated in the development of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. In this disease, kidney cysts develop due to a defect in proliferation and because of fluid secretion into the cysts. About 85% of ADPKD cases result from mutations in the TRPP1 gene and protein, with the remainder accounted for by mutations in the TRPP2 gene and protein. We therefore followed up on our own initial observations in Dictyostelium by studying the involvement of TRPP2 in the effects of naringenin on the growth of Madin-Darby canine kidney cells and cysts. We found that TRPP2 mediated the growth-inhibitory effects of naringenin in both systems. Methods Dictyostelium growth assays Dictyostelium discoideum wild-type cells were grown in shaking suspension in Axenic medium at 120 rpm and harvested in mid-log phase. Cells were then resuspended in Axenic medium containing 100 μM naringenin or DMSO and counted at 24 h intervals. Dictyostelium insertional mutagenesis library screening Dictyostelium wild-type cells were mutagenized by REMI of plasmid DNA using pBBC plasmids, which are derivatives of the pBSR1 plasmid that contain 60mer DNA barcodes. REMI was performed using three combinations of restriction enzymes for plasmid linearization/electroporation. Clonal transformants were propagated in 24-well culture plates and stored at –80°C in 10% DMSO for future recovery. The residual cells from these plates were spotted on a bacterial growth plate, allowed to grow for 2 days, and collected as pools. A number of these pools of 24 were combined into 30 large pools of 672–768 mutants. Twenty-five large pools were used in the enrichment experiments that were carried out for each pool, in triplicate, in 10 cm Petri dishes with 10 mL of HL-5 supplemented with 100 μg·mL −1 streptomycin and 100 U·mL −1 penicillin. Naringenin was added to 5 × 10 6 mutant cells in 10 mL of supplemented HL-5. After 3 days or when cell concentration reached ∼2 × 10 6 cells·mL −1, 1 mL of the initial culture media was removed and added to 9 mL of fresh media containing naringenin. The same procedure was repeated for 21 days. Genomic DNA was purified from cells that were collected from each culture dish and plasmid insertion sites were cloned as described previously. After a mutant's insertion site was identified by plasmid rescue, a clonal strain was recovered from the 24-well frozen stock to confirm resistance to growth inhibition by naringenin and for further analysis. Dictyostelium pkd2 − recapitulation Knockout constructs were created using methods described previously. Briefly, 5′ and 3′ fragments flanking the Dictyostelium pkd2 was amplified by PCR from wild-type genomic DNA. The 5′ terminal targeting fragment was amplified using AAGGGATCCAATACCTTGAAATTAATAATCCATC and TTAACTGCAGCTGATGCTGTC, and the 3′ terminal fragment was amplified using CTGATATTGCCTCATTCCATGGCTTCG and TTGGTGATTGTGGGGTACCAGTAC. The 5′ and 3′ PCR fragments were cloned into the plPBLP expression vector using BamHI/PstI and NcoI/KpnI restriction sites, respectively, incorporating the gene in the reverse orientation to the blasticidin resistance cassette. The knockout cassette was linearized and transformed into wild-type cells via electroporation. Positive transformants were selected in nutrient media containing blasticidin. Independent clones were screened for homologous integration by PCR, using diagnostic PCR products for the presence of target gene genomic DNA and knockout vector sequences, as well as a diagnostic PCR product only found for homologous intergrant for both N and C-terminal regions of the knockout cassette. Triplicate independent isolates were identified, clonally plated onto Raoultella planticola, and isogenic colonies were used in subsequent experiments. Dictyostelium random cell movement assay To analyse the effect of naringenin on Dictyostelium random cell movement, wild-type and pkd2 − cells were grown in shaking suspension in Axenic medium for 48 h, washed and resuspended in phosphate buffer at 1.7 × 10 6 cells·mL −1, and treated with 30 nM cAMP at 6 min intervals while shaking at 120 rpm as described previously. Cells were then shaken in the presence of 200 μM naringenin or 0.7% DMSO for 1 h, transferred into 8-well glass coverslips and random cell movement was recorded by capturing one image every 15 s for 5 min. A minimum of three independent experiments were performed for each cell and condition, whereby an average ∼10 cells were quantified per experiment. Random cell movement was analysed using the Quimp 11b software package for ImageJ. Data were imported into MATLAB where changes in motility, circularity, distance travelled and number of protrusions formed were monitored for each cell line in the presence and absence naringenin. The effect of naringenin was assessed in relation to distance travelled by cells during random cell movement, cell circularity, number of protrusions and motility. Data were compared using one-way anova with Tukey's post hoc test. MDCK cell culture MDCK C7 cells were a generous gift from Dr Anselm Zdebik. MDCK cells were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS, gentamycin, penicillin and streptomycin, and were maintained at 37°C in a humidified, 5% CO 2 atmosphere. Cells of less than 18 passage numbers were used for all cytotoxicity and cyst growth studies. MDCK cell viability assays Naringenin was dissolved in DMSO and evaluated for its antiproliferative effect on MDCK cells using the sulforhodamine B assay. Cells were seeded in complete DMEM in a 96-well plate, allowed to adhere for 24 h then incubated with naringenin for 24–48 h. The medium was removed and 100 μL of SRB solution was added to each well and plates were incubated for 10 min at room temperature. The SRB solution was removed and cells were washed five times with 1% acetic acid before air drying. SRB bound to adherent cells was solubilized with 10 mM Tris base and plates were placed on a horizontal shaker for at least 10 min at room temperature. Absorbance was read at 550 nm using an ELx808 Absorbance Microplate reader. Actinomycin-D was used as a positive control. The neutral red assay was performed as described previously with readings at 510 nm. EC 50 values were calculated by four-parameter non-linear regression using GraphPad Prism. MDCK cyst culture and measurement For cyst growth studies, we followed a published protocol. In brief, MDCK cells were cultured in 24-well plates. A cell suspension was mixed with 0.4 mL ice-cold collagen supplemented with DMEM containing 10% FBS, gentamycin, penicillin, streptomycin, 10 mM HEPES and 27 mM NaHCO 3. Plates containing cells in collagen were incubated at 37°C in a humidified, 5% CO 2 atmosphere for about 2 h until the collagen sets. DMEM containing 10% FBS and forskolin was added to each well and plates were placed back in the incubator. Cells were replenished with fresh DMEM medium supplemented with forskolin after every 2 days until the end of day 12. Cells transformed into cysts within 3 days of plating and were photographed using an inverted microscope at ×100 magnification. On day 6, a total of 50 cysts each with a diameter >50 μm were selected and referenced using microscope slide-grids underneath each well. The same protocol was followed for the transfected MDCK cells. To evaluate the potential effect on cyst growth, naringenin at 1, 3, 10, 30, 60, 100 μM, or metformin, or vehicle control were added in DMEM containing forskolin on days 6, 8 and 10. Photographs of referenced cysts were taken on days 6, 8, 10 and 12. Cyst area was measured using Image J software. Electrophysiological measurements of MDCK monolayers MDCK cells were seeded onto Snapwell permeable supports at 2 × 10 5 cells·cm −2. Cells formed monolayers in culture in a humidified incubator. Culture medium was replaced every 2 days and monolayers were used in experiments after 12–13 days in culture. Monolayers were mounted in Ussing chambers and bathed both sides with Krebs-Henselheit buffer: in mM, NaCl 117, NaHCO 3 25, KCl 4.7, MgSO 4 1.2, KH 2 PO 4 1.2, glucose 11, CaCl 2 2.5, bubbled with 95% O 2 /5% CO 2 to maintain pH at 7.45. Experiments were performed at 37°C using heated water-jacketed buffer reservoirs. The transepithelial potential difference generated across MDCK monolayers was clamped to 0 mV and the short-circuit current recorded using a DVC-1000 voltage-clamp amplifier via an analog–digital convertor and Acknowledge 3.8.2 software. Brief voltage steps from 0 to 1 mV were applied periodically and the change in current used to calculate transepithelial resistance. MDCK monolayers had a spontaneous Vt of −4.7 ± 1.3 mV on mounting, baseline I SC was 1.0 ± 0.3 μA·cm −2 and transepithelial resistance was 2152 ± 308 Ωcm 2. siRNA TRPP2 transfection MDCK cells were grown until 80% confluent. For transfection experiments, cells were incubated overnight in reduced serum medium Opti-MEM prior to transfection. Cells were then transfected with 20 nM canine TRPP2 siRNA or scrambled control siRNA in a lipid-based transfection reagent lipofectamine 2000 at 1:1000 dilution for 24 h. Cells were allowed to recover in DMEM without antibiotics for 12 h. The following day, cells were re-transfected using a similar procedure. This double transfection procedure resulted in a transfection efficiency of approximately 60–70%. Following transfection, cells were grown for 24–48 h for Western blot analysis or further processed for cyst culture or proliferation assay. Transfection efficiency was monitored using confocal microscopy of transfected cells cultured on chambered glass slides in order to analyse siRNA subcellular localization and stability. The molecular target nomenclature for TRPP2 conforms to BJP's Concise Guide to PHARMACOLOGY. Western blot analysis Lysates of control and transfected cells were prepared in RIPA with protease inhibitor. Protein fractions were separated on 4–12% Bis-Tris acrylamide gels, transferred to polyvinylidine difluoride membranes and incubated in blocking buffer for 2 h and then overnight at 4°C with anti-TRPP2 antibody or mouse monoclonal anti-β-actin in PBS. Blots were washed three times in PBS/0.01% TWEEN 20 then incubated with IR Dye anti-goat/mouse secondary antiserum for 1 h, each at room temperature. Immunostained proteins were visualized and quantified using an infrared imaging system. Data analysis and statistical procedures Data are presented as mean and SEM from n independent experiments Statistical tests were performed using Prism 5.0.4 as stated in the text. Chemicals All materials used in this study were from Sigma Aldrich unless otherwise specified. Results Naringenin inhibits growth of Dictyostelium To identify the molecular mechanism of action of naringenin, we first defined conditions suitable for screening a Dictyostelium REMI mutant library. The growth of wild-type Dictyostelium in shaking cultures was reduced after 48–96 h by naringenin with an EC 50 between 50 and 100 μM. In contrast, development of Dictyostelium on nitrocellulose filters was unaffected in the presence of up to 200 μM naringenin. This growth inhibition enabled the selection of cells resistant to the effect of naringenin in shaking culture using a library of REMI mutants, exposed to 200 μM naringenin for 21 days. Sequence analysis of cells resistant to naringenin under these conditions identified 26 mutants containing an interrupted open reading frame potentially controlling the effect of naringenin on growth. One of these interrupted genes, pkd2, encoded the TRPP2 protein. This protein showed a similar overall size to the human protein, with similar potential transmembrane domains although it showed low homology to the human protein. Figure 2 Naringenin reduced growth of Dictyostelium and inhibited cell behaviour, an effect controlled through the TRPP2 protein. Dictyostelium growth in liquid culture is reduced in a concentration-dependent manner by naringenin. Ablation of the gene encoding... TRPP2 mediates the effect of naringenin on Dictyostelium Recapitulation of the gene knockout mutant, pkd2 −, in wild-type cells enabled the comparison of the effect of naringenin on wild-type and pkd2 − cells. Initial analysis of these two cell lines showed that 100 μM naringenin caused a significant 37% reduction in wild-type cell growth at 48 and 72 h, whereas the pkd2 − mutant showed reduced growth compared with wild-type cells in the absence of naringenin, but showed no significant change in growth in the presence of 100 μM naringenin at both time points. To better quantify this resistant phenotype, and because we have also shown the effect of a range of dietary compounds on Dictyostelium cell behaviour, we also examined a role for naringenin regulating cell shape and movement. In these experiments, cells were developed under control conditions over a 5 h period, and then treated with 200 μM naringenin for 60 min before recording random cell movement. Naringenin treatment caused wild-type cells to round up, with a loss of pseudopod formation and a block in cell movement. In contrast, the naringenin-treated pkd2 − mutant showed no significant change in shape, measured as roundness, did not form a significantly different number of pseudopods, and did not significantly change cell movement. These data suggest that TRPP2 controls the function of naringenin on Dictyostelium movement. Naringenin inhibits growth of MDCK cells and cysts As mutations within the human TRPP2 protein are associated with growth of renal cysts in polycystic kidney disease, we next investigated a similar effect of naringenin on the mammalian TRPP2 during cell growth. TRPP2 is expressed in the MDCK canine kidney cell line and cyst formation in these cells has been used as a model of PKD. In this system, naringenin inhibited the growth of MDCK cells over 24–48 h with EC 50 values of 28.5 ± 1 μM using two independent assays for cell growth assessment. Figure 3 Inhibition of proliferating, unpolarized MDCK cell growth by naringenin after 48 h. Cell viability was measured using the neutral red assay and the SRB protein assay. Data are from three independent experiments showing mean and SEM. MDCK cells can be induced to form cysts by the addition of forskolin to the growth medium bathing a collagen gel inoculated with the cells. Following this treatment, cysts were observed after 3 days, with individual cysts reaching sizes of >50 μm in diameter 6 days after induction. Addition of naringenin caused a concentration-dependent decrease in cyst size, with an EC 50 of 3–10 μM following a 12 day treatment. Growth inhibition was complete after 6 days exposure to 100 μM naringenin ; no cysts remained at this concentration. Metformin, an activator of AMP-dependent kinase, also inhibited cyst growth, as reported in another study. Figure 4 Inhibition of cyst growth by naringenin. Photomicrographs of normal cysts treated from day 6 to day 12 with medium, 0.1% DMSO, naringenin 1–100 μM or metformin 10 μM. The shadows/lines... Knockdown of TRPP2 protects MDCK cysts and cells from naringenin As it was clear that naringenin inhibited the proliferation of MDCK cells and cysts, we implemented an siRNA strategy to knock down the cellular level of TRPP2 in MDCK cells. In this approach, cell extracts derived from MDCK in isolated cell culture were analysed by Western blot and were positive for TRPP2: two proteins were detected as shown previously. Transforming these cells with siRNA specific to TRPP2 RNA or with a scrambled sequence, and leaving cells to recover for up to 48 h, enabled the assessment of reduced MDCK protein by Western blot analysis. This approach gave a dose-dependent decrease in the abundance of both TRPP2 proteins using specific TRPP2 siRNA at 10 nmol or 20 nmol. Protein abundance was decreased to 56 ± 5% with 20 nmol of TRPP2 siRNA after 24 h, 39 ± 8% after 48 h, and 32 ± 2% after 12 days. Figure 5 Knockdown of TRPP2 protein in MDCK cells. Representative Western blot of TRPP2 from cells transfected 48 h or 12 days. Lane 1: untransfected cells, Lane 2: cells... The growth of MDCK cells transfected with either scrambled siRNA or TRPP2 siRNA was then measured in the presence of increasing concentrations of naringenin for 48 h. The inhibitory effect of naringenin on growth was reduced in cells transfected with TRPP2 siRNA when compared with untransfected cells and to cells transfected with scrambled siRNA. The EC 50 value for naringenin was increased from 28 ± 1 μM to 65 ± 1 μM. Transfection with scrambled siRNA had no effect on the EC 50 for growth inhibition. Thus, at a time point, when TRPP2 protein was reduced to 39% of control, the effect of naringenin on cell growth was blunted and the EC 50 value more than doubled. Figure 6 Reduced inhibition of MDCK cell growth transfected with TRPP2 siRNA by naringenin after 48 h. The growth of cells transfected with scrambled siRNA and treated with naringenin was unaffected. Cell viability was measured using the neutral red assay.... Untransfected MDCK cells and cells transfected with TRPP2 siRNA, were then grown as cysts for 6 days after which naringenin was added for another 6 days. Transfected cysts with knocked down TRPP2 were larger than their untransfected counterparts, showing that reduced functional TRPP2 levels promotes cyst formation and growth. Transfected cysts were more resistant than control cysts to inhibition by naringenin at 10 μM and 30 μM after 6 days. Naringenin at 100 μM progressively reduced cyst growth and cysts were absent at 12 days. Metformin also inhibited the growth of transfected cysts with no difference in activity compared with normal cysts, confirming the selectivity of TRPP2 siRNA treatment. Figure 7 Transfection with siRNA TRPP2 protects cysts from the growth-inhibitory effects of naringenin. Photomicrographs of transfected cysts treated from day 6 to day 12 with medium, 0.1% DMSO, naringenin 1–100 μM... Lack of effect of naringenin on chloride secretion in MDCK monolayers Naringenin has been reported to inhibit chloride secretion at super-physiological concentrations, while others have reported that it stimulates chloride secretion. A reduction in cAMP-dependent chloride secretion is one method for reducing cyst growth. We therefore performed experiments to determine the effect of naringenin on forskolin-induced chloride secretion measured as I SC. Monolayers were treated on both sides with naringenin or its vehicle followed by forskolin. Forskolin increased I SC by 10.6 ± 3.1 μA·cm −2 in vehicle-treated monolayers, and by 11.6 ± 3.8 μA·cm −2 in naringenin-treated monolayers, with no significant difference between the means. Ten minutes after addition of forskolin, I SC remained similar in vehicle-treated monolayers and naringenin-treated monolayers. Furosemide, an inhibitor of basolateral chloride uptake, added after the forskolin response began to decline, had little or no effect on I SC, indicating that the stimulation of chloride secretion by forskolin was transient in these cells. Figure 8 Effect of naringenin on cAMP-dependent chloride secretion. Representative traces showing addition of naringenin or vehicle, forskolin and furosemide. Naringenin attenuated cell behaviour after 60 min treatment. The inhibitory effect of naringenin was conferred by the expression of the TRPP2 protein, because the pkd2 − mutant was insensitive to naringenin-dependent reduction in cell behaviour. In another study, other flavonoids including the related compound apigenin had no effect on Dictyostelium proliferation, suggesting a degree of structural specificity for naringenin presumably through a TRPP2-dependent effect. Although a mechanism for how TRPP2 regulates Dictyostelium cell behaviour is unclear, a role for calcium signalling in Dictyostelium has been reported before. These studies showed that a decrease in extracellular calcium levels instantly decreased cell speed and induced a loss of cell attachment with the substratum caused by loss of intracellular cell structure, consistent with our findings of a naringenin-induced alteration of cytoskeletal structure and block of cell behaviour. In addition, chelating intracellular calcium by loading with BAPTA also prevented cell movement and pseudopod emission. The role of a potential pkd1 protein in Dictyostelium can also be considered in future studies. Naringenin inhibits renal cell growth via TRPP2 Growth of renal MDCK cells and cysts was inhibited by naringenin at similar EC 50 values to Dictyostelium. We confirmed that TRPP2 was expressed in MDCK cells and siRNA knockdown of this protein indicated that TRPP2 also regulated the growth-inhibitory action of naringenin in these mammalian cells. Knockdown of TRPP2 in MDCK cells increased resistance to the concentration of naringenin required to reduce cyst growth. TRPP2 has a number of roles in mammalian cells, and in kidney tubule cells where it is most studied. TRPP2 or polycystin-2 is a member of the TRP family of ion channels, and is a Ca 2+ -permeable non-selective cation channel located in the endoplasmic reticulum and in the primary cilium. Shear stress bends the primary cilium and TRPP2 admits Ca 2+ into the cytoplasm. The influx of Ca 2+ stimulates Ca 2+ release via TRPP2 on the ER and elevates intracellular Ca 2+ concentration, with important consequences for growth. Ca 2+ stimulates PDE and keeps cAMP low, suppressing the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway of cyst proliferation. When TRPP1 or TRPP2 is disrupted, as in mutations of the corresponding genes PKD1 and PKD2 in PKD, then flow-sensitive Ca 2+ influx is reduced, cAMP is elevated and the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway stimulated, leading to cyst proliferation. We propose that naringenin may activate TRPP2 to cause Ca 2+ influx and a decrease in cellular proliferation. Naringenin has been shown to regulate other channels such as the large conductance K + channels in vascular myocytes causing vasorelaxation. The possibility that naringenin binds and opens TRPP2, with downstream growth-inhibitory effects, is therefore intriguing and novel. The TRPP1/TRPP2 complex has other reported effects on growth regulation, and through a diverse range of signalling pathways in addition to Ca 2+ and cAMP, for example: the mammalian target of rapamycin, STAT1/3, G-protein regulated pathways of differentiation, apoptosis and proliferation, and the β-catenin/Wnt pathway for gene expression and differentiation. One interesting mechanism is the binding of TRPP2 to the pro-proliferative transcription factor, Id2. In this model of ADPKD genesis, mutations to TRPP2 allow Id2 to enter the nucleus and turn off growth-suppressive genes. A similar mechanism is proposed for TRPP2 in the promotion of phospho-ERK-meditated eIF2α phosphorylation, which down-regulates cell growth. The role of these pathways in the actions of naringenin requires further investigation. It is important to note that naringenin was as potent at inhibiting cyst growth as metformin and that the activity of the latter was unaffected by the transfection procedure. Metformin activates AMPK, a kinase that controls growth and metabolism, in part via the actions of mTOR, which is required for growth. In addition, AMPK inhibits apical cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator channels required for Cl − secretion. Metformin therefore inhibits both cystogenesis and chloride secretion and is a potential drug development candidate for ADPKD. Naringenin does not inhibit Cl − secretion Other flavonoids modulate CFTR-mediated transepithelial chloride secretion. However, while forskolin stimulated a transient increase in I SC in MDCK cells, in agreement with a previous report, naringenin had no significant effect on I SC or on the response to forskolin. These data indicate that the reduction in cyst growth was not due to a reduction in cAMP-dependent chloride secretion. Currently there are no approved clinical therapies for the treatment of PKD. Tolvaptan, a vasopressin V 2 receptor antagonist, which is used to reduce cAMP-dependent fluid secretion, reduced the decline in kidney function in patients with ADPKD, but adverse effects led to a high level of discontinuation. Other more experimental strategies include inhibition of CFTR by metformin or direct channel blockers ; inhibition of mTOR by metformin and inhibition of B-Raf as the crucial point in the MEK/ERK pathway. Our results allow us to speculate about a potential use for naringenin in ADPKD treatment. In the minority of ADPKD patients where TRPP2 function is lost, naringenin would presumably have no effect. In the majority of ADPKD cases, where TRPP1 function is absent, naringenin could potentially activate TRPP2 to inhibit cyst growth in these patients, providing a novel therapeutic approach for ADPKD treatment. Further study of naringenin as a drug for the treatment of ADPKD is now required. 