 Multiple species of cellular slime mold amoebae share overlapping subterranean environments near the soil surface. Despite similar life-styles, individual species form independent starvation-induced fruiting bodies whose spores can renew the life cycle. N-glycans associated with the cell surface glycocalyx have been predicted to contribute to interspecific avoidance, resistance to pathogens, and prey preference. N-glycans from five CSM species that diverged 300–600 million years ago and whose genomes have been sequenced were fractionated into neutral and acidic pools and profiled by MALDI-TOF-MS. Glycan structure models were refined using linkage specific antibodies, exoglycosidase digestions, MALDI-MS/MS, and chromatographic studies. Amoebae of the type species Dictyostelium discoideum express modestly trimmed high mannose N-glycans variably modified with core α3-linked Fuc and peripherally decorated with 0–2 residues each of β-GlcNAc, Fuc, methylphosphate and/or sulfate, as reported previously. Comparative analyses of D. purpureum, D. fasciculatum, Polysphondylium pallidum, and Actyostelium subglobosum revealed that each displays a distinctive spectrum of high-mannose species with quantitative variations in the extent of these modifications, and qualitative differences including retention of Glc, mannose methylation, and absence of a peripheral GlcNAc, fucosylation, or sulfation. Starvation-induced development modifies the pattern in all species but, except for universally observed increased mannose-trimming, the N-glycans do not converge to a common profile. Correlations with glycogene repertoires will enable future reverse genetic studies to eliminate N-glycomic differences to test their functions in interspecific relations and pathogen evasion. Keywords: social amoebae, cellular slime molds, Dictyostelium, evolution, N-glycome Introduction Dictyostelium discoideum is a social amoeba, also known as a cellular slime mold, that resides in soils around the world. Kin to other amoebae such as Acanthamoeba and Entamoeba, the group diverged from other major eukaryotic lineages during the crown radiation. The social amoebae consist of over a hundred species that can cohabitate the same soil environment where they feed phagocytically on bacteria and yeasts. In response to starvation, cells chemotactically aggregate to form multicellular structures termed slugs, which migrate to the soil surface and culminate to form fruiting bodies, whose spores can then be dispersed to new environments. The up to 100,000 cells of the slug are specialized into prespore and multiple prestalk cell types, which differentially contribute to the formation of spores and the supporting stalk. Individual species modify this basic developmental program in characteristic ways. The unicellular amoebae are enveloped by an extensive glycocalyx with a high content of high-mannose N-glycans. Classical studies documented that Dd glycans derive from the canonical Glc 3 Man 9 GlcNAc 2 -PP-Dol precursor, and consist of a family of Man 6–9 structures variably modified by bisecting and intersecting β4-GlcNAc residues, core α3-linked fucose, and peripheral Man-linked Fuc, SO 4 and CH 3 -PO 4, as recently confirmed by mass spectrometry studies. During development, these structures undergo major changes in terms of the number of substituents and extent of Man-trimming. The major question we address here is whether discrete structures support growth and developmental processes universal to the CSMs, or processes specific to individual species. Despite physical proximity in the soil, the various species develop independently and the glycocalyx may contribute to their mutual avoidance. N-glycans have been implicated in amoeba-bacteria interactions, and multiple glycosyl modifications appear to influence cell interactions during growth and development. For example, a global fucosylation mutant exhibits slow growth and forms abnormal cell aggregates in suspension, mucin-type O-glycosylation mutants exhibit abnormal sorting of prespore and prestalk cells and abnormal spore coat assembly, anionic N-glycan processing mutants exhibit altered kinetics of protein compartmentalization, and cytoplasmic glycosylation mutants exhibit abnormal O 2 -sensing. Studies from our laboratory and others have begun to use MS to explore the N-glycomes of two cellular slime molds used as model organisms for interspecific relations, Dd and Dictyostelium purpureum. Recently, the genomes of additional social amoebae have been sequenced, opening the door to apply genomics to glycogene identification to enable a genetic approach to addressing these questions. Their phylogeny, which spans the diversity of known CSMs, is represented in Fig. 1a. Fig. 1 Phylogeny and N-glycans of social amoebae. a. The social amoebae are classified into 4 groups denoted in parentheses) based on the phylogeny of a core group of housekeeping genes. The last common ancestors of these... In this study we compared the N-glycomes of five anciently diverged CSM species during vegetative growth and upon starvation induced development. Though all CSM N-glycans appear to derive from the same Glc 3 Man 9 GlcNAc 2 precursor, their glycomic profiles as revealed by MALDI-TOF-MS are highly distinctive and do not converge during development. Based on a recent analysis of the prominent cell surface glycoprotein gp130, this repertoire is likely to be reflective of cell surface glycocalyx differences that have the potential to influence interspecific and kin recognition, predator-prey relationships, and commensal interactions with other bacteria. Experimental Procedures Cell strains and cell culturing Dictyostelium purpureum strain Dp -1 was from Adam Kuspa. Dictyostelium discoideum strain Ax3, D. fasciculatum, Polysphondylium pallidum, and Acytostelium subglobosum were from the Dictyostelium Stock Center. Amoebae were grown on SM agar plates in association with Klebsiella aerogenes bacteria at 22°C using standard methods. Growth stage amoebae were harvested as they began to clear the Ka lawn. Cells were scraped off and suspended into by vortexing or pipetting into ice-cold 50 mL KP buffer, pelleted by repeated centrifugation/resuspension at 1000 × g for 1 min until cleared of bacteria, and counted in a hemacytometer. Aliquots of 1 × 10 7 cells were transferred to 1.5-mL microcentrifuge tubes, pelleted again, and snap-frozen at −80°C. For development, the washed cells were resuspended at 2 × 10 8 cells/mL in KP buffer, and 0.6 mL was spread on a 10-cm diameter non-nutrient agar plate as described and incubated under fluorescent room lighting at 22°C. At the slug stage, cells were scraped, spun into the bottom of a 1.5-mL tube, and frozen as above. N-glycan release and recovery Cell pellets were lysed by probe sonication in 200 µL 5% formic acid, and sequentially digested with pepsin and PNGase A as described. Alternatively, cell pellets were resuspended in 200 µL 6 M urea in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate with probe sonication, reduced and alkylated, diluted, and sequentially digested with trypsin and PNGase F or Endo-H f as described. To recover N-glycans, samples were diluted with an equal volume of 0.1% TFA in water and applied to a pre-equilibrated C 18 -SepPak cartridge. Glycans were purified from the flow-through fraction by absorption to and release from a Carbograph cartridge, with 0.1% TFA in 50% ACN, and dried in a vacuum centrifuge, as described. To enrich for H10N2-H12N2 N-glycans from Dp, samples were fractionated on a porous graphitized carbon column eluted with an increasing ACN gradient. Fractions were surveyed for glycan content by MALDI-TOF-MS. Enrichment of anionic glycans The Carbograph-purified N-glycans were resuspended in 100 µL 5mM Trizma base and anionic glycans enriched by adsorption to QAE-Sephadex A-50 and NaCl-elution, as previously described, and desalted on a Carbograph cartridge. The flow-through fraction was recovered as an enriched fraction of neutral glycans. Glycan derivatizations Spin column permethylation using methyl iodide or deuterated methyl iodide was performed as described. Alternatively, N-glycans were labeled with 2-aminobenzamide, purified by Whatman 3MM paper chromatography, and eluted with 100 µL 5% acetic acid in H 2 O, as previously described. MALDI-TOF-MS analysis N-glycan samples were dried and resuspended in 20 µL of 50% ACN/H 2 O. 0.5 µL was spotted onto polished steel MALDI target plate with an equal volume 20 mg/mL 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid in 50% ACN/H 2 O and vacuum dried for co-crystallization. For glycan fragmentation, TOF–TOF MS/MS experiments were performed by accelerating fragment ions generated by laser-induced dissociation at 19 kV using Ar as the collision gas in the LIFT™ device incorporated in the Bruker Ultraflex II MALDI-TOF-TOF instrument used for these studies. Spectra were analyzed in GlycoWorkbench. Exoglycosidase digestion α-mannosidase 2-AB labeled N-glycans, or native N-glycans enriched in H10N2-H12N2 species, were treated with purified jack bean α-mannosidase, as described previously. α-glucosidase-I Glycans from 2 × 10 7 Dp cells prepared by the pepsin/PNGase A method were resuspended into 50 µL 10 mM NH 4 Ac, pH 6.8. An aliquot of N-glycans was digested with 1 µL yeast processing α-glucosidase-I previously microdialyzed against 10 mM NH 4 Ac for 2 h at 4°C. To confirm activity under these conditions, 1 µL of 1 mM Glcα1,2Glcα1,3Glcα-O-CH 3 was added to 2.5 µL of enzyme. α-glucosidase-I digests were incubated at 37°C for 1–18 h before analysis by MALDI-TOF MS. SDS-PAGE analysis and Western blotting Cell extracts were electrophoresed on an SDS-PAGE gel, blotted onto 0.45-µm pore size nitrocellulose and probed with a core α3-linked fucose specific antibody as described. Quantification of glycan species N-glycan types were quantitated from positive ion mode MALDI-TOF-MS data of permethylated glycans, by dividing the ion current from the monoisotopic peak of each species type by the sum of monoisotopic peak values of all detected N-glycans in the sample. Database searches Gene homologs were searched for using the BLASTP algorithm seeded with Dd and Dp glycogene sequences. CSM genomes were searched at,, and. Results Neutral N-glycomes The main features of N-glycans of the type species Dd are illustrated in Fig. 1b. These structures are derived from the typical, highly-conserved, eukaryotic Glc 3 Man 9 GlcNAc 2 lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor followed by post-transfer Glc-removal. For the present study, cells were solubilized in formic acid, to inhibit endogenous endo-H like activity, and sequentially digested with pepsin and peptide:N-glycosidase A, to allow release of core α3-fucosylated structures. N-glycans were purified on a Carbograph cartridge, and analyzed natively or after permethylation or derivatization with 2-AB at the reducing terminus. As shown in Fig. 2a, analysis of underivatized glycans from bacterially-grown cells of the Dd laboratory strain Ax3 by MALDI-TOF-MS revealed diverse neutral high-mannose glycans predominantly consisting of Man 5 to Man 9 species, variably decorated with 1–2 GlcNAc residues and up to one Fuc. Similar compositions were observed when comparing native and derivatized glycans. Previous chromatographic studies suggested that initial Man-trimming to generate the Man8 species occurs on the A- rather than the more common B-arm site. Where present, the third and fourth GlcNAc residues are β4-linked at the intersecting and bisecting positions, based on prior exoglycosidase, NMR and MS/MS studies. The Fuc is typically α3-linked to the core GlcNAc based on resistance to digestion to PNGaseF, MS/MS studies, and epitope analysis with anti-HRP. Anionic glycans are minimally detectable by positive ion mode MS, and are examined separately below. Fig. 2 Neutral growth stage N-glycan glycomes are species-specific. N-glycans were released from pepsin-digested whole cell extracts of bacterially grown cells, using PNGase A, and profiled by MALDI-TOF-MS in positive ion mode. Most ions were observed as... Mannose trimming A similar analysis of total N-glycans from bacterially-grown, growth stage Dp, Df, Pp and As cells showed that each expresses predominantly H5 to H9 structures as for Dd. Since these species also possess the genetic complement to encode the enzymes that assemble the archetypal Glc 3 Man 9 GlcNAc 2 -lipid-linked oligosaccharide donor, it is likely that these structures derive from Glc and Man trimming after transfer to the protein acceptor. In general, the hexose residues were confirmed to consist of α-linked Man residues based on sensitivity to removal by the broad spectrum α-mannosidase from jack beans. Individual α-mannosidase resistant glycans, and anionic glycans which are insensitively detected in positive ion mode analysis of unfractionated material, are examined further in later sections below. Interestingly, each species displays a characteristic profile indicating stereotyped variations in the average extent of Man-trimming, as shown in Figs. 2 and S2 for native glycans and summarized below in Fig. 8a for permethylated glycans. Specifically, Man 6 species are more abundant than the other processed states observed, including Man 5, Man 7, Man 8 and Man 9 in As. Likewise, Man 7 is the most abundant in Dp and Df, and Man 8 is the most abundant in Dd and Pp. Further studies are needed to establish which Man residues are trimmed and the extent of heterogeneity, which cannot be ascertained by MALDI-TOF-MS experiments. As described below, these high-mannose structures were variably modified with neutral and anionic substituents, the quality and degree of which also exhibited substantial species specificity. Only H9N2 structures tended to be less modified. Fig. 4 Dp N-glycans are high-mannose and partially retain Glc3 caps. N-glycans were released from Dp slugs or growth stage cells with PNGase A. Non-fucosylated species were enriched on a porous graphite column. Samples were subjected to... Fig. 8 Quantitation of neutral and anionic N-glycan classes from growing and developed slug cells. a–f. The abundance of each neutral N-glycan subclass was calculated by dividing the sum of the... Peripheral GlcNAc A substantial fraction of growth stage Dd N-glycans were modified with an additional HexNAc residue, shown previously to represent GlcNAc in β4-linkage to the α6-linked Man, or with 2 HexNAcs the second of which is β4-linked to the βMan. N-glycans with 3 HexNAcs were predominant in Df, Pp and As. Under the conditions of treatment with endoglycosidase Hf employed here, the N3 N-glycans of the other species are, like the N3 and N4 glycans of Dd, resistant to release. MS/MS results were most consistent with an intersecting position on the α6-linked Man, owing to detection of a MeHex3HexNAc fragment ion and failure to detect ions diagnostic for alternative positions. Whereas peripheral GlcNAc residues were found on all Dd Man-processing variants except Man9, in As peripheral HexNAc favored the H6 species over the also abundant H7 and H8 isoforms. The abundant H7 and H8 species present in Df and Pp, respectively, were efficiently modified by peripheral HexNAc. Thus this HexNAc is unlikely to be related to the β2-linked GlcNAc installed on Manα1–3Manβ1– by GlcNAc-T1 as the initial step in processing to complex forms of animals. HexNAc3 species were of low abundance in Dp, but were more common in our previous analysis of Dp. The reason for this discrepancy is not clear but might related to the use of CHAPS rather than formic acid extracted material. Ions corresponding to the presence of a fourth HexNAc as found in Dd were not detected in the other species. Though the simplest assumption is that the third HexNAc in Dp, Df, Pp and As represents an intersecting β-GlcNAc, the possibility of a bisecting position or some other configuration or HexNAc type, cannot be excluded. Fig. 6 Developmental regulation of N-glycan expression. N-glycans prepared from slug stage cells of each of the 5 species were profiled in positive ion mode as in Fig. 2. Corresponding growth stage samples GlcNAc, as also observed in plants and invertebrates. This structure is recognized as an epitope by anti-HRP antibody and, based on Western blotting, was similarly if not more abundant in growth stage As. The occurrence of this linkage in As was supported by the detection by MS of multiple singly and doubly fucosylated species after digestion with PNGase A but not PNGase F, which cleaves core α6- but not α3-fucosylated structures. Core α3-fucosylation was highly enriched on N-glycans with one or two peripheral HexNAc residues in Dd and As, suggesting an interdependence of the GTs that mediate the addition of their respective sugars. Whereas a range of Man-trimmed Dd glycans were core α3-fucosylated, this modification was preferentially enriched on Man 6 species in As. Fig. 3 Core α3-fucosylation of amoeba glycoproteins. a. Whole cell CSM extracts were Western-blotted and probed with affinity-purified rabbit anti-HRP Ab. The Dd membrane panels at the right confirm previously... Core α3-fucosylation was also implicated in growth-stage Dp cells by anti-HRP Western blotting, but fucosylated N-glycans were not observed by MS 8e ). However, core α3-fucosylated structures were found by MALDI-TOF-MS in slug-stage Dp cells, which correlated with increased anti-HRP labeling in Western blots, so low level core α3-fucosylation probably occurs in growing Dp cells too. A low level of deoxyHex was observed in permethylated Pp N-glycans, but no evidence for fucosylation was found in Df. At the protein level, the Western blot analyses showed little evidence for M r conservation of the carriers of core Fuc modifications, either at different developmental stages within the same species, or between species, suggesting that the proteins that these glycans modify are evolutionarily divergent. The M r profiles of anti-HRP reactive bands in total cell and total membrane fractions were distinctive, suggesting that a large fraction of α3-core fucosylated glycoproteins reside in a non-membranous pool. As also expressed glycans with multiple deoxyHex residues, assumed to represent Fuc based on analogy with Dd. Peripheral fucosylation was not observed in the absence of core fucosylation, suggesting a dependence of peripheral FTs on the core α3-FucT, which remains to be identified. Although core α6-fucosylation has been reported in Dd, no evidence for Fuc or other deoxyHex residues was obtained in the present analysis of bulk PNGase F-released N-glycans from any of the species. If present, core α6-Fuc is a minor substitution, or occurs in combination with another modification that interferes with cleavage by PNGaseF. H12N2 species from Dp is glucose-capped Dp uniquely accumulated substantial levels of H10N2 and H12N2 structures, 4c ), which could be released by Endo Hf. To examine the identity of the additional Hex residues, native glycans samples from slug cells were treated with jack bean α-mannosidase which is capable of removing all α-linked Man residues. After enrichment of non-fucosylated N-glycans on a porous graphitized column, N-glycans with 4–7 hexoses N2) were degraded to HN2, indicating successful removal of almost all Hex residues. In comparison, the H12N2 and H11N2 species were converted to HN2 species, which could be explained by protection of the A-arm by 3 Glc residues derived from the Glc 3 Man 9 GlcNAc 2 -LLO precursor. The presence of a Glc cap was confirmed by α-glucosidase I digestion of a pool of growth stage Dp N-glycans, which trims only the terminal α2-linked Glc from the Glc 3 Man 9 GlcNAc 2 precursor. As shown in Figs. 4c and d, a single Hex residue was removed from only the H12N2, and the H12N3 species observed in this trial, suggesting that Dp incompletely processes its initial N-glycans. The presence of the third HexNAc in the H12N3 species, though only variably observed, confirms that these glucosylated glycans did not artifactually derive from contaminating lipid-linked precursor, and in turn indicates that peripheral HexNAc addition does not depend on N-glycan processing, as shown before for the intersecting β4-GlcNAc. The disappearance of species smaller than H8N2 after α-mannosidase digestion indicates that deglucosylation precedes Man-processing for most N-glycans. Peripheral mannose methylation in Pp The most abundant N-glycan of growing Pp was consistent with a trimethylated H8N3 species, which was accompanied by lesser quantities of ions corresponding to dimethylated, monomethylated and nonmethylated forms. 5a ). Only an H8N3 species was detected after permethylation, indicating that the mass increment was due to Me groups substituted on sugar -OH groups. This was investigated further by perdeuteration, which yielded an m/z value that was 9 less than expected for a fully perdeuterated derivative, confirming the initial presence of 3 CH 3 groups which would each contribute a mass of 14 rather than the 17 of CD 3. In MS/MS analysis of the abundant trimethylated native glycan, the absence of MeH fragment ions and presence of MeH2 is most consistent with the occurrence of mono-methylation of subterminal Man residues, one on each arm. The tri-methylated N-glycan was resistant to α-mannosidase digestion, indicating that each arm was modified and that methylation of the underlying Man residue interferes with enzymatic release. Further studies will be required to determine the position of Me-linkage to the Man residues. No evidence for methylation was found in the other CSM species. Fig. 5 Methylated N-glycans of Pp. a. MALDI-TOF-MS analysis of N-glycans from growth stage Pp suggested that the most abundant species was H8N3 modified by 3 Me groups. b. Permethylation with methyl iodide eliminated the mass increment of the CH... Developmental changes in neutral N-glycomes The total neutral N-glycan pool from the slug stage of Dd consisted of a range of high mannose structures related to those of growth state cells except for the smaller average number of Man residues, in agreement with prior work documenting increased Man-trimming during development. Each of the other the CSM species exhibited a similar trend, although Pp maintained H8 as the predominant species which may be due to protection by continued Man-trimethylation. Modestly decreased peripheral HexNAc was observed in Dd, Pp and As, whereas Df and Dp remained similar. Dd and Dp showed increased fucosylation in the slug stage. This was consistent with modestly increased reactivity with the anti-HRP antibody, suggesting that at least some of these residues are core α3-linked. Some slug Pp glycans contained up to 3 Fuc residues whose positions remain to be mapped. By contrast, As N-glycans exhibited the opposite trend of less fucosylation in slugs. Dd and Pp, but not Dp, preferentially fucosylated glycans with peripheral HexNAc residues. Anionic glycans Sulfation and methylphosphorylation are prominent peripheral modifications of Dd N-glycans, but require negative ion mode MS, enrichment, and/or permethylation for efficient detection. To investigate their occurrence in other species, native anionic glycans were enriched from growth stage cells by a QAE-Sephadex anion exchange method, and displayed in negative or positive ion mode. Neutral glycans only were detected in the QAE-flow through fractions. Elution with 70 mM NaCl yielded, after desalting, a variety of ions the great majority of which could be assigned as N-glycans modified by methyl phosphate, sulfate or both. Negative ion mode analysis was generally more sensitive than positive ion mode analysis, but the latter helped to confirm assignments of the major ions because they generally occurred as singly-charged disodiated or trisodiated species for mono-anionic and di-anionic glycans, as opposed to the singly-charged deprotonated or di-deprotonated/monosodiated states that occur in negative ion mode. In addition, the identification of di-anionic glycans was facilitated by their appearance in the 140 mM NaCl eluent of the QAE-resin. For example, a minor ion appeared at m/z 2016.6 in unenriched samples of Pp and As in positive ion mode, that was consistent with mP2H7N3 and SF2H6N3. This corresponded to a major ion that appeared after QAE-enrichment in the 70 mM NaCl fraction, at m/z 1970.0 in negative ion mode, which could be assigned as mP2H7N3 or SF2H6N3, and again at 2016.6 in positive ion mode. The appearance of this ion in the 140 mM NaCl fraction confirmed its assignment as the di-anionic double methylphosphorylated species, as annotated. The distinction between phosphorylation and sulfation, which introduce similar masses, was facilitated by the tendency of CSMs to esterify their PO 4 groups with CH 3 groups. Since methylation of neutral N-glycans was not observed in any CSMs except Pp, the presence of the respective masses of Me and PO 4 is assumed to represent methylphosphorylation. In Pp, the occurrence of ions with the mass increment of PO 4 or SO 4 in the neutral fraction after permethylation was most consistent with their origin as mP rather than SO 4, because SO 4 groups are not methylated under these conditions. In addition, the putative di-mP Pp species tended to ionize as a pair of − and − ions in negative ion mode, as observed for di-mP species in Dp and Df. Thus the anionic species in Pp appear to be methylphosphorylated rather than sulfated, and also methylated at separate sites. Fig. 7 Anionic glycans. Growth stage cells: left panels; slug stage cells: right panels. N-glycans were enriched by QAE-Sephadex anion exchange chromatography and analyzed by MALDI-TOF-MS in negative ion mode. Ions are −, except *=... As summarized in Figs. 8g and i, mP was found on N-glycans of all species, and sulfation was abundant in all but Pp where it was minimal if present at all. N-glycans with up to 2 mP residues were observed, more than a single SO 4 was uncommon, and mixed methylphosphorylated/sulfated N-glycans were observed. The profile of anionic glycans showed negligible overlap between the species. Based on negative ion mode analysis of native glycans, methylphosphorylated and sulfated N-glycans had similar relative abundance, except for Dd and As where sulfation was modestly more prevalent and Pp where it was not detected. In positive ion mode analysis of permethylated samples, in which methylphosphorylated glycans are neutral and preferentially observed, methylphosphorylated glycans represented approximately 20% of the total, suggesting that on average, total anionic glycans represent over a third of total N-glycans. The patterns of anionic substitution were not foretold simply by the abundance of underlying backbones. In Dp, Man glycans were modified with either SO 4 or mP, however Man 9 GlcNAc 2 and Glc 3 Man 9 GlcNAc 2 glycans were not. In Df, the predominant H7 species were also sulfated or methylphosphorylated, but in As these substitutions were restricted to the H6 species, which were also the main target of fucosylation which in some cases was simultaneous. In Pp, the sum of mP and Me groups did not exceed 3, suggesting that these modifications are mutually exclusive. Since methylphosphorylation occurs on the 6-position of terminal and subterminal Man residues of each arm, and methylation evidently occurs at the subterminal Man of each arm, exclusivity may lie at the level of the terminal disaccharide. Sulfation and methylphosphate changes during development Anionic glycan changes recapitulated many of the changes observed in neutral glycans of the slug stage. During development Dd showed a marked decrease in the relative abundance of methylphosphorylated and sulfated N-glycans consistent with previous reports. The remaining anionic N-glycans are predominantly sulfated, only on N-glycans that lack peripheral GlcNAc residues. Similarly, As showed significant decreases in the overall levels of sulfation and methylphosphorylation in slugs. Dp maintained similar methylphosphorylation and sulfation and applied them to the more highly trimmed Man structures. Df and Pp exhibited modestly increased methylphosphorylation, that extended to the more highly trimmed Man structures and at the expense of sulfation in the case of Df. Pp, which did not extensively trim its Man structures, continued to lack sulfation. Discussion Traditional high mannose type N-glycosylation is a global feature across CSM evolution, with no evidence for maturation to traditional paucimannose, hybrid, or complex N-glycans. This feature was also found for another amoebazoan, Acanthamoeba, and in a modified form in a more distantly related amoebazoan, Entamoeba, which utilizes a truncated Man 5 - rather than Man 9 -containing lipid-linked precursor. Also conserved across the CSMs are a peripheral HexNAc residue, α3-core fucosylation, and peripheral sulfation and methylphosphorylation. Remarkably, these modifications are absent from N-glycans of the other characterized amoebazoans Acanthamoeba and Entamoeba. In contrast, these other amoebazoans diversify their N-glycans in distinctive fashion, by the addition of peripheral Gal in α2-linkage to Man, core α6-linked Fuc which can be extended by αMan, peripheral non-methylated phosphomannose, and pentosylation at multiple sites. Therefore the distinctive traits in the CSMs, including the enzymes that apply them and the genes that encode them, were evidently acquired early in their evolution and their retention suggests important CSM specific functions. Despite these commonalities, the glycomic profiles of the 5 species are remarkably divergent. 6 ). The differences are attributable in part to variations in Man residue trimming, resulting in a different spectrum of backbone structures available for further processing. This is amplified by variations in the number of peripheral HexNAc residues, core and peripheral Fuc residues, sulfates, and/or methylphosphates. Species-specific modifications contributed further diversity: peripheral Man methylation in Pp, Glc 3 -retention in Dp, and apparent lack of fucosylation in Df and sulfation in Pp. Thus a unique fingerprint of N-glycan types, with limited overlap, is characteristic of the growing cells of each species. Mechanisms for controlling these variations, and their potential interdependence, can now be addressed. The peripheral HexNAc residues of Dd are GlcNAc β4-linked to the α6-linked Man and the β4-linked Man, and evidence favors an intersecting position for the single peripheral HexNAc of Pp N-glycans. Dd has three tandem genes with distant similarity to the CAZy GT17 family, which includes GlcNAcT-III that attaches the bisecting GlcNAc in animals. These are thus candidates for mediating the addition of the bisecting and/or intersecting βGlcNAcs of Dd, though unlike the animal enzyme the Dictyostelium enzymes do not depend on prior action of GlcNAcT-I and α-mannosidase I. Interestingly, these genes are apparently absent from Dp, Pp and As, which argues against their role in the addition of their peripheral HexNAc residue. An alternative possibility is that the HexNAc in these other species is a GlcNAc in α4-linkage to the β-Man, as recently reported for the fungus Coprinus cinerea. Dp and Df possess a GT8 family gene related to the α4-GlcNAcT that mediates formation of this linkage in fungi. However, neither was detected in Pp and As, leaving the origin and identity of their third HexNAc in need of further investigation. Like the fungal glycans modified with α-GlcNAc, the N-glycans of Dp and Df with a peripheral HexNAc are resistant to release by Endo H, but so also are the N-glycans of the other species with a peripheral β-GlcNAc, under the conditions employed in this study. Fucosylation is a common modification in each of the species except for Df. The great majority of fucosylated N-glycans are inferred to possess a core α3-linked Fuc, as documented previously in Dd, because fucosylated N-glycans are released by PNGase A but not PNGase F. This conclusion is consistent with expression of the HRP epitope. Multiply fucosylated species were found in Dd, Pp and As. Previous MS/MS studies indicated a peripheral Man-linkage for additional Fuc residues in Dd. Further studies are needed to confirm this for Pp and As, and to define the positions of these linkages. There are multiple α3FucT-like genes, 10 in Dd and 5 Dp, that might contribute to their assembly. The apparent absence of N-glycan fucosylation in Df suggests that its α3FucT-like genes target different glycan types. Most organisms express anionic N-glycans, and this role is fulfilled by peripheral sulfation and methylphosphorylation in Dd. This feature is conserved in the other CSMs, except for minimal or no sulfation in Pp. Gpt1, the enzyme that mediates the initial transfer of GlcNAc-PO 4 from UDP-GlcNAc to peripheral Man residues of N-glycans in Dd, is conserved in all the CSM genomes. However, the genetic bases for removal of the GlcNAc and subsequent methylphosphorylation remain to be determined. Me-PO 4 was not observed in Acanthamoeba, so the responsible methyltransferase might be mined from a genomic comparison of amoebazoan genes. Since sulfation was also not found in the other amoebazoans, the enzyme that forms the SO 4 -Man linkages may be identified by a similar approach. Methylation is unique to Pp N-glycans among the five CSMs examined. Three CH 3 groups per glycan is most frequent, and they appear to prefer subterminal Man residues on each arm of the H8N3 backbone. Based on the profiles observed, methylation is antagonistic with fucosylation on the same N-glycan, but is tolerant of mP. Methylation also occurs in Acanthamoeba, where a single moiety was mapped to the Man α3-linked to the core β-Man. CH 3 -Man was observed in nematodes and mapped to the 3-O-position of Man in gastropods. The CH 3 -linkage of Pp remain to be determined. The terminal Glc 3 -moiety of the lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor is almost universally removed after transfer of the glycan to protein as part of ER quality control of protein folding. As previously described in Dd, the other CSMs conform to this principle except for Dp, which in this study consistently expressed tri- and mono-glucosylated species during growth, and tri-, di-, and mono-glucosylated species in the slug. While the mono-glucosylated species might reflect activity of the UDP-Glc-dependent αGlcT owing to persistent engagement of the carrier proteins in the calnexin cycle, the tri- and di-Glc species suggest reduced activity of α-glucosidase-I and -II. Since glucosylated N-glycans were not observed in a previous study that analyzed CHAPS-solubilized Dd and Dp N-glycoproteins, these underprocessed species might belong to a protein pool that was not accessed using that approach. Retention of a terminal Glc is common on N-glycans of a cell surface glycoprotein in Leishmania species. The N-glycan repertoire of growth stage cells is under dramatic regulation in response to nutritional deprivation in Dd, and analysis of the slug stage confirms this as a principle for all the CSMs. 7 ). The common theme among all 5 species is increased α-mannosidase trimming of glycans in slugs compared to growing cells, resulting in a reduced average size but still a considerable overlap of structures ranging from H3 to H9. Other features, however, diverge. Fucosylation is strongly up- or down-regulated in species-specific fashion. Fucosylation increases in Dd, Dp and Pp, but becomes nearly undetectable in As. The peripheral HexNAc residue is selectively and dramatically reduced in As, as occurs in Dd, but does not change in the other species. Pp methylation is modestly decreased. Methylphosphorylation, strongly reduced in Dd as previously described, is modestly decreased in Dp but increased in Df. The slug N-glycome presumably represents the sum of carryover from growth stage cells and new synthesis in emergent prestalk and prespore cells, and further studies are needed to resolve their relative contributions. It is expected that the slug-unique glycan species are newly synthesized rather than remodeled from prior glycans, given the ongoing general synthesis of new proteins during the developmental program. The only conserved developmentally regulated N-glycomic change is increased mannose trimming. Studies in Dd implicate contributions of both α-mannosidase-I and -II activities, whose corresponding inhibitors do not, however, impact the developmental program under laboratory conditions. The finding that the other N-glycomic changes were not shared across the CSMs and that the structures do not converge to a common pattern, suggests that they do not subserve shared general developmental mechanisms such as chemotaxis, cell adhesion, cell sorting, morphogenesis, and cell differentiation. Nevertheless, individual species have distinctive developmental features that might be supported by their glycan differences. For example, Pp assembles small lateral fruiting bodies on a larger vertical fruiting body, Dp forms an extended stalk, and As does not form specialized stalk cells; any of these differences might be supported by specialized glycans. The N-glycans for this study were derived from whole cells and thus reflect the composition not only of the cell surface glycocalyx but also the internal endomembrane system and vesicle contents including lysosomal enzymes. Interestingly, recent analysis of a single cell surface Dd glycoprotein, gp130, identified the entire spectrum of known Dd N-glycans in association with at least one of its 18 N-glycan sites. Assuming that this promiscuity is general across the other CSMs, it is likely that the species differences observed here occur at their cell surfaces and potentially influence interactions with other CSMs, prey, predators and parasites. Different strains and species of CSMs encounter one another in the soil environment, and exhibit avoidance responses at various times before or during development, and glycan differences, which are a dominant feature of the glycocalyx, might contribute to intercellular recognition. Some strains of Dd exhibit preferential kin association and strain-specific N-glycomic variations might contribute to this process too. Interestingly, a genetic analysis suggests that N-glycosylation and gp130 contribute to differential recognition of gram-negative and gram-positive prey bacteria by Dd. Dd can be colonized by certain bacteria, so glycosylation differences among the CSMs might support evasion from pathogens as proposed in other host-pathogen relationships. Alternatively, differences might be selectively permissive for colonization by commensal bacteria. Generalizing from a concept in innate immunity, the distinctive N-glycan profiles are candidates for microbe-associated molecular patterns that might be recognized by pattern recognition receptors. The comparative N-glycomic analysis reported here will enable future identification of glycogene targets that will permit mutational analyses of the proposed N-glycan roles in these processes. Supplementary Material 1 Click here to view. 