 Cytoskeletal motors perform critical force generation and transport functions in eukaryotic cells 1, 2. Engineered modifications of motor function provide direct tests of protein structure-function relationships and potential tools for controlling cellular processes or for harnessing molecular transport in artificial systems 3, 4. Here, we report the design and characterization of a panel of cytoskeletal motors that reversibly change gears—speed up, slow down or switch directions—when exposed to blue light. Our genetically encoded structural designs incorporate a photoactive protein domain to enable light-dependent conformational changes in an engineered lever arm. Using in vitro motility assays, we demonstrate robust spatiotemporal control over motor function and characterize the kinetics of the optical gearshifting mechanism. We have used a modular approach to create optical gearshifting motors for both actin-based and microtubule-based transport. Previously, the activity of cytoskeletal motors has been controlled in vitro by relying on inherent responses to environmental signals such as heat 5 and by using natural or engineered 6, 7 responses to metal ions. Optical control has been explored using synthetic approaches such as covalent attachment of caging groups 8, 9 or photoswitches 10, photolysis of tethers in multimotor teams 11 and modification of the adenosine triphosphate fuel 12. To enable simple and precise control over nanoscale motion, we sought to create autonomous genetically encoded motors that can be specifically and reversibly switched between functional states using a spatially restricted signal. Several properties of myosin motors can, in principle, be controlled by modulating the geometry and mechanics of the lever arm, which serves as a structural amplifier of conformational changes in the catalytic head. Protein engineering studies have confirmed that the size and direction of the force-generating power stroke depend on the length and exit angle of the lever arm 13 – 15. We previously designed a conformational change in an engineered lever arm to enable dynamic control over myosin directionality 7, 16. We attached a collapsible lever arm element to an engineered variant of the -end-directed myosin VI motor, and showed that the construct could be switched between - and -end-directed motion using a rigid-to-flexible transition triggered by. We have speculated 7 that a variation of this general approach could allow optical control of directionality and other motor properties. The light–oxygen–voltage-sensing LOV2 protein domain, found in plant phototropins, responds to blue light with a structural transition 17 that involves undocking of a C-terminal α-helix. The LOV2 domain from Avena sativa has been used in a variety of chimaeric fusions to generate novel optical control of protein function 18 – 21. We hypothesized that conformational changes in the LOV2 domain could provide a basis for optical control of lever arm structure. Figure 1 Molecular design, proposed switching mechanism and in vitro performance of MyLOV constructs Guided by a structural model of the myosin VI power stroke 22, we fused the catalytic domain of myosin VI to an artificial compound lever arm composed of the LOV2 domain flanked by rigid structural elements derived from α-actinin. α-Actinin fragments containing one or two spectrin-like repeats have been used extensively as functional replacements for myosin lever arms 7, 14, 15, 23, 24. We selected a myosin: α-actinin junction used in previous protein engineering studies of myosin VI directionality determinants 7, 15, and additional helix-sharing junctions were designed between the α-actinin elements and the N- and C-termini of the LOV2 domain. In the dark state, the tip of the compound lever arm is predicted to move toward the -end of the actin filament, leading to -end-directed motility. When exposed to blue light, the C-terminal Jα-helix of the LOV2 domain is expected to undock, changing the structural role of the LOV2 domain from a rigid hairpin to a flexible hinge. Because the C-terminal portion of the lever arm no longer contributes mechanically, the effective lever arm ends at the LOV2 domain, which moves toward the -end of the actin filament during the power stroke. This construct is therefore predicted to be a -end-directed motor in blue light. In this scheme, the LOV2 domain serves to conditionally redirect the lever arm, analogous to the permanent redirection of a myosin lever arm using a four-helix bundle in a previous study 14. We created a series of monomeric myosin-1R–LOV2-2R fusion constructs and tested their behaviour in gliding filament assays. Our initial design showed constitutive -end-directed motion, and we did not detect significant light-dependent changes in velocity. We hypothesized that this failure might be due to undesired flexibility at helix-sharing domain junctions. In a previous study of engineered myosin VI motors, the myosin:α-actinin fusion point was varied to find optimal chimaeras, and successful fusion points were predicted with the help of molecular dynamics simulations 15. Here, we have created junctional variants by including additional LOV2 residues at the N- and C-termini of the photoreceptor domain or by introducing computationally predicted mutations in α-actinin residues near the LOV2 junctions. After light-modulated myosin function was observed in the second-generation constructs, a third-generation chimaera was constructed by recombining the MyLOV1 and MyLOV3 sequences. These four redesigned chimaeras all show reversible changes in velocity under blue light illumination during in vitro motility. MyLOV2 and MyLOV4 are -end-directed in the dark and switch to -end-directed motility when illuminated, as predicted from our original MyLOV design. MyLOV1 and MyLOV3 exhibit related behaviours that may be attributable to variations in junction angles or flexibility: MyLOV1 switches from faster -end-directed motility to slower -end-directed motility, and MyLOV3 switches from slower -end-directed motility to faster -end-directed motility. In each of these cases, the change in velocity occurs in the expected direction, with the velocity becoming more -end-directed upon illumination. Directionality switching is thus seen to be a special case of velocity switching. An important feature of optical signals is that they may be readily controlled in both space and time 25, 26. To demonstrate spatiotemporal control over myosin function, we tested MyLOV constructs using gliding filament assays in which blue illumination was intermittently applied to a restricted region of the field of view. As expected, filaments in the restricted region showed characteristic light-dependent changes in velocity, whereas filaments in the adjacent masked region were unaffected. Our results may be more generally applicable if the photoactive compound lever arm retains its function when ported to new molecular motor contexts. As an initial test of modularity, we created MyLOVChar monomers by grafting the photoactive lever arm from MyLOV4 onto the motor domain of Chara corallina myosin XI. For this construct we adopted a myosin:α-actinin fusion point that has been used previously for studies of recombinant Chara myosin 16, 24. Myosin XI differs structurally and functionally from myosin VI: it is -end-directed 27 and drives motility at much higher velocities 24. Based on the new structural context, illumination of MyLOVChar was predicted to cause a switch from slower to faster -end-directed motility. As expected, MyLOVChar shows an increase in velocity that coincides sharply with illumination timing. Figure 2 Dynamic control of speed in MyLOVChar Velocity measurements for MyLOV1–4 constructs relied on long integration times because of the low gliding filament speeds. In contrast, MyLOVChar exhibits rapid motility, facilitating measurements of velocity changes at high time resolution. We therefore used MyLOVChar to characterize the photoswitching kinetics of the photoactive lever arm. Frame-to-frame filament velocities were analysed at subsecond resolution, revealing an exponential rise in velocity upon illumination and a subsequent decay in velocity when illumination was removed. Switching occurs on a timescale of seconds, with a shorter decay time than has been observed in some previous LOV2 fusions 18 or for the isolated Avena sativa LOV2 domain 30, 31. We further tested the repeatability of the photoswitch by subjecting MyLOVChar to successive short pulses of light stimulation, and observed no sign of photofatigue over 50 repetitions. We have shown that a design based on light-triggered conformational changes in an artificial lever arm can be applied to control the behaviour of distinct myosin classes. To further challenge the modularity of our approach, we asked whether light-activated gearshifting could be extended to control motors that act on microtubules. Unlike conventional kinesin-1, the non-claret disjunctional protein motor and other members of the kinesin-14 family have been proposed to use a swinging lever arm mechanism reminiscent of myosin, where the coiled-coil domain of the Ncd dimer is thought to act as an extended lever arm structure 32 – 34. As a step toward adapting our gearshifting design to Ncd, we first sought to create monomeric Ncd motors in which the coiled-coil is functionally replaced with an artificial lever arm. We created 1R-Ncd by fusing an α-actinin spectrin repeat to the catalytic head of Ncd, imitating previous engineered myosin designs. As expected, 1R-Ncd is a -end-directed kinesin, with gliding filament velocities faster than the catalytic domain alone and similar to an Ncd construct with a truncated native coiled-coil lever arm, although slower than the >100 nm s −1 velocities typical of intact Ncd motors 33. Further validation is provided by a cryoelectron microscopy reconstruction of 1R-Ncd, which shows the artificial lever arm in the expected orientation in the post-stroke state. Figure 3 Design, structure and in vitro performance of engineered kinesin-14 motors We next created two optically controllable microtubule-based motors, LOVKinA and LOVKinB, by fusing the catalytic domain of Ncd to truncated variants of the compound lever arm from MyLOV4. As expected, LOVKinA is -end-directed in the dark and becomes -end-directed upon illumination. A point mutant of Ncd has previously been reported to be stochastically bidirectional 35. LOVKinA now places bidirectionality under the deterministic control of an external signal. As shown previously for myosin 14, successful geometric redirection of the lever arm provides additional support for a swinging lever arm model for Ncd. LOVKinB is -end-directed, and shows a velocity change in the expected direction, with increased speed in the light. We have shown that spatiotemporal control of both actin-based and microtubule-based motors can be achieved using a general design based on light-triggered conformational changes in an artificial lever arm. Switching behaviours are qualitatively predicted by structural models of the pre- and post-stroke states of the engineered motors, although further structural and single-molecule measurements may be required to develop accurate quantitative models of light-dependent behaviours. Desirable extensions of our molecular designs will include building from monomeric motors to switchable processive multimers, as previously demonstrated for -controlled bidirectional myosins 7, 16. In future applications of this work, genetically encoded light-responsive motors may expand the optogenetics toolkit, complementing precise perturbations of ion channels 26 and intracellular signalling 25 with spatiotemporal control of cytoskeletal transport and contractility. Light-activated gearshifting will enable new synthetic approaches in cell biology 4, new investigations of basic properties of active fluids 36 and dynamic control of analyte transport in microfabricated devices that harness the proven capabilities of biological molecular motors 3, 4, 37. Methods Molecular constructs Constructs were assembled from DNA fragments encoding porcine myosin VI codons 1–790, Chara corallina myosin XI codons 1–746, Dictyostelium discoideum α-actinin codons 266–502, Avena sativa phot1 codons 408–543 and Drosophila melanogaster Ncd codons 309–700 and cloned into an expression plasmid based on pBiex-1 that includes the codons for a C-terminal eYFP and FLAG tag. Proteins were expressed via transient transfection of SF9 cells and affinity purified as described previously 7. For details of construct composition, including junction variations, see Supplementary Fig. 1. Motility assays MyLOV constructs were characterized using dual-labelled gliding filament assays as described previously 7, using a modified assay buffer containing 23 mM Tris-HCl, 23 mM KCl, 9.2 mM dithiothreitol, 1.9 mM MgCl 2, 0.94 mM EGTA, 0.75 mM imidazole-HCl, 2.0 mM ATP, 1.5% glycerol, an ATP regeneration system containing 1.0 mM phosphocreatine and 0.95 μg ml −1 creatine phosphokinase and an oxygen-scavenging system containing 0.40% glucose, 0.20 mg ml −1 glucose oxidase and 0.36 μg ml −1 catalase. Each flow chamber was constructed using a Nescofilm gasket sandwiched between two glass coverslips, after spin-coating the assay surface of the imaging-side coverslip with nitrocellulose. Assays were prepared by incubating with anti-green fluorescent protein to mediate specific attachment of the YFP-tagged motor, then blocking the surface with 2 mg ml −1 BSA, and finally incubating with 100 nM motor for 2 min. TMR/Cy5-labelled filaments were excited with a 532 nm optically pumped semiconductor laser using total internal reflection and imaged on an electron-multiplying charge-coupled device camera. Blue illumination was provided by epi-illumination using a light-emitting diode with emission centred at 470 nm using custom software to control the LED power and timing. The estimated irradiance at the sample was 16 ± 3 mW cm −2. All assays were carried out at room temperature. Ncd constructs were characterized using polarity-labelled microtubule filaments generated as previously described 38. Briefly, bright microtubule seeds were first prepared by mixing 0.30 mg ml −1 rhodamine-tubulin and 3.5 mg ml −1 unlabelled tubulin in BRB80 with 10% dimethylsulphoxide and 1 mM guanosine triphosphate, then incubating at 37 °C for 10 min. A polymerization mixture for the more dimly labelled microtubule extension was prepared with 0.014 mg ml −1 rhodamine-labelled tubulin, 0.6 mg ml −1 unlabelled tubulin and 0.6 mg ml −1 N -ethylmaleimide -modified tubulin. Filaments were assembled by combining 1.5 μl of the bright seeds with 18 μl of the polymerization mixture and incubating at 37 °C for 15 min before adding 20 μM taxol. Gliding filament assays were performed in a buffer containing 80 mM K-PIPES, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl 2, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM DTT, 20 μM taxol and 1 mM ATP, supplemented with the ATP-regeneration and oxygen-scavenging systems used for MyLOV constructs. Assays were prepared and imaged as described for the MyLOV constructs above, except that the motor was incubated at a concentration of 1 μM and blocking was carried out using 1 mg ml −1 BSA. Videomicroscopy analysis For MyLOV1–4 data, signed velocities were determined for each 8 min period of illumination or darkness using automated analysis of videomicroscopy data. In this analysis, filaments were only selected for analysis if they were associated with a single Cy5-labelled seed, enabling unambiguous directionality determination. A low-order polynomial was fit to each filament's trajectory over each eight-minute segment, and the contour length was used to determine the displacement over that period. For MyLOVChar data, filaments were automatically identified and tracked, and displacements for each filament were calculated frame-to-frame. For Ncd constructs, unambiguous polarity-labelled filaments were manually selected and analysed by measuring linear displacements of the leading filament end. Supplementary Material S1 Click here to view. S10 Click here to view. S11 Click here to view. S12 Click here to view. S13 Click here to view. S2 Click here to view. S3 Click here to view. S4 Click here to view. S5 Click here to view. S6 Click here to view. S7 Click here to view. S8 Click here to view. S9 Click here to view. 