 Phenylalanine and tyrosine ammonia-lyases form cinnamic acid and p -coumaric acid, which are precursors of a wide range of aromatic compounds of biotechnological interest. Lack of highly active and specific tyrosine ammonia-lyases has previously been a limitation in metabolic engineering approaches. We therefore identified 22 sequences in silico using synteny information and aiming for sequence divergence. We performed a comparative in vivo study, expressing the genes intracellularly in bacteria and yeast. When produced heterologously, some enzymes resulted in significantly higher production of p -coumaric acid in several different industrially important production organisms. Three novel enzymes were found to have activity exclusively for phenylalanine, including an enzyme from the low-GC Gram-positive bacterium Brevibacillus laterosporus, a bacterial-type enzyme from the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, and a phenylalanine ammonia-lyase from the moss Physcomitrella patens in the medium using Escherichia coli as the heterologous host). Novel tyrosine ammonia-lyases having higher reported substrate specificity than previously characterized enzymes were also identified. Enzymes from Herpetosiphon aurantiacus and Flavobacterium johnsoniae resulted in high production of p -coumaric acid in Escherichia coli and in Lactococcus lactis. The enzymes were also efficient in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, where p -coumaric acid accumulation was improved 5-fold over that in strains expressing previously characterized tyrosine ammonia-lyases. INTRODUCTION Small organic molecules of biotechnological interest include aromatic structures that are derived from p -coumaric acid. pHCA can be formed from phenylalanine either through deamination to cinnamic acid by phenylalanine ammonia-lyase and subsequent hydroxylase activity by trans -cinnamate-4-monooxygenase or through deamination of tyrosine by tyrosine ammonia-lyase. Considering that the route from phenylalanine requires activity of a P450 enzyme, which has been shown to be the limiting step in previous engineering strategies, deamination of tyrosine for production of pHCA may be preferred in microbial cell factories. Tyrosine ammonia-lyases have been employed for the production of plant biochemicals and aromatic compounds, e.g., for pHCA itself, or in the production of stilbenes, such as resveratrol, flavonoids, such as naringenin, cinnamoyl anthranilates, or plastic precursors, such as p -hydroxystyrene, yet the TAL reaction may be the limiting step. FIG 1 Aromatic amino acid ammonia-lyases and aminomutases. Phenylalanine may be converted into β-phenylalanine by phenylalanine aminomutase or deaminated to cinnamic acid. Similarly, tyrosine may be converted to... Due to the significant interest in production of phenolic compounds in biotechnological processes, we aimed at increasing the range of characterized phenylalanine ammonia-lyases and tyrosine ammonia-lyases, and in particular at identifying the optimal TAL for use in microbial cell factories. Several enzymes have previously been characterized both in vivo and in vitro, and the data are available from both patent and scientific literature. However, the conditions of kinetic analysis are often quite different and may not represent the extent to which the enzymes perform in vivo. Therefore, we decided to evaluate a range of previously identified enzymes, and expanded our analysis to novel enzymes selected from available sequence data. Identification of TAL enzymes based solely on sequence information is not straightforward, since the sequences do not provide unambiguous prediction of substrate specificity. This is illustrated by the fact that hypothetical genes whose predicted products have homology to aromatic amino acid ammonia-lyases are often simply annotated as being histidine ammonia-lyases without experimental evidence of their substrate specificity. Phenylalanine and tyrosine ammonia-lyases are members of a family that either have a lyase activity that forms α,β-unsaturated acids from amino acids by elimination of ammonia or a mutase activity that forms β-amino acids. The aromatic amino acid ammonia-lyases in this family are classified by their substrate specificity as being histidine ammonia-lyases, tyrosine ammonia-lyases, phenylalanine ammonia-lyases, or phenylalanine/tyrosine ammonia-lyases. Enzymes categorized as acting on either of the structurally similar amino acids tyrosine or phenylalanine often have some activity for the other substrate as well or for similar compounds, such as 3,4-dihydroxy- l -phenylalanine. Homologous and structurally similar enzymes are tyrosine 2,3-aminomutases and phenylalanine aminomutase. The enzyme activities are difficult to predict based on primary sequence, as all enzymes contain a prosthetic group, 3,5-dihydro-5-methylidene-4H-imidazol-4-one, formed by the cyclization of the sequential amino acids alanine, serine, and glycine. Here we compared previously described and commonly used enzymes—RsTAL from Rhodobacter sphaeroides, RcTAL from Rhodobacter capsulatus, BagA from Streptomyces sp., SeSam8 from Saccharothrix espanaensis, RmXAL from Rhodotorula mucilaginosa, and other fungal enzymes—for enzymatic activity in vivo together with 11 uncharacterized enzymes. MATERIALS AND METHODS Bioinformatic methods. The nonredundant protein database in GenBank was searched using BLASTP 2.2.28+ using four known enzymes having TAL activity: RsTAL from Rhodobacter sphaeroides, RmXAL from Rhodotorula mucilaginosa, S_bagA from Streptomyces sp., and SeSam8 from Saccharothrix espanaensis. To limit the list of BLAST hits to the most likely correctly annotated sequences, duplicates were removed and the resulting hits were limited to those having homology over the central part of the sequence covering the catalytically important residues, ranging from the alanine-serine-glycine triplet forming the MIO prosthetic group to the tyrosine stabilizing the MIO group and to a minimum length of 300 amino acids. We grouped the hits into clusters using H-CD-HIT in the CD-HIT suite, with three hierarchical rounds of clustering: 90%, 60%, and 40% amino acid identity, yielding 107 clusters. Assignment to phyla was done by reconstructing taxonomy trees from the NCBI taxonomy database. Synteny was analyzed using GCView with input sequences being PSI-BLAST results for RsTAL from Rhodobacter sphaeroides, PYP, 4-coumarate-CoA ligase from Halorhodospira halophila, and the urocanate hydratase protein of Bacillus subtilis retrieved from the nonredundant database using standard parameters. Phylogenetic trees were constructed in MEGA6 using the maximum-likelihood method based on a JTT matrix-based model on Clustal Omega -aligned sequences and an initial tree constructed by the neighbor-joining method. Strains and media. Media. Escherichia coli strains were routinely grown at 37°C on plates or in liquid culture in either lysogeny broth or 2×YT medium with antibiotics when appropriate. Liquid cultures were incubated with aeration in an orbital shaker. For analysis of production rates, E. coli strains were grown in M9 minimal medium with 0.2% glucose. Growth was measured by following the optical density at 600 nm. Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains were routinely grown in synthetic dropout medium lacking histidine for selection of DNA integration or lacking uracil for selection of episomal plasmids. For production analysis, strains were grown either in the Feed-In-Time synthetic fed-batch medium M-Sc.syn-1000 from m2p-labs GmbH or in a defined minimal medium based on Delft medium supplemented with 76 mg liter −1 uracil and 380 mg liter −1 leucine or 25 mg liter −1 histidine and 75 mg liter −1 leucine at 30°C and 250 rpm. For molecular biology procedures, Lactococcus lactis strains were cultivated as batch cultures without aeration in M17 medium supplemented with 0.5% glucose at 30°C. To assess pHCA production, strains were grown as static cultures in chemically defined medium containing 1% glucose without pH control and supplemented with 1.7 or 3.7 mM l -tyrosine. Plasmid selection was achieved by addition of 5 μg ml −1 chloramphenicol to the growth medium. Growth was monitored by measuring OD 600. DNA and molecular biology tools. DNA oligonucleotide primers were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies. Synthetic genes, codon optimized for expression in E. coli, L. lactis or S. cerevisiae, were ordered from GeneArt. General molecular techniques were performed essentially as described elsewhere. Restriction enzymes, T4 DNA ligase, DNA polymerases, and Gibson Assembly master mix were obtained from New England BioLabs or Thermo Scientific and used according to the supplier's instructions. DNA purification was done using Macherey-Nagel kits, except for plasmid purification from L. lactis. Lactococcal plasmid DNA isolation was carried out using the QIAprep spin miniprep kit for small-scale purifications with the following modifications: the bacterial pellet was resuspended in Birnboim A solution, containing 5 mg ml −1 lysozyme and 30 μg ml −1 RNase I, and incubated at 55°C for 10 to 15 min before addition of buffer P2. TABLE 1 DNA oligonucleotides used in this study Cloning for expression in Escherichia coli. Genes optimized for E. coli were amplified using the oligonucleotides shown in Table 1 and cloned into pCDFDuet-1 as follows. The plasmid was digested with NdeI and BglII and gel purified. The genes were inserted by isothermal assembly using Gibson Assembly master mix, and transformed into chemically competent DH5α or NEB5α, selecting for resistance to 50 μg ml −1 spectinomycin in LB medium. A few genes were constructed by assembly of multiple fragments: the gene encoding RsTAL-var2 was assembled from two fragments PCR amplified from the gene encoding RcTAL-var1 and the synthetic double-stranded DNA fragment CBJBB6. The genes encoding RtXAL-EP18Km-6 and RtPALmut2-RM120-1 were constructed by assembly of two and three, respectively, PCR products amplified from the gene encoding RtXal1. Plasmids carrying genes encoding His-tagged versions of the proteins were made as follows. Partly complementary oligonucleotides CBJP559 and CBJP560 were ligated into pCDFDuet-1 digested with NdeI and BglII, forming a new histidine tag. The resulting plasmid pCBJ229 was PCR amplified with CBJP575 and CBJP576, and this linear DNA fragment was combined with individual genes amplified with the oligonucleotides shown in Table 1 as described previously. Clones were verified by sequencing and electroporated into the E. coli expression strain BL21/pLysS, selecting for pLysS with 34 μg ml −1 chloramphenicol and for expression plasmids with 50 μg ml −1 spectinomycin. A control strain carrying pCDFDuet-1 was also made. The resulting plasmids and strains are shown in Tables 2 and ​ and3, 3, respectively. TABLE 2 Plasmids TABLE 3 Strains Cloning for expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. All genetic constructions were made in E. coli DH5α grown in LB containing 100 μg ml −1 ampicillin for plasmid maintenance. Fourteen of the genes cloned for expression in E. coli and the TEF1 promoter were amplified using the uracil-containing primers listed in Table 1. The promoter fragment and each of the genes were combined into the integrative EasyClone vector, pCfB391 following the uracil-specific excision reagent cloning method. The resulting plasmids are listed in Table 2. Plasmids were digested by NotI and purified by using NucleoSpin gel and PCR cleanup kits following manual instructions. DNA linearized plasmids were transformed into S. cerevisiae CEN.PK102-5B by the lithium acetate transformation protocol. Yeast transformants were selected on synthetic complete dropout medium without histidine, resulting in strains STC0 to STC14. Correct insertions of TAL genes were verified by yeast colony PCR by primers pIntFwdU and XI-5 down_out. Alternatively, for plasmid-borne expression, 12 genes, including those encoding HaTAL1 and FjTAL optimized for S. cerevisiae, were amplified using the oligonucleotide also listed in Table 1 and inserted by uracil excision into the vector pCfB132 together with the PPGK1 promoter amplified by primers PPGK1_fw and PPGK1_rv. The finished plasmids were transformed into S. cerevisiae CEN.PK102-5B selecting for growth on synthetic dropout medium plates lacking uracil. Control strains with either the integration of pCfB391 or carrying pCfB1322 were also made. The resulting plasmids and strains are shown in Tables 2 and ​ and3, 3, respectively. Cloning for expression in Lactococcus lactis. The synthetic RsTAL Ll and RmXAL Ll genes were cloned into the nisin-inducible expression vector pNZ8048 as follows. RsTAL Ll and RmXAL Ll genes and the vector were PCR amplified using the primers listed in Table 1 and assembled in a single-tube isothermal reaction using the Gibson Assembly master mix. Reaction products were ethanol precipitated and suspended in double-distilled water before transformation into L. lactis by electroporation as described by Holo and Nes. The synthetic genes encoding SeSam8, R_XAL, HaTAL1, and FjTAL were amplified by PCR using the primer pairs listed in Table 1, digested with specific restriction enzymes, and cloned between the NcoI and XbaI restriction sites of pNZ8048. The plasmids were obtained and maintained in NZ9000, and the gene sequences of the different constructs were verified by sequencing. To assess pHCA production, TAL expression vectors were transformed into NZ9000Δ ldh Δ ldhB. A control strain was also constructed by transformation of NZ9000Δ ldh Δ ldhB with empty expression vector pNZ8048. Plasmids and strains are listed in Tables 2 and ​ and3 3. Analysis of production. Heterologous TAL and PAL expression and analysis of pHCA and CA production in E. coli. Unless otherwise stated, pHCA production was carried out as follows. E. coli BL21pLysS strains harboring recombinant plasmids were precultured in 3 ml of 2×YT with appropriate antibiotics and incubated at 37°C and 250 rpm overnight. The following day, each preculture was transferred into 2 ml of M9 minimal medium with appropriate antibiotics to a final OD 600 of 0.05 and cultured at 37°C and 300 rpm in 24-well deep-well plates until the OD 600 reached ∼0.6. Then, isopropyl β- d -1 thiogalactopyranoside was added at a final concentration of 1 mM, and the cells were grown for 3 h at 30°C, followed by addition of 2 mM substrate. Finally, the culture was incubated at 30°C for 24 h. In the case of the time course experiments with E. coli, samples were collected every hour for 14 h and after 24 h from substrate addition. Collected samples were harvested by centrifugation at 16,200 × g for 10 min, and the supernatant was filtered through 0.2-μm filters and analyzed by using high-performance liquid chromatography as described below. Experiments were carried out at least in triplicate. Heterologous TAL and PAL expression and analysis of pHCA and CA production in S. cerevisiae. For screening the 14 different chromosomally integrated TAL and PAL genes, yeast cultures were grown in 0.5 ml SC medium lacking histidine at 30°C and 250 rpm for 24 h in a 96-well deep-well plate, and then 50 μl of this preculture was inoculated into 0.5 ml Delft medium with 2% glucose or into FIT medium, both of which were supplemented with 76 mg liter −1 uracil, 380 mg liter −1 leucine, and 10 mM tyrosine or phenylalanine. Yeast cultures were cultivated in 96-well deep-well plates at 30°C and 250 rpm for 72 h. Samples for HPLC were taken at the endpoint of cultivation, and the OD 600 of the yeast cultures was measured in a microtiter plate reader after cultures had been diluted 2 to 20 times. A similar procedure was used for the analysis of strains carrying genes on episomal plasmids, except that selection was done in medium without uracil. Heterologous TAL and PAL expression and analysis of pHCA and CA production in L. lactis. For heterologous expression of cloned tyrosine ammonia-lyases, L. lactis strains were grown in CDM, and nisin was added at an OD 600 of 0.3 to 0.4. Samples of cultures were collected at different points during growth and centrifuged, and the supernatants were stored at −20°C until analysis by HPLC. Analytical methods. The production of pHCA, cinnamic acid, and urocanic acid was measured by HPLC on a Thermo HPLC setup and quantified using standards. Samples were analyzed using a gradient method with two solvents: 10 mM ammonium formate and acetonitrile at 1.5 ml min −1, starting at 5% B. From 0.5 min after injection to 7 min, the fraction of B increased linearly from 5% to 60%, and between 9.5 and 9.6 min, the fraction of B decreased back to 5%, remaining there until 12 min. pHCA and CA were quantified by measuring absorbance at 333 nm and 277 nm, respectively. Titers were calculated by correlating OD 600 to grams of cells liter −1, using previously measured correlation or literature values. Protein purification and kinetic analysis. Strains expressing His-tagged versions of the enzymes were grown in LB medium overnight at 37°C, diluted into fresh LB with 1 mM IPTG, and propagated overnight at 30°C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 9,800 × g for 8 min and disrupted using an EmulsiFlex-C5 homogenizer into a buffer. The supernatant was clarified by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C and loaded onto nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid resin columns on an Äkta Pure system connected to an F9-C fraction collector. Finally, the fractions containing the purified protein was dialyzed overnight against a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, and 10% glycerol, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C. The purification and protein sizes were assessed by SDS-PAGE. Enzymatic assays were performed in 200-μl volumes in wells in a UV transparent 96-well plate, by following the increase in absorbance at 315 nm or 295 nm. The pH optima were determined in 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer for pH 6.0 to 8.0 and in 50 mM potassium borate buffer for pH 8.5 to 10.5. The reaction mixtures contained 2 μg of purified protein, and the reactions were initiated with 1 mM tyrosine or 6 mM phenylalanine after equilibration to 30°C. The enzymatic activity was expressed in units per gram, where 1 unit is defined as 1 μmol substrate converted per minute. We did not observe any production in the absence of enzymes under any conditions. The kinetic constants K m and V max were determined from assays containing from 1.56 μM to 200 μM tyrosine or from 193 μM to 25 mM phenylalanine. Nucleotide sequence accession numbers. The codon-optimized genes have been deposited in GenBank under accession numbers } KR095285 to } KR095310. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Using synteny and phylogeny to identify enzymes. We examined the diversity of known and hypothetical XAL enzymes, aiming at identifying enzymes from the protein sequence databases that differed from the previously characterized enzymes. For this purpose, we created a protein sequence subset from the nonredundant protein sequence database at GenBank by identifying homologs to four nonsimilar known genes with TAL or PAL activity: those encoding RsTAL from R. sphaeroides, S_BagA from Streptomyces, RmXAL from Rhodotorula mucilaginosa, and SeSam8 from Saccharothrix espanaensis. In order to assess the true diversity of XAL enzymes, and to further counter the challenge of sequence bias, we condensed the data set for 4,729 unique sequences into 107 representative clusters, each containing 1 to 1,201 sequences with more than 40% sequence identity to the first cluster representative sequence. Sequencing bias is illustrated by the fact that 99% of sequences found in the largest cluster, making up one fourth of all sequences, could be identified as belonging to proteobacteria. To a large extent, each cluster represented sequences found in a single phylum, but a single phylum could be represented in several clusters. For example, a single strain may have two homologs in its genome, one being a HAL and the other a PAL. Overall, the majority of sequences were of bacterial origin, with proteobacteria contributing to 47% of all sequences that could be assigned to phyla, reflecting the overrepresentation of proteobacteria in the database. Figure 2 shows a phylogenetic tree containing representatives of each cluster together with previously characterized proteins and enzymes chosen for further study here. FIG 2 Phylogenetic relationship between enzymes of aromatic amino acid ammonia-lyase homologs. Included are representative from clusters of sequences that are at least 40% identical and... Since functionally related genes may show synteny and cluster together in microbial genomes, we examined the combinatorial presence of characteristic proteins that could hint at the activity encoded by the candidate gene. Some bacteria use pHCA as a chromophore in the light-sensing photoactive yellow protein, and homologs to PYP were found in close proximity to a TAL homolog in Idiomarina loihiensis, Halorhodospira halophila, and Curvibacter. R. sphaeroides, Rhodobacter capsulatus, Salinibacter ruber, Rhodopseudomonas palustris, Sorangium cellulosum, Leptospira biflexa, Leptothrix cholodnii, Gemmatimonas aurantiaca, and Haliangium ochraceum carry PYP gene homologs elsewhere in their chromosomes, while other bacteria have a PYP homolog as part of a larger protein. The enzyme 4-coumaroyl-CoA ligase forms the activated thioester from pHCA and CoA, required for example for formation of pHCA-bound PYP or for formation of flavonoids or stilbenes. A homolog to a 4CL may act on either pHCA or CA, but not on urocanic acid, and is thus linked to PAL and TAL activity but not HAL activity. HAL activity is the first step in the degradation of histidine to urocanic acid, which is then processed by the enzyme urocanase, whose gene is commonly annotated as hutU in bacteria. Thus, we used linkage of either a 4CL gene or hutU as a criterion for predicting enzymatic function, and the clusters containing XAL homologs closely linked to 4CL or hutU are shown in Fig. 2. No cluster contained two XALs with different linkages. The largest clusters carried sequences homologous to HALs and linkage to hutU, showing that the HAL functionality is more abundant in the sequence database. However, close inspection showed that, the catalytically important MIO-forming amino acid triad and a conserved tyrosine were absent from many sequences, while the immediate surrounding amino acid residues were conserved. Some of the coding sequences are genetically linked to histidine degradative genes, and it is unclear if their products are catalytically active as histidases independent of a MIO-based mechanism, e.g., by using an alternative prosthetic group, such as formation of dehydroalanine, as first suggested for aromatic amino acid ammonia-lyases, or if they catalyze an alternative reaction. TABLE 4 The 15 largest sequence clusters and phylogeny of selected TAL genes From Fig. 2 it is evident that there are large groups of potential enzymes which do not show a high degree of homology to enzymes that have been functionally characterized, while many previously characterized enzymes cluster together. It is also clear that there are large groups of enzymes for which no representative has hitherto been characterized. The known HALs as well as the hutU -linked genes from both eukaryotes and prokaryotes form a large group, which is separated from the enzymes that have TAM, PAM, TAL, or PAL activity. This was also found to be true in the cases where a PAL and a HAL are from the same organism. Aiming at functionally characterizing a wide spectrum of PAL and TAL enzymes, we chose to examine 22 proteins, of which half were uncharacterized, representing different clusters. We included two near-identical TALs from R. capsulatus, a TAL from R. sphaeroides which is highly similar with regard to primary sequence and enzyme kinetics, and a third representative from this cluster, R_XAL, from Rheinheimera sp. strain A13L. Two homologs, from the extreme halophilic bacterium Salinibacter ruber and from the spirochete Leptospira biflexa, grouped with the previously characterized SeSam8 from Saccharothrix espanaensis. Because the sequences contain active-site residues similar to those of TALs, and since the chromosomes furthermore encode PYP homologs, they were predicted to be TALs and included in this study. The Idiomarina loihiensis genome encodes the homolog IlTAL, as well as both a PYP and a 4CL. BagA from Streptomyces sp. showed the greatest homology to BlPAL from the Gram-positive organism Brevibacillus laterosporus. TABLE 5 Enzymes analyzed in this study We selected PpPAL from the biotechnologically relevant moss Physcomitrella patens subsp. patens, and the fungal enzymes of RmXAL, TcXAL, PcXAL, and RtXAL, including two mutants of the latter for which improved enzymatic characteristics have been reported. A cyanobacterial sequence from Leptolyngbya was chosen together with two other sequences from the genome of the green nonsulfur bacterium Herpetosiphon aurantiacus. Interestingly, the organism has a third homolog in its genome, which clusters together with the HALs. We furthermore chose to include DdPAL from Dictyostelium discoideum as a representative of a rare protein from an amoeba. Finally, we included a bacterial sequence that showed little similarity to other known enzymes, FjTAL from Flavobacterium johnsoniae. This clusters with enzymes from Bacteroides but is otherwise grouped most closely to previously described PALs, TAMs, and PAMs mainly from actinobacteria and proteobacteria. IlTAL and FjTAL represent the two largest clusters with only uncharacterized coding sequences in the analysis, and only the former cluster contains homologs linked to 4CL homologs. Prediction of enzyme specificity from sequence or synteny. Aromatic amino acid ammonia-lyases and mutases share a range of residues that have been shown through structural studies, mutational analysis, and simulation to be important for substrate binding and catalysis. Catalysis requires the formation of MIO and tyrosine residues Y60 and Y300, and the MIO interacts with several other amino acid side chains and residues, including L153, G204, F350, and Q436, which are all conserved in the selected enzymes. Substrate binding takes place to accommodate the carboxylic acid group through R303 and N435 and the aliphatic part through Y60 and G67 to the ring structure through L90, L153, M405, N432, and Q436. The far end of the substrate binding pocket may be hydrophobic in the case of phenylalanine or hydrophilic in the case of tyrosine or histidine as a result of the presence of either aliphatic residues or charged residues. Mutational studies have confirmed that this last region is important for specificity and that this may be changed through mutation. We included the RtXAL–RM120-1 mutant, where a mutation in this site resulted in increased specificity for tyrosine. The residues in this region are, however, not sufficient for predicting the substrate specificity. FjTAL, for example, has the highest sequence similarity to HALs and TAMs, while S_BagA, IlTAL, HaTAL1, and HaTAL2 do not conform to any of the previously defined sequences. Mutation of V409 has also been found to change the substrate specificity ; however, this amino acid is not conserved within enzymes of the same specificity. A reaction mechanism has also been hypothesized to be determined by N432, which was an asparagine for TALs and TAMs and a glutamine for PALs and PAMs. However, there is no such consistency between substrate specificity and this residue for the newly identified enzymes, since S_BagA, IlTAL, HaTAL1, and HaTAL2 contain a glutamine in this position. The N435-Q436 dyad does, however, appear to allow a sequence-based distinction between HALs and all other enzymes. The enzymes with dual TAL and PAL activity were generally of eukaryotic origin, although the bacterial R_XAL was capable of both reactions. We speculate that bacterial enzymes are more specific, as they take part in secondary metabolite formation, where the product is generally linked to a single downstream reaction. FjTAL, whose specificity could not be inferred from phylogeny or primary sequence, may be involved in the formation of flexirubin pigments in F. johnsoniae, giving rise to the bacterium's yellow color, as it is found close to genes characteristic of flexirubin biosynthesis. The gene encoding BlPAL, which shows homology to the TAL BagA, is present in a genomic region encoding polyketide synthases. HaTAL1 and HaTAL2 are very similar, while the third homolog encoded in the genome is more distinct and is associated with histidine degradation. However, none of three TAL homologs present in the Herpetosiphon aurantiacus genome belongs to the proposed biosynthetic loci. Since sequence motifs as well as synteny were not sufficient to predict substrate specificity for all proposed enzymes, we performed an in vivo screening. Screening for p -coumaric acid production in Escherichia coli. The coding sequences of all selected proteins were codon optimized and expressed in an E. coli B strain that was grown in minimal medium optionally supplemented with a 2 mM concentration of either tyrosine, phenylalanine, or histidine, and the resulting supernatants were analyzed for pHCA and CA formation. We were able to measure product formation for all enzymes except L_XAL and SrXAL. The enzymes RsTAL, RcTAL-var1, RcTAL-var2, R_TAL, IlTAL, S_BagA, SeSam8, LbTAL, HaTAL1, HaTAL2, and FjTAL all had TAL activities more than 10-fold higher than their PAL activities, except for R_XAL. The two variant enzymes from R. capsulatus shared a TAL-over-PAL preference, but one variant resulted in a 4-fold-higher specific production than the other despite only small sequence differences. RcTAL-var1 has a ten-amino-acid N-terminal extension, a single residue change, and a single residue gap near the C-terminal end compared to RcTAL-var2. The exogenous addition of the substrate tyrosine or phenylalanine to the growth medium caused an increased production of the products pHCA and CA, respectively. We also tested histidine as a potential substrate, but no urocanic acid was formed, confirming that none of the selected enzymes had HAL activity when the genes were heterologously expressed. The highest production of pHCA was observed from the strains expressing SeSam8, FjTAL, and HaTAL1, with concentrations of 0.54, 0.44, and 0.13 mM pHCA OD 600 unit −1 while producing 18, 0.5, and 1.1 μM CA OD 600 unit −1, respectively. In order to determine the maximum rate of catalysis under the chosen reaction conditions, we followed the in vivo production of pHCA from E. coli after induction in late exponential growth phase with exogenous tyrosine added. The results show patterns similar to those obtained with the endpoint data and also show that SeSam8 and FjTAL are equally effective, while HaTAL1 produces pHCA at a rate around one third that of the other enzymes. SeSam8 and FjTal show pHCA productivities that were not significantly different, while HaTAL1 gave a significantly lower productivity. FIG 3 Production of p -coumaric acid and cinnamic acid in E. coli, L. lactis, and S. cerevisiae expressing aromatic amino acid ammonia-lyases. Twenty-two open reading frames, codon optimized for E. coli, were expressed in E. coli. The pHCA and... FIG 4 Production of pHCA in E. coli with tyrosine ammonia-lyases SeSam8, HaTAL1, and FjTAL. Genes encoding SeSam8, HaTAL1, or FjTAL were induced in cells after 3 h of growth in M9 minimal medium with glucose. After another 4 h, in the late exponential phase,... The yeast enzymes RmXAL, TcXAL, PcXAL, and RtXAL had almost equal TAL and PAL activities, given the substrate availability and product secretion in vivo. RtXAL had almost equal preference for the TAL and PAL reactions, in accordance with published results, and while one of the mutants, RtXAL-EP18Km-6, showed little difference in production from the wild type, the other mutant, RtXAL-RM120-1, had a clearly altered preference for the TAL reaction, as expected, but also an 86% diminished overall activity. Lastly, BlPAL, PpPAL, and DdPAL all exclusively had PAL activity. Based on whether there was a >10-fold preference for a reaction, we designated the enzymes as TAL, PAL, or XAL. Phylogenetically, HAL enzymes form a cluster separate from other enzymes. Ritter and Schulz proposed that the eukaryotic PALs evolved from a bacterial HAL early in time, while the bacterial PAL/TALs emerged independently later, also from bacterial HALs. The cyanobacterial PALs have been suggested to be related to an intermediate in this evolution. The previously described homologs from the cyanobacteria Anabaena variabilis and Nostoc punctiforme have not had any measurable TAL activity, yet we identified the TALs, HaTAL1 and HaTAL2, that show greater sequence similarity to AvPAL and NpPAL than to any previously characterized TALs, suggesting that there has been convergent evolution of TAL and PAL activity. The included plant enzyme, PpPAL from moss, clusters together with other plant enzymes that generally have a preference for the PAL reaction over the TAL reaction, and this enzyme shows a perfect specificity for phenylalanine. The PAL from D. discoideum is shorter than the previously described PAL enzymes of eukaryotes, as it lacks around 50 residues in the N-terminal end and around 180 residues in the C-terminal region compared to others. Its closest known homolog is the bacterial PAL enzyme StlA. The amoeba has been suggested to have acquired other prokaryotic genes by horizontal gene transfer, and this also is a likely origin of DdPAL. Since substrate specificity is important for product purity, previous work focused on changing the specificity of yeast enzymes for the TAL reaction. RtXAL-RM120-1 did appear to have a higher TAL/PAL ratio than its parent, but this ratio was still lower than what was observed for the novel bacterial enzymes, FjTAL and HaTAL1, where only trace amounts of CA could be detected. Kinetic characterization of selected TAL enzymes. We further wanted to examine if the in vivo production observed in E. coli reflected the enzyme kinetic parameters, as the apparent in vivo activity also reflects substrate availability and product secretion. SeSam8, FjTAL, and HaTAL1, which showed the highest in vivo TAL activity while still being specific, were examined together with the previously characterized enzyme RsTAL. The four enzymes were purified or partially purified by identical means using N-terminal histidine tagging. After the tyrosine concentration that resulted in maximal activity with a given enzyme concentration had been determined, the pH optima of RsTAL and SeSam8 and the novel enzymes HaTAL1 and FjTAL were determined. The maximal enzymatic activities were found at pH 9.0 or above, where they were found to level off for all enzymes except HaTAL1, which showed a decrease in activity at high pH. Similar pH optima were observed for the PAL and TAL reactions. The TAL activity was highest for HaTAL1 and lowest for SeSam8, reaching 95 and 18 nmol mg −1 min −1, respectively. The PAL activity was highest for RsTAL and lowest for FjTAL, reaching 65 and 2 nmol mg −1 min −1, respectively, in the presence of 6 mM phenylalanine. FIG 5 pH optima for RsTAL, SeSam8, HaTAL1, and FjTAL. The pH optima for the TAL and PAL reactions were measured from pH 6.0 to 10.5 in 0.5-pH-unit intervals and expressed as nanomoles of product produced per minute per milligram of protein. The kinetic constants K m and V max were determined for the enzymes with either tyrosine or phenylalanine as a substrate at their optimal pH, as summarized in Table 6. SeSam8, HaTAL1, and FjTAL had very little activity for phenylalanine, with k cat / K m values of 2.49, 5.52, and 1.23 M −1 s −1, respectively. HaTAL1 had high turnover numbers for both tyrosine and phenylalanine but very low affinity for phenylalanine. FjTAL was the enzyme with the lowest activity for phenylalanine, resulting in a 2,400-fold-higher specificity constant, k cat / K m, between the two substrates. In comparison, SeSam8 was found to have a 1,200-fold difference in specificity between the substrates. TABLE 6 Kinetic analysis of four selected TAL homologs using tyrosine or phenylalanine as the substrate The kinetic constants are in line with previous analysis of SeSam8, but the importance of standardized assays is evident when data for RsTAL in the literature, where dramatically different kinetic constants for the same enzyme have been presented, are compared. These differences may have been due to different expression and assay conditions. The high pH optimum of the reactions may be a reflection of the reaction mechanism and is generally identical for all enzymes and similar to what has been observed previously for RsTAL, SeSam8, and other homologous enzymes. Alkaline pH may also be used for biocatalysis, where tyrosine produced by fermentation at physiological pH can be converted to pHCA in high titers by subsequent reaction at alkaline pH in the presence of TAL-expressing E. coli cells or cell paste. Production of p -coumaric acid in Lactococcus lactis. The performance of the novel enzymes were tested in a Gram-positive bacterium. Genes encoding HaTAL1, FjTAL, and four other enzymes with TAL activity in E. coli were expressed individually in L. lactis from plasmids using a nisin-inducible promoter, and the production was measured in culture supernatants. Even though the genes encoding RsTAL and RmXAL had been specifically codon optimized for L. lactis, RsTAL Ll and RmXAL Ll, FjTAL showed by far the highest specific production of pHCA, a 5-fold increase in specific production over RmXAL Ll, the second-best enzyme. The values were lower than those achieved in E. coli, and the production of pHCA could be slightly increased when the concentration of tyrosine in the medium was increased from 1.7 mM to 3.7 mM and the pH of the medium was increased from 6.5 to 7.0. RmXAL Ll was the only enzyme resulting in production of CA. Production of p -coumaric acid in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeasts, and in particular S. cerevisiae, are widely used as a cell factory for production of various chemicals. However, all known TAL enzymes of fungal origin also have at least a partial PAL activity. Well-described examples include enzymes used in this study: RmXAL, TcXAL, PcXAL, and RtXAL. Twenty-one genes were cloned and were chromosomally integrated into S. cerevisiae and/or expressed from an episomal plasmid based on a 2μ origin of replication. The resulting strains were analyzed for production of CA and pHCA in minimal defined medium and in FIT fed-batch-simulation medium with or without addition of tyrosine or phenylalanine. The novel enzymes HaTAL1 and FjTAL resulted in the highest production of pHCA, 90 and 89 μM pHCA OD 600 unit −1 while remaining highly specific for the TAL reaction over the PAL reaction, as no CA could be detected. The specific production was almost 4-fold higher than what was obtained using the previously reported TAL, RsTAL. As for E. coli, expression of genes encoding PpPAL, DdPAL, and BlPAL gave CA as the sole product, while PpPAL gave the highest specific production of CA. RmXAL led to production of both pHCA and CA, favoring pHCA, in contrast to the result for E. coli and L. lactis, where the CA production was equal or higher. RsTAL, S_BagA, SeSam8, R_XAL, IlTAL, LbTAL, FjTAL, and HaTAL1 all gave pHCA as the sole product, unlike in E. coli, where trace amounts of CA could be measured from all enzymes. The titers in defined minimal medium could be increased by the addition of phenylalanine or tyrosine, while the extent was less significant in the FIT medium. An analysis of the dynamics of pHCA production in FIT medium by five strains expressing either of RsTAL, S_BagA, RmXAL, HaTAL1, or FjTAL revealed that additionally supplemented tyrosine was consumed fast by S. cerevisiae, without a significant simultaneous production of pHCA. Rather, the majority of the pHCA production was observed in the subsequent part of the growth experiment. Consumption of tyrosine without comparative production of the downstream pathway has previously been seen for resveratrol production in yeast. In S. cerevisiae, the previously best-performing TAL enzymes have been reported to be those from Rhodosporidium and Rhodobacter. In comparison, the novel FjTAL and HaTAL1 enzymes gave a specific pHCA production that was three- to fivefold higher while not resulting in any measurable production of CA as a side product. The production was further increased by codon optimizing the genes encoding HaTAL1 and FjTAL for S. cerevisiae and expressing these from an episomal plasmid. The most significant improvements were observed for FjTAL, reaching 200 μM OD 600 unit −1 in FIT medium supplemented with tyrosine. Conclusion. In conclusion, 22 TAL and PAL genes were expressed and screened for product formation in E. coli. Selected enzymes were purified and characterized kinetically, and their efficacy was further demonstrated in the industrially important Gram-positive bacterium L. lactis as well as in the yeast S. cerevisiae. To our knowledge, this constitutes the largest comparative study of TAL homologs for biotechnological purposes reported so far, and it sheds light on the broader phylogenetic distribution of TAL and PAL activities, as the novel enzymes presented here cover a portion of the sequence space not previously covered by characterized enzymes. The study resulted in the identification of enzymes with improved kinetic characteristics over the currently employed enzymes. The novel TALs outperformed the previously characterized TALs when employed in vivo in a Gram-negative bacterium, a Gram-positive bacterium, and a yeast, while being very specific, as confirmed by in vitro kinetic experiments. We envision a role of the presented enzymes in biochemical production of phenolic compounds, and we are currently employing them in a series of cell factory designs. Supplementary Material Supplemental material: Click here to view. 