The study of cytoskeletal regulators on cell motility using Dictyostelium discoideum as a model organism with a view to human application in Marfan's syndrome and valvular diseases You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF The study of cytoskeletal regulators on cell motility using Dictyostelium discoideum as a model organism with a view to human application in Marfan's syndrome and valvular diseases Clin Med. 2016 Jun 1; 16: s29. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Clin Med v.16; 2016 Jun 1 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay The study of cytoskeletal regulators on cell motility using Dictyostelium discoideum as a model organism with a view to human application in Marfan's syndrome and valvular diseases Gaurav Kataria Additional article information Aims Several human disorders such as muscular dystrophy, Marfan's syndrome and valvular diseases have an etiology linked to filamin protein mutation. This research aimed to ascertain the role of filamin as an adaptor protein for normal cell development through exploring its influence upon cell movement and signalling. Methods The pre-spore cells in D. discoideum were focused upon as they produce extracellular signals involved in cell differentiation. To further investigate the role of filamin, the filamin promoter gene was firstly amplified by PCR. This was then ligated into a plasmid containing a lacZ reporter gene using the restriction enzymes Bam and Eco. This was next transformed into E. coli for further growth and subsequently electroporated into Dictyostelium cells. Following a period of growth under optimum conditions, the cells were stained using X-Gal under the presence of a pH 7.0 Z-buffer, allowing areas of high expression to be identified. To gain insight into its influence upon cell sorting, UblA knockouts were created and the results were recorded. Results The results demonstrated a clear correlation between filamin expression and normal cell differentiation. They further indicated that filamin is regulated at the protein level of UblA, and that UblA downregulates a filamin binding partner. In a UblA knockout mutant, cells were seen to have a sorting defect, while in a UblA/filamin knockout, construct cells were correctly targeted to the collar region. Conclusions These results conclude that the role of filamin as a cytoskeletal protein does indeed have an effect upon cell movement. The relationship between UblA and filamin now allows for further research into filamin mutation disorders such as muscular dystrophies and Marfan's syndrome/valvular diseases. Article information Clin Med. 2016 Jun 1; 16: s29. doi: 10.7861/clinmedicine.16-3-s29 PMCID: PMC4989947 PMID: 27252332 Gaurav Kataria Gaurav Kataria Manchester University, Manchester, UK Find articles by Gaurav Kataria Manchester University, Manchester, UK Copyright © Royal College of Physicians 2016. All rights reserved. Articles from Clinical Medicine are provided here courtesy of Royal College of Physicians