 Directional sensing, a process in which cells convert an external chemical gradient into internal signaling events, is essential in chemotaxis. We previously showed that a Rho GTPase, RacE, regulates gradient sensing in Dictyostelium cells. Here, using affinity purification and mass spectrometry, we identify a novel RacE-binding protein, GflB, which contains a Ras GEF domain and a Rho GAP domain. Using biochemical and gene knockout approaches, we show that GflB balances the activation of Ras and Rho GTPases, which enables cells to precisely orient signaling events toward higher concentrations of chemoattractants. Furthermore, we find that GflB is located at the leading edge of migrating cells, and this localization is regulated by the actin cytoskeleton and phosphatidylserine. Our findings provide a new molecular mechanism that connects directional sensing and morphological polarization. INTRODUCTION Chemotaxis plays important roles in many biological processes, including tissue morphogenesis, immune responses, wound healing, and cancer metastasis. Accurate chemotaxis depends on efficient conversion of extracellular chemical gradients into intracellular signaling events. This conversion of information from outside the cell to inside the cell involves signal amplification, which allows cells to sense extremely small differences in chemical concentrations. Intracellular chemotactic signaling events, such as the activation of Ras GTPases and the production of phosphatidylinositol -triphosphate, which lead to actin polymerization, are dynamic and spontaneously stimulated even in the absence of chemoattractants. When a chemoattractant gradient is present, cells spatially reorganize and polarize the locations of these dynamic events according to external chemical information received by chemoattractant receptors. This gradient-stimulated reorganization of signaling events is termed gradient sensing. Gradient sensing can occur in the absence of an actin cytoskeleton upstream of cell polarization or migration. Although not essential, the actin cytoskeleton generates additional signals that reinforce robust gradient sensing in migrating cells. Such reorganization elongates cells and contributes to the localized signal activation at the front of the cells. Because they are key gradient sensing components, activation of Ras GTPases and production of PIP3 have been extensively used as indicators of gradient sensing in mammalian and Dictyostelium cells. Ras GTPases are activated on the side of a cell that faces a higher concentration of chemoattractant through its receptors and receptor-coupled trimeric G-proteins. This localized Ras activation stimulates phosphoinositide 3 -kinases to produce PIP3 in the same region. Fluorescent protein–based biosensors for Ras activation and PIP3 production allow visualization of gradient sensing events as biosensors accumulate and form crescents at cell peripheries. In migrating cells, PIP3 stimulates actin polymerization, which drives pseudopod formation, likely through activation of Rho GTPase family members, which include Rho and Rac subfamily members. We recently showed that a Dictyostelium Rho GTPase, RacE, controls directional sensing in a chemical gradient. The active form of RacE localizes at the rear of cells and restricts the activation of Ras GTPase, thereby reducing PIP3 production at the region with the higher chemoattractant concentration. Despite the importance, molecular mechanisms that coordinate Rho, Rac, and Ras activities in gradient sensing are poorly understood. To further define the mechanism of directional sensing, we identified and characterized a novel RacE-binding protein, GflB, involved in chemotaxis. RESULTS GflB is a developmentally regulated protein that binds to Rho and Ras GTPases To understand the molecular mechanism that regulates directional sensing, we searched for RacE-binding proteins by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry. Dictyostelium cells expressing constitutively active green fluorescent protein –RacE G20V or GFP were lysed, GFP-fusion proteins were precipitated with GFP-Trap magnetic beads, and bound proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. We found potential regulators of RacE, including two known RacE-binding proteins, formin and IQGAP, and two Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors, GxcC and DocD. We also found a novel protein, GflB, which contains a Rho GTPase–activating protein domain and a Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factor domain. FIGURE 1: Identification of GflB as a RacE- and Ras-binding protein. Identified RacE- binding proteins. Number of unique peptides, total number of spectra, and coverage of the proteins by the identified peptides. The domain structure of GflB was analyzed... There are three proteins in the Dictyostelium genome that contain both RhoGAP and RasGEF domains: GflB, GflD, and GefD. A previous RNA sequencing study showed that the expression of GflB, but not GflD or GefD, is up-regulated during differentiation into multicellular fruiting bodies, which requires chemotaxis. This expression pattern of GflB suggests that GflB may function in developmentally regulated chemotaxis. To confirm interactions between GflB and RacE in cells, we performed pulldown assays. Whole-cell lysates were prepared from Dictyostelium cells expressing FLAG-GflB and mixed with lysates from cells expressing GFP-RacE, constitutively active GFP-RacE G20V, or dominant-negative GFP-RacE T25N. GFP-fusion proteins were pulled down with GFP-Trap beads, and bound fractions were analyzed with antibodies to GFP and FLAG. We found that FLAG-GflB bound similarly to all three forms of GFP-RacE, suggesting that GflB interacts with RacE regardless of its activation status. To ask whether this interaction is specific to RacE, which is the closest Dictyostelium homologue of mammalian RhoA, we tested Rac1A and RacB, which belong to the Rac family. We found that Rac1A and RacB, similar to RacE, interact with GflB. A truncation analysis revealed that GflB interacts with RacE, Rac1A, and RacB via a region that spans amino acid residues 645–1601 and contains the RhoGAP and RasGEF domains. In addition to Rho GTPases, we found that GflB also binds to Ras GTPases, using pulldown assays with cell lysates expressing GFP-GflB and the FLAG-tagged Ras GTPases FLAG-RasC and FLAG-RasG, which function in Dictyostelium chemotaxis. Increased amounts of GFP-GflB were pulled down with RasC and RasG in the presence of EDTA compared with GTPγS. Thus interactions of GflB with RasC and RasG are decreased when these GTPases are in GTP-bound forms. We also confirmed that GFP-GflB 645–1601 was sufficient for binding to endogenous RasG. The N- and C-terminal regions coordinately localize GflB to pseudopods To examine the intracellular localization of GflB, we expressed GFP-GflB in wild-type Dictyostelium cells and observed them by fluorescence microscopy. GFP-GflB was localized at the cell periphery and enriched at the cell protrusions, or pseudopods, in randomly migrating and growing cells. This membrane association was enhanced with GFP-GflB 1–644, in which the RhoGAP and RasGEF domains are removed. Immuno­blotting whole-cell lysates showed that expression levels of GFP-GflB and GFP-GflB 1–644 are comparable, ruling out the possibility that localization of the latter is caused by increased expression. In contrast, GFP-GflB 645–1601 and a GFP control were uniformly distributed in the cytosol. These localizations suggest that the C-terminal region containing the RhoGAP and RasGEF domains negatively regulates the peripheral localization of GflB, which is mediated by the N-terminal extension. To further narrow down the region necessary for peripheral localization of GflB, we removed the portion of the N-terminal extension that contains asparagine repeats from GFP-GflB 1–644 and found that GFP-GflB 361–644 was sufficient for the peripheral localization. Although GflB interacts with RacE, localization of GFP-GflB was independent of the presence or activation of RacE. FIGURE 2: GflB is located at the cell periphery in growing cells and the leading edge of chemotaxing cells. GflB constructs used. Growing WT cells expressing the indicated forms of GflB fused to GFP were observed by fluorescence microscopy. Arrowheads indicate... GflB 361–644 contains two clusters of positively charged residues, which may interact with negatively charged lipids. To confirm this model, we performed a lipid dot blot assay. We incubated nitrocellulose membranes spotted with different lipids with lysates prepared from Dictyostelium cells expressing FLAG-GflB, FLAG-GflB 361–644, or FLAG-GflB 645–1601. Lipid–protein interactions were detected with anti-FLAG primary antibodies and fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies. We found that full-length GflB and GflB 361–644, but not GflB 645–1601, strongly bound to phosphatidylserine. As a negative control, we used cell lysates without ectopic protein expression. In cells migrating toward cAMP, GFP-GflB was enriched at the leading edge. Unlike GFP-GflB, GFP-GflB 1–644 localized along the cell peripheries, with slight enrichment at the rear end of chemotaxing cells, suggesting that the C-terminal region containing the RhoGAP and RasGEF domains restricts GflB to the leading edge of migrating cells. The localization of GflB is regulated by the actin cytoskeleton but not PIP3 We found that localization of GflB was regulated by activation of cAMP receptor. When Dictyostelium cells are starved and differentiating, expression of cAMP receptors increases to enable cells to respond to the chemoattractant. PHcrac-GFP, a biosensor for PIP3, is recruited to the plasma membrane after cAMP stimulation, and PIP3 production is sensitive to the PI3 kinase inhibitor LY294002 but resistant to the actin polymerization inhibitor latrunculin A. Stimulating cells with cAMP increased the amount of GFP-GflB and GFP-GflB 1–644, but not that of GFP-GflB 645–1601, at the peripheries of chemotaxis-competent differentiated cells. LY294002 did not affect cAMP-simulated recruitment of GFP-GflB and GFP-GflB 1–644 to the periphery, indicating that the recruitment of GflB to the plasma membrane does not require PIP3. Whereas GFP-GflB 1–644 was strongly associated with the cell periphery, latrunculin A treatment redistributed it to the cytosol. Addition of cAMP did not affect their cytosolic localization in the presence of latrunculin A. These results suggest that the peripheral localization of GflB and GflB 1–644 involves association with the actin cytoskeleton. gflB is required for chemotaxis toward cAMP To determine the cellular function of GflB, we deleted gflB in Dictyostelium by homologous recombination. The gene disruption was confirmed by PCR and Southern blot analysis. To test the role of gflB in chemotaxis, we first examined starvation-induced differentiation into fruiting bodies, which consists of stress-resistant spores and spore-supporting stalk cells. During the differentiation process, Dictyostelium cells migrate toward cAMP and form multicellular aggregates that eventually culminate into fruiting bodies. Because chemotaxis toward cAMP is critical for Dictyostelium differentiation, mutant cells that are defective in chemotaxis show defects in differentiation. We found that WT cells started aggregating at ∼6 h after starvation. After 12 h, multicellular aggregates were observed. After 24 h, WT cells produced fruiting bodies. In contrast, the formation of aggregates was delayed in gflB − cells, and we observed aggregates after 12 h. At 24 h, gflB − cells formed only smaller fruiting bodies. Ectopic expression of GFP-GflB partially rescued the differentiation phenotype in gflB − cells, and we observed aggregation at ∼9 h. FIGURE 3: gflB − cells are defective in chemotaxis. The gflB was replaced by a blasticidin resistance cassette. Genomic DNA was analyzed by PCR with primer sets 1/2, 2/3, and 4/5. The primer set 1/2 amplified a 0.8-kb region in gflB −... To directly monitor chemotaxis, we used a micropipette assay. In this assay, Dictyostelium cells were starved for 5 h to be competent for chemotaxis and then were placed in a cAMP gradient generated by a micropipette that releases the chemoattractant. The WT, but not gflB − cells, efficiently moved toward the tip of the micropipette. Quantification of chemotactic behaviors showed that gflB − cells had significantly reduced chemotactic speed and motility speed compared with WT and GFP-GflB/ gflB − cells. The chemotactic index, which indicates the directional accuracy of cell migration, was also reduced in gflB − cells compared with WT and GFP-GflB/ gflB − cells. In addition, gflB − cells were less polarized and rounder than WT and GFP-GflB/ gflB − cells. Extending starvation time did not improve impaired chemotaxis in gflB − cells. Because GFP-GflB/ gflB − cells showed greater roundness than did WT cells, we tested whether GFP-GflB has a dominant-negative effect and indeed found that it significantly increases roundness when expressed in WT cells. Cytokinesis requires GflB In addition to chemotaxis, we found that GflB is important for cytokinesis. The gflB − cells showed decreased proliferation rates and increased cell sizes with many nuclei, as shown by 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining in shaking culture. Dictyostelium cells divide using two distinct mechanisms. Although Dictyostelium cells mainly use the contractile ring consisting of actin and myosin II filaments in suspension culture, they also divide by traction force, which is independent of actin-myosin, on solid substrates. We found that cell division defects in gflB − cells were rescued when grown on a solid substrate. Because RacE and RasG also function in cytokinesis, GflB may coordinate signal transduction of RacE and RasG for cytokinesis in addition to chemotaxis. To exclude potential effects of cytokinesis defects on chemotactic behaviors, we grew cells on solid substrates in all experiments performed for this study. GflB controls chemotactic signaling Because GflB contains the RasGEF and RhoGAP domains and is required for efficient chemotaxis, we tested the role of GflB in chemotactic signaling using Ras-binding domain -GFP, PHcrac–red fluorescent protein, and RFP fused to the CRIB domain from PakB. Activation of Ras and Rac and production of PIP3 result in pseudopod formation driven by actin polymerization. Basal, spontaneous activation of Ras and Rac and production of PIP3 are greatly reduced in differentiated cells; activation of Ras and Rac and production of PIP3 are transiently induced by cAMP. To test the role of GflB in temporal regulation of chemotactic signaling, we uniformly added cAMP to differentiated cells. In WT cells, uniform cAMP stimulation transiently induced recruitment of RBD-GFP, PHcrac-RFP, and CRIB-RFP to the cell periphery. Similar responses to Ras activation and PIP3 production were observed in gflB − cells. In contrast, we found that Rac activation was slightly but significantly increased in gflB − cells, suggesting that GflB negatively regulates Rac GTPases and functions as a RacGAP. The PI3 kinase inhibitor LY294002 did not affect activation of Ras GTPases in WT and gflB − cells, although PIP3 production was blocked. It has been suggested that Rac becomes activated downstream of PIP3. To our surprise, LY294002 did not affect the translocation of CRIB-RFP to the plasma membrane upon cAMP stimulation. FIGURE 4: Alterations in Ras activation, PIP3 production, and Rac activation in response to global chemoattractant stimulation in gflB − cells. WT and gflB − cells expressing the indicated biosensors were uniformly stimulated with 1 μM... Of interest, Ras activation and PIP3 production were reduced in gflB − cells that were uniformly stimulated with cAMP in the presence of latrunculin A when compared with WT cells. It appears that GflB activates Ras GTPases in response to cAMP through a mechanism suppressed by the actin cytoskeleton. In contrast to Ras, latrunculin A reversed the increased activation of Rac GTPases in gflB − cells such that similar levels of Rac activation were seen in WT and gflB − cells. These data suggest that the actin cytoskeleton is required for the function of GflB in suppression of Rac activation. To biochemically test for activation of two Ras GTPases—RasC and RasG—that function in chemotaxis, WT and gflB − cells were uniformly stimulated by cAMP and lysed at different time points. We incubated the lysates with recombinant glutathione S -transferase –Byr-RBD, which binds to the active forms of RasC and RasG. The GST-fusion protein was pulled down with glutathione-Sepharose beads, and the bead-bound fractions were analyzed by immunoblotting with antibodies to RasC and RasG. The amounts of active RasC and RasG transiently increased in WT cells, whereas RasG activation was significantly reduced in gflB – cells. Therefore GflB appears to be necessary for normal activation of RasG by the chemoattractant cAMP. FIGURE 5: GflB is required for cAMP-stimulated activation of RasG. Dictyostelium cells were lysed at the indicated time points after the addition of cAMP. GST-Byr2-RBD, which binds to active RasC and RasG, was added to the lysates. The GST-fusion protein was... Next we examined activation of Ras and Rac, production of PIP3, and localization of actin filaments with biosensors in vegetatively growing cells and chemotaxis-competent differentiated cells. Increased numbers of protrusions and macropinocytic cups containing RBD-GFP, PHcrac-RFP, and CRIB-RFP were found at the cell peripheries of vegetative gflB − cells compared with WT cells. Compared to RBD-GFP and PHcrac-RFP, CRIB-RFP signals were relatively uniformly distributed at the cell periphery in addition to being locally enriched. Localization of CRIB-RFP was not altered in cells lacking RacE or overexpressing constitutively active RacE G20V, consistent with a study showing that CRIB from PakB does not bind to RacE. Presumably as a result of signal activation, increased amounts of actin filaments were seen in vegetative gflB − cells by Lim∆coil-RFP compared with WT cells. These signaling events are spatially polarized toward the leading edge of chemotaxing cells in a cAMP gradient. During chemotaxis, gflB − cells were less polarized and had a broader leading edge, as visualized by the F-actin biosensor Lim∆coli-RFP, compared with WT cells. Similarly, CRIB-RFP had a broader distribution at the leading edge, which may result from increased Rac activation, similar to increased Rac activation in response to uniform cAMP stimulation. Because RBD-GFP and PHcrac-RFP also showed broader distributions at the leading edge of chemotaxing gflB − cells compared with WT cells, the loss of GflB increases overall chemotactic signaling and impairs effective cell migration. FIGURE 6: GflB spatially organizes PIP3 production and Ras activation in a chemoattractant gradient. WT and gflB − cells expressing the indicated biosensors examined during growth and during chemotaxis by fluorescence microscopy. RBD-GFP and... GflB regulates directional sensing in a cAMP gradient Because it has been shown that the actin cytoskeleton amplifies Ras activation through a positive feedback mechanism, broader distribution of Ras activation visualized by RBD-GFP could result from broader distribution of the actin cytoskeleton. To test this model, we examined Ras activation and PIP3 production in the absence of the actin cytoskeleton. We placed WT and gflB − cells in a cAMP gradient in the presence of latrunculin A, which separates directional sensing from regulation by the actin cytoskeleton. In WT cells, RBD-GFP and PHcrac-RFP formed crescents at the cell periphery nearer to the higher concentration of cAMP. In gflB − cells, the width of the RBD-GFP and the PHcrac-RFP crescents increased. These data suggest that broader Ras activation in gflB − cells is not due to broader distribution of the actin cytoskeleton. Because we did not observe increased activation of Ras GTPases when cells were uniformly stimulated with cAMP, GflB likely plays a greater role when a chemoattractant gradient is present. We suggest that GflB spatially restricts signal activation toward higher concentrations of the chemoattractant. FIGURE 7: GflB regulates gradient sensing. The gradient-sensing assay. Cells expressing biosensors were placed in a cAMP gradient in the presence of latrunculin A. To determine the positions of the PHcrac and RBD crescents, the angle Φ was defined by... In addition to increased width of Ras activation and PIP3 production, RBD-GFP and PHcrac-RFP crescents were more stable in gflB − cells. Whereas RBD-GFP and PHcrac-RFP crescents moved laterally with 15° fluctuations in the angle Φ in WT cells, Φ was reduced to 10° in gflB − cells. We previously showed that the angle Φ is regulated by RacE activation and that constitutively active RacE G20V limits activation of Ras GTPases from the side of the cell that faces away from the gradient. When we expressed GFP-RacE G20V in gflB − cells, we found no additional stabilization of the PHcrac-RFP crescent. These data suggest that loss of GflB reduces Φ of RBD-GFP and PHcrac-RFP crescents through activation of RacE. Given that the localization of GFP-RacE G20V crescents was similar in WT and gflB − cells, GflB does not regulate the location of active RacE. Although CRIB-RFP is enriched at the leading edge of polarized cells in a cAMP gradient in polarized cells, CRIB-RFP was evenly distributed along the plasma membrane in both WT and gflB − cells in a cAMP gradient in the presence of latrunculin A Therefore the spatial regulation of Rac activation seems to require the actin cytoskeleton. DISCUSSION In this study, we identified a novel developmentally regulated protein, GflB. GflB contains three major domains—an N-terminal lipid-binding domain, a RhoGAP domain, and a RasGEF domain. We found that GflB interacts with both Rho and Ras GTPases and controls their activities in response to the chemoattractant cAMP. The phenotype of a gflB knockout shows that GflB is important for spatially restricting intracellular chemotactic signals at the leading edge of migrating cells. Of interest, GflB controls the distribution and spatial stability of Ras activation and, thereby, PIP3 activation. Considering that GflB has RhoGAP and RasGEF domains, GflB may function in balancing the activation of these small GTPases to optimize gradient sensing. On uniform chemotactic stimulation, Ras activation and PIP3 production are temporally increased on the plasma membrane. These signaling events are also observed at the leading edge of chemotaxing cells. To account for these temporal and spatial responses, a local excitation-global inhibition model has been proposed. In this model, the differences resulting from a fast activation and a subsequent slow inhibition create temporal and spatial distribution of signaling events. Of interest, although uniform cAMP stimulation induced Rac activation in the presence of latrunculin A, Rac activation was not spatially organized in a cAMP gradient in the absence of the actin cytoskeleton, in contrast to Ras activation and PIP3 production. It seems that the spatial regulation of Rac activation requires additional components, such as morphological polarization mediated by the actin cytoskeleton. GEFs and GAPs regulate small GTPases, including Rho and Ras. GEFs remove GDP from these GTPases and increase their GTP-bound forms. On the other hand, GAPs stimulate GTP hydrolysis and increase their GDP-bound forms, inactivating the small GTPases. Similar to mammalian cells, Dictyostelium cells have a large number of potential small GTPase regulators, including 53 RhoGEFs, 46 RhoGAPs, 25 RasGEFs, and 7 RasGAPs. It is largely unknown why there are so many regulators and how they function to orchestrate intracellular signaling events. In the present study, we show that GflB connects the actin cytoskeleton with the activation of Rho and Ras in chemotaxis. To balance such signaling events, we propose that GflB and the RhoGEF GxcT act at multiple regions in cells, including the leading and trailing edges of migrating cells. We propose that GxcT activates RacE at the rear of cells and that activated RacE stabilizes the position of the Ras activity toward higher concentrations of chemoattractants. In contrast to the GxcT mechanism, GflB negatively controls the position of Ras activity at the front of cells. By balancing signaling events, cells can precisely control gradient sensing in response to chemoattractant gradients. Although temporal Ras activation was modestly decreased in gflB − cells, spatial Ras activation was increased. This apparent discrepancy cannot be explained simply by any potential function of GflB as a RasGEF. It is possible that a global inhibitory mechanism, proposed by a local excitation/global inhibition model, decreases inhibition of Ras activities when Ras activation is decreased. The recruitment of GflB to the leading edges of migrating cells likely involves the coordination of the N- and C-terminal regions. Our data suggest that the lysine-rich N-terminal region associates with the cortical actin and distributes evenly at the cell periphery. Although the C-terminal region alone does not associate with the actin cytoskeleton, it restricts the localization of the N-terminal region of GflB toward pseudopods. We do not know how GflB interacts with the actin cytoskeleton. The C-terminal region may switch the type of actin cytoskeleton to which the N-terminal region preferentially binds from stable F-actin to dynamic F-actin. Finally, we found that GflB interacts with phosphatidylserine ; however, PS is likely not the main determinant for the localization of GflB, because the PS biosensor GFP-LactC2 is located in intracellular vesicles, in contrast to GflB. We also observed that GFP-LactC2 becomes cytosolic after differentiation, consistent with a previous study. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture, gene knockout, and plasmids Dictyostelium discoideum cell lines were cultured in HL5 medium at 22°C. The GflB genes was disrupted by homologous recombination using the blasticidin resistance cassette and confirmed by PCR and Southern blot. Briefly, a vector targeting the GflB gene was constructed as follows. A DNA fragment containing the 5′ untranslated region was amplified from genomic DNA with primers gflB salI 1–19 and gflB smaI 880–781. A DNA fragment containing the 3′ UTR region was amplified with primers gflB smaI 4116-4134 and gflB notI 4875–4856. These DNA fragments and the blasticidin S resistance cassette from pLPBLPv2 were cloned into pBluescript to generate the targeting vector. The plasmids used for this study are listed in Supplemental Table S1. The PCR primers used for the construction of plasmids and gene disruption are listed in Supplemental Table S2. Identification of RacE-binding proteins WT Dictyostelium cells expressing GFP or GFP-RacE G20V were lysed in lysis buffer and incubated with GFP-Trap magnetic beads for 4 h at 4°C. The beads were washed, and the bound fractions were analyzed using mass spectrometry at the Johns Hopkins Mass Spectrometry and Proteomic Facility as described previously. Protein–protein interaction assay To prepare Dictyostelium cell lysates, cells carrying different plasmids were starved for 4 h and lysed in lysis buffer with or without 5 mM EDTA or 50 μM GTPγS and 5 mM MgCl 2 on ice for 10 min. Cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation, and GFP-Trap beads or anti-FLAG antibody beads were added to the mixture and incubated at 4°C for 4 h. After washing with dilution buffer, bound proteins were eluted with 2× SDS–PAGE sample buffer and analyzed by SDS–PAGE and immunoblotting using appropriate antibodies. Cell proliferation and development assay To examine cell proliferation, cells were cultured in HL5 medium on a rotary shaker at 180 rpm at 22°C and counted daily. To examine developmental phenotypes, exponentially growing cells were washed twice in development buffer and plated on 1% nonnutrient DB agar at 1× 10 6 cells/cm 2. Chemotaxis assay A needle assay was performed as described. Cells were cultured in HL5 medium, washed twice with DB, and shaken for 1 h before being induced to differentiate with 100 nM cAMP pulses at 6-min intervals for 4 h. Cells were then plated on a chambered coverslip. A cAMP gradient was produced by a micropipette containing 1 μM cAMP and a microinjector with a compensation pressure of 100 hPa. Images of moving cells were recorded at 30-s intervals for 20 min using a DMI6000 and a Yokogawa CSU10 spinning-disk confocal microscope equipped with a 10× objective connected to a digital camera. ImageJ software was used to analyze data. Directional sensing assay Directional sensing was assessed as described. Differentiated cells expressing PHcrac-RFP, RBD-GFP, or CRIB-RFP were plated on a chambered coverslip and treated with 5 μM latrunculin A for 10 min. A cAMP gradient was generated by a micropipette containing 1 μM cAMP. Cells were observed with a microscope consisting of a fully automated DMI6000 and a Yokogawa CSU10 spinning-disk confocal. Lipid dot blot assay A lipid dot blot assay was performed as described. Cells expressing FLAG fused to full-length or truncated versions of GflB were cultured in HL5 medium and starved for 3 h in DB. After being washed twice in ice-cold 10 mM sodium phosphate, cells were lysed in 10 mM sodium phosphate containing 1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, and protein inhibitor cocktail, on ice. Cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation and diluted fourfold with binding buffer. Membranes spotted with different phospholipids were blocked in phosphate-buffered saline containing 3% fatty acid–free bovine serum albumin and then incubated with the lysates for at least 4 h. After washing, the membranes were probed with anti-FLAG antibodies, followed by Alexa 488–labeled anti-mouse immunoglobulin G antibodies. The membranes were scanned with a PharosFX Plus molecular imager and analyzed with Quantity One software. RBD-binding assay The RBD-binding assay was performed as previously described. Escherichia coli BL21 cells expressing a fusion protein were cultured in 3 l of 2YT and induced at an OD 600 of 0.6–0.8 with 0.4 mM isopropyl-β- d -thiogalactoside for 18 h at 18°C. After induction, cells were harvested by centrifugation. Cell pellets were washed once in STE buffer and frozen overnight at −80°C. The next day, cell pellets were resuspended in 100 ml of ice-cold binding buffer and lysed with a microfluidizer. Triton X-100 was added to the cell lysates, and the lysates were cleared by centrifugation. A 3-ml bed volume of glutathione-Sepharose beads was added to a cleared lysate, and the mixture was incubated for 45 min at 4°C. The beads were washed in PBS buffer containing 1 mM DTT and resuspended in a total volume of 6 ml. The WT or gflB − cells were pulsed with cAMP for 5 h and shaken at 200 rpm in DB with 5 mM caffeine for 20 min, washed twice with PM, and resuspended to a concentration of 5 × 10 7 cells/ml in PM. Cells were stimulated with 1 μM cAMP, and aliquots were taken at each time point, lysed in an equal volume of ice-cold 2× lysis buffer, and incubated on ice for 10 min. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation. GST-Byr2-RBD beads were washed in 1× lysis buffer, and 0.6 ml of cleared lysate was incubated with a 20-μl bed volume of beads for 45 min at 4°C. Beads were harvested by centrifugation, washed twice with 1× lysis buffer, and washed twice with 1× lysis buffer without BSA. Twenty-five microliters of 1× SDS gel loading buffer was added to the pelleted beads, and the mixture was boiled for 5 min. Ten microliters of each sample was fractionated by SDS–PAGE, blotted onto polyvinylidene fluoride membranes, and probed with antibodies to RasC or pan-Ras. Statistical analysis The p values were calculated using the Student’s t test: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Supplementary Material Supplemental Materials: Click here to view. 