 Open in a separate window Highlights • Dynein clusters into lipid microdomains on the phagosome as it matures • Clustering allows many dyneins to simultaneously contact a single microtubule • Large cooperative forces can now be generated to transport phagosomes to lysosomes • Leishmania lipophosphoglycans disrupt microdomains and inhibit this transport Dynein motors physically cluster into lipid rafts on the membrane of a phagosome as it matures inside the cell. The geometric organization in clusters increases the generation of force and allows many motors to cooperate to drive fast transport of the phagosome, a process required for elimination of many intracellular pathogens. Introduction Microtubule motors of the kinesin and dynein families drive many cellular processes such as organelle transport, chromosome segregation, and beating of cilia/flagella. This diversity of function requires the cellular localization and activity of motors to be regulated in many ways. Regulation of motors at the single-molecule level by motor-associated regulatory proteins has been studied extensively. However, most cellular functions require large forces that can only be generated collectively by a team of many motors. Little is known about how such motor teams are assembled at appropriate cellular locations before they can execute a specific task. The substrate on which motor teams must assemble inside cells is usually a lipid membrane, for example, the bilayer membrane covering vesicular cargoes that are transported by motors. We therefore wondered if motor recruitment to a lipid membrane can be controlled by the membrane itself, perhaps in coordination with other membrane-bound proteins that regulate vesicle trafficking. In this respect, the heterogeneity of biological membranes is of particular interest. Cholesterol and sphingolipids appear enriched within lipid microdomains, where they enhance membrane packing to promote microdomain formation. This process is likely facilitated by a combination of protein-lipid and protein-protein interactions, because microdomains are enriched in specific proteins and may be maintained by active processes that drive the membrane away from thermodynamic equilibrium. Motors could be localized to microdomains by direct binding to lipids or via adaptor proteins. Membranous regions of high motor density could potentially be created by clustering many copies of a motor within a microdomain. Such geometrical clustering may be of advantage if multiple motors are to work cooperatively as a team. Geometrical arguments suggest that motor clustering is necessary for efficient transport of micron-sized cargoes. Indeed, cooperative improvement in transport of artificial liposomes through clustering-induced dimerization of kinesin-3 motors has been reported. A minus-end-directed kinesin is also shown to localize into membrane domains near the apical subplasma membrane of polarized epithelial cells. However, the functional relevance of clustering of motors and its impact on specific cellular processes is unknown. In this context, the appearance of microdomains on phagosomes with maturation is particularly interesting. Phagocytosis and subsequent encapsulation of microbes into a membranous vesicle result in the formation of a phagosome. Phagosome maturation is intimately connected to microtubule motor-driven motion. Early phagosomes move in a bidirectional manner on MTs, when they physically interact with and exchange lipids and proteins with endosomes. Intriguingly, this motion changes as the phagosome matures, so that late phagosomes exhibit rapid unidirectional dynein-driven transport toward the MT minus end. The mechanism of this change is important to understand because it facilitates fusion of phagosomes with perinuclear lysosomes and is essential for pathogen clearance. MT depolymerization blocks delivery of fluid phase markers from endosomes to phagosomes and also reduces phagosome-lysosome fusion. Importantly, pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Salmonella specifically inhibit this switch to dynein-dependent transport as a survival strategy. We therefore wondered if microdomains on the phagosome membrane could upregulate dynein-driven transport of phagosomes. Cholesterol appears to be a major player in microdomain formation on cellular membranes. Dynein-driven transport of endosomes increases in cholesterol storage disorders like Niemann-Pick disease, where cholesterol-laden “paralyzed” endosomes cluster around the MT minus ends. Cholesterol accumulation into endolysosomes results in cholesterol-poor phagosomes that are unable to fuse with lysosomes. Interestingly, the GTPase Rab7 that recruits dynein to phagosomes interacts with the cholesterol sensor ORP1L and is enriched in a cholesterol-rich detergent resistant fraction of phagosomal membranes. Taken together, the above observations suggest a molecular connection between dynein, Rab7, and cholesterol within microdomains on the phagosome membrane. Here, we show using multiple experimental approaches that dynein clusters into microdomains on the membrane of a phagosome as it matures inside cells. This geometrical clustering allows many dyneins to simultaneously contact a single MT and generate large cooperative force. This force drives rapid retrograde transport of late phagosomes, likely enabling their fusion with degradative lysosomes. We also show that lipophosphoglycan, the main molecule used by pathogenic Leishmania donovani parasites to survive inside macrophages, specifically disrupts the clustering of dynein on LP membranes to block retrograde transport of LPs. Results Transport- and Maturation-Dependent Changes of Latex Bead Phagosomes Inside Cells We used phagocytosed beads to understand how motor-driven transport and phagosome maturation impact each other. Phagocytosed beads undergo biogenesis inside cells to acquire a bilayer lipid membrane. Motor and non-motor proteins assemble in situ on this membrane to drive vigorous transport of these “latex bead phagosomes” along MTs. Motion at defined stages of maturation can be assayed using a pulse-chase strategy that allows phagosomes to mature for specific chase periods after ingestion. Proteomic and biochemical studies have extensively used latex bead phagosomes to understand phagosome biology. These refractile and spherical phagosomes are also ideal for optical trapping to measure forces generated by motors. Beads were phagocytosed into J774 mouse macrophages or into Dictyostelium discoideum cells. The beads were chased inside Dictyostelium cells for 5–10 min to investigate early phagosome motion and for >30 min to investigate LP motion. EPs moved in bidirectional manner inside agar-flattened Dictyostelium cells. For EPs, fast unidirectional segments of motion were interrupted by pauses followed by reversal and rapid unidirectional motion in opposite direction. In contrast, LP motion was largely uninterrupted and unidirectional. Many LPs appeared to move smoothly inside cells over distances longer than apparent from Figure 1 A, but the convoluted trajectories prevented reliable characterization of motion. Figure 1 A also shows representative tracks of endosomes inside Dictyostelium cells. These endosomes do not have beads inside them but are highly motile endogenous vesicles at various stages of maturation. The motion of EPs was very similar to the bidirectional motion of endosomes, but the motion of LPs resembled that of unidirectional endosomes. The velocity of motile EPs within fast unidirectional segments was similar to unidirectional velocity of LPs and endosomes. The bidirectional and unidirectional motions are also reproduced for phagosomes inside J774 mouse macrophages. Therefore, phagocytosed beads appear to replicate specific maturation-dependent aspects of motion within the endophagosomal pathway. Phagosomes mature beyond the EP stage within ∼10 min of ingestion in Dictyostelium. It was therefore practically impossible to assay inside Dictyostelium cells how motor function changes from EPs to LPs. Figure 1 Latex Bead Phagosome Motion Inside Dictyostelium Cells and in Cell Extract Figure S1 Motion and Force Generation of Phagosomes Inside Macrophage Cells: Calculation of the Area A CONTACT from Where Dyneins Can Contact an MT to Drive Cargo Transport, Related to Figures 1 and ​ and3 3 In Vitro Reconstitution of Early and Late Phagosome Transport Vesicle transport can be reconstituted in Dictyostelium cell extract, permitting controlled evaluation of motor protein activity. Detailed protocols have been described for purification of EPs and LPs from Dictyostelium using a pulse-chase strategy. Phagosomes purified from Dictyostelium were used for in vitro motility assays on polarity-labeled MTs. We verified the identity and purity of EPs and LPs purified in a similar manner from J774 or RAW264.7 mouse macrophage cell lines. A clear difference was observed between motion of purified EPs and LPs. In vitro motion of EPs and LPs was characteristically similar to their corresponding motion inside cells. Figure 1 B also shows bidirectional and unidirectional tracks of endosomes purified from Dictyostelium, which appear very similar to EPs and LPs. The velocity of purified EPs, LPs, and endosomes during uninterrupted segments of motion was statistically same as their respective velocities inside cells. Figure 1 D reports run lengths for purified EPs and LPs. A run was defined as a period of uninterrupted fast motion. No difference in plus-directed run lengths was seen between EPs and LPs. In contrast, minus-end-directed LPs usually moved much farther than EPs. The actual run length is likely larger for these LPs, because they often got stuck at obstacles or reached the end of the MT during in vitro motion. Note that runs of EPs could end in reversals or detachments from the MT. The persistent long minus-end-directed runs of purified LPs along single MTs is reminiscent of similar observations inside mouse macrophages and may facilitate degradative fusion of phagosomes with lysosomes. Figure S2 Identity and Purity of Latex bead Phagosomes and Western Blotting to Investigate Differences in Dynein Amount on Purified EPs and LPs, Related to Figures 1 and ​ and3 3 Force Measurement on Early and Late Phagosomes The above data show that a switch from bidirectional to retrograde unidirectional motion in the phagosomal/endosomal pathway is reproduced in our in vitro motility assays. To understand the mechanism of this switch, we measured the force generated by motors on purified EPs and LPs using an optical trap. Motors on EPs generated vigorous force in both directions, with frequent transitions between plus and minus-end-directed stalls. In contrast, LPs exhibited repeated minus-end directed stalls. The total number of plus and minus stalls were counted to determine the ratio of minus:plus stalls. The significant increase in this ratio for LPs showed that dynein driven stalls dominate as the phagosome matures and likely cause the minus-end-directed bias in LP motion. Qualitatively similar differences in force generation between EPs and LPs were also seen for phagosomes inside J774 cells. Figure 2 Optical Trapping of EPs and LPs Reveals Differences in Dynein Number, Function, and Cooperativity Figure 2 C shows a histogram for plus-directed stall forces on EPs and LPs. The histogram for EPs and LPs appears similar, with a major peak at ∼6 pN followed by a broad distribution centered at ∼12 pN. This is similar to observation on LPs inside J774 cells. We have earlier shown using purified kinesin-coated beads that the Dictyostelium Unc104 kinesin generates ∼6 pN force. Therefore, one or two kinesins appear to drive the motion of EPs as well as LPs, in agreement with the similar plus-directed run length of EPs and LPs. It therefore appears that kinesin activity on phagosomes is not sensitive to maturation. Enhanced retrograde transport of LPs therefore does not arise from a suppressed kinesin activity on LPs. In contrast to the observation for kinesin, minus-end-directed stalls showed a pronounced shift toward higher force on LPs. A cumulative frequency count showed that only 50% EPs exerted >6 pN force, but this fraction was 86% for LPs. The major peaks for minus-end-directed LPs appeared at ∼4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, and 16 pN, whereas the peaks for EPs were at ∼2, 4, and 6 pN. We have earlier shown using purified dynein-coated beads that single Dictyostelium dynein generates ∼1.1 pN force, similar to mammalian dynein. The ∼2pN interval between peaks in the force histogram agrees with our earlier observation on LPs inside J774 cells. This possibly happens because dynein is recruited in pairs to LPs via a dimer of Rab7, with each dynein-pair generating 1.1 × 2 ∼2 pN force. Dynein is recruited to early endosomes/phagosomes by Rab5, which is also a dimer in the active GTP-bound conformation. Optical trapping therefore confirmed an increase in frequency and magnitude of minus-end-directed force generating events on LPs. Since force measurements suggested similar activity of one or two kinesins on EPs and LPs, the improved minus-end-directed motion must stem from enhanced dynein activity on LPs. Such enhancement could arise in one or more of the following ways: molecular properties and function of dynein is different on LPs compared to EPs; there is more dynein on LPs than on EPs; or organization of dynein on the LP membrane is different from the EPs, allowing more dyneins to generate force simultaneously. In what follows, we will examine the evidence pertaining to each of these possibilities. No Significant Difference in Molecular Function and Amount of Dynein between Early and Late Phagosomes As already mentioned, minus-end-directed velocities for EPs and LPs were statistically the same. Both EPs and LPs showed a 2 pN periodicity in force histograms, suggesting that the force generated by a pair of dyneins is similar. Therefore, each dynein on EPs as well as LPs likely generates ∼1 pN force, which is the same as the force generated by purified Dictyostelium dynein-coated beads. We next measured minus-end-directed run lengths of dynein-coated beads and LPs that were first made to stall against the optical trap before release and free motion on the MT. We chose only LPs that generated 3–5 pN force to enable a fair comparison with dynein-coated beads. The average stall force was statistically same for beads and such LPs, confirming motion driven by approximately the same number of dyneins. The run length was also statistically same for dynein-coated beads and LPs generating 4–6 pN force. This suggests no significant increase in dynein’s processivity through association with LP-specific regulatory proteins. As expected, LPs exhibiting higher force in minus direction had longer runs because they were likely driven by more dyneins. Next, we estimated the persistence of dyneins against load by measuring the time spent by cargo above half-maximal load against an optical trap. Again, stalls within the same force regime showed statistically same T STALL for beads, EPs, and LPs. Taken together, velocity, force, run length, and T STALL suggest no significant change in the molecular function of dynein with phagosome maturation. The higher net-minus force on LPs therefore likely results from a larger number of dyneins that can engage a MT simultaneously to drive LP motion. This is supported by additional peaks of ∼2 pN periodicity at higher force for LPs. We next probed the obvious possibility that improved retrograde motion is caused by increased recruitment of dynein on LPs. Immuno-electron microscopy of phagocytosed beads in J774 cells has reported no increase in dynein on LPs compared to EPs, and no increase was seen on late endosomes compared to early endosomes. Figure 3 A shows three representative EPs and three LPs that were purified from Dictyostelium. Dynein consistently showed a non-uniform punctate distribution on LPs, but not so on EPs. We traced a circle along the circumference of individual EPs/LPs to determine the fluorescence intensity as a function of the angular rotation. Figure 3 B shows representative profiles of EP#3 and LP#3. The EP shows high basal values of pixel intensity and smaller fluctuations. In contrast, the baseline for LP intensity is almost zero, but there are strong peaks corresponding to intense puncta. The mean pixel intensity after averaging along the circumference for eight EPs and seven LPs is statistically the same. This suggests no significant difference in dynein amount between EPs and LPs at the single-phagosome level. Quantitative western blotting confirms that the amount of dynein does not change significantly between purified EPs and LPs. Figure 3 D plots the SD in pixel intensity along the circumference for EPs and LPs. The SD is significantly higher for LPs, suggesting that dynein intensity is nonuniform on LPs. These data suggest that dynein redistributes from more uniform organization to a punctate organization on LPs, where it presumably clusters within small domains. This clustering appears to occur with no significant recruitment of additional dynein on LPs. Figure 3 Clustering of Dynein, Rab7, and Flotillin into Cholesterol-Rich Domains on Late Phagosomes Clustering of Dynein and Why This Is Needed for Transport of Large Cargoes The punctate staining provided preliminary evidence that dynein exists in clusters on the LP membrane. We observed approximately eight puncta of dynein along an LP of 2 μm diameter. The number of puncta per unit length was calculated, yielding ∼20 puncta on the entire surface of such LPs. Assuming that the inter-puncta distance is maintained, the approximately 6-fold smaller surface area of a 759-nm-diameter LP yields only approximately three puncta on its entire surface. The long minus runs and high force therefore suggest that the motile LPs are largely driven by multiple dyneins within a single puncta. A spherical cargo of radius R is schematized in Figure 3 E with two dyneins attached to the cargo and also engaged to a MT. If their attachment points on the cargo are moved further upward, then the dyneins cannot reach the MT. The maximum arc along which dyneins can contact the MT is shown in red. Dyneins situated along this arc within distance ∼ D perpendicular to the plane of paper may also reach the MT. Therefore, there exists an approximately rectangular contact area on the cargo, such that only dyneins within A CONTACT can drive transport along a single MT. An expression for A CONTACT is derived in Figure S1 C. As an example, A CONTACT ∼0.09 μm 2 for a spherical cargo of 1 μm diameter with surface area of 3.14 μm 2. If we now randomly place motors on the spherical cargo, the probability that a motor will fall within A CONTACT, and therefore engage the MT, is P CONTACT = A CONTACT /. Here, the denominator is the total surface area of the spherical cargo. We plot P CONTACT as a function of cargo radius in Figure 3 E, with D = 70 nm. For neuronal vesicles with a diameter of ∼100 nm, there is an ∼50% probability that an added dynein will be able to drive transport. However, P CONTACT reduces rapidly with increasing cargo size. For an EP or LP used in our motility assays, a randomly added dynein would have only a 4% chance of contacting the MT, thereby making multiple-dynein-driven motion along a single MT quite unlikely. Similar conclusions have been reached using computer simulations. This problem can be overcome by generating a nonuniform dynein distribution, with multiple dyneins clustered within A CONTACT. We emphasize that activating dynein molecularly using regulatory proteins is of little help, because the activated dyneins would never be able to contact a single MT simultaneously without clustering. Dynein, Flotillin, and Rab7 Colocalize into Microdomains on the Phagosome Membrane What mechanisms can cluster dynein on a cargo membrane? The staining of dynein on LPs was reminiscent of similarly punctate staining for the cholesterol-binding protein flotillin on phagosomes. We therefore suspected that dynein localizes into, and clusters within, cholesterol-rich microdomains on the LPs. Double-immunostaining of LPs purified from J774 cells against dynein and flotillin showed that dynein indeed co-localizes with flotillin into punctate structures on LPs. This is also clear from the overlapping pixel intensity profiles of dynein and flotillin along the circumference of an LP. Cross-correlation analysis also confirmed the co-localization of dynein with flotillin. LPs also showed a punctate staining for cholera toxin B as reported earlier, confirming the presence of lipid microdomains on LPs. Figure S3 Colocalization of Dynein and Rab7 on Late Phagosomes: Effect of LPG on Fluorescence Intensity Patterns of Dynein and Rab7 on Late Phagosomes, Related to Figures 3 and ​ and5 5 Figure S4 Cholera Toxin and Dynein Staining on Late Phagosomes, Appearance of Dynein in DRM Fraction, and Effect of MβCD and LPG on Proteins Associated with Late Phagosomes, Related to Figures 3, ​,4, 4, and ​ and5 5 The GTPase Rab7 interacts with dynein and recruits dynein to LPs in a GTP-dependent manner. Rab7 also interacts with the cholesterol sensor ORP1L and could therefore be present in membrane microdomains. Double immunostaining for dynein and Rab7 showed that these proteins colocalize into the same punctae on LPs. In contrast to dynein and Rab7, distribution of the LP marker LAMP1 was uniform and continuous, as also reported by others. Figure 3 I plots the SD in fluorescence intensity calculated along the circumference of LPs for dynein, flotillin, and LAMP-1. The punctate staining of dynein and flotilin-1 is reflected in significantly higher SD compared to LAMP1. To investigate whether dynein’s punctate staining is an artifact from disruption of phagosome membrane during purification, we performed immunostaining for dynein inside macrophage cells. While the staining on EPs was more uniform, a punctate staining for dynein was again apparent on LPs inside cells. To investigate whether punctate staining is an artifact of antibody clustering, we phagocytosed latex beads into stable HeLa bacterial artificial chromosome cells where the dynein intermediate chain is tagged to GFP. Dynein-GFP again appeared in punctate arrangement on LPs. We also isolated detergent-resistant membranes from purified LPs to find that dynein is enriched in the DRM fraction along with flotillin-1. However, DRM formation may be an artifact and its relevance to lipid microdomains inside cells is unclear. Increase in Membrane Cholesterol on Phagosomes with Maturation Since cholesterol is an important component of membrane microdomains, we investigated whether clustering of dynein correlates with an increase in membrane cholesterol on LPs. This possibility is supported by the enrichment of the cholesterol-binding protein flotillin on late phagosomes. Immunofluorescence images revealed barely detectable flotillin-1 on EPs, but intense and punctate staining on LPs. We next stained purified EPs and LPs with filipin, an antibiotic used to detect cholesterol in lipid membranes. Images for filipin could only be acquired under epifluorescence illumination, possibly obscuring the punctate staining of filipin on LPs. Higher filipin staining was observed on LPs as compared to EPs. A statistically significant increase in pixel intensity of flotillin and filipin was measured on the LP circumference. The images in Figures 4 A and 4B provide microscopic evidence for higher cholesterol on LPs as compared to EPs. Figure 4 LPs Have More Membrane Cholesterol Than EPs We next estimated the amount of membrane-associated cholesterol on bulk samples of purified EPs and LPs. This was done using a cholesterol assay kit and also by quantitative lipidomics. Averaging over all these methods, we found ∼1.6-fold more cholesterol on LPs than on EPs. Sphingomyelin and cholesterol are known to interact, and their concentrations correlate in cell membranes. The SM content is 1.74 times higher in LPs than EPs. This is in good agreement with the LP:EP cholesterol ratio measured here. Since EPs are derived from the cholesterol-rich plasma membrane, it is not obvious how LPs acquire more cholesterol than EPs. It is possible that EPs are formed from cholesterol-poor domains of the plasma membrane. A role for cholesterol recycling from endosomes is also possible, though these issues remain to be addressed in detail. Figure S5 Experiments to Obtain EP and LP Samples with Equal Number of Phagosomes, Related to Figures 4 and ​ and5 5 Figure S6 Cholesterol Estimation on Phagosomes, Related to Figures 4 and ​ and5 5 Dynein Clustering Hypothesis for Rapid Unidirectional Transport of Late Phagosomes The observed increase in cholesterol and punctate staining of dynein/Rab7/flotillin on LPs prompted us to make the following dynein clustering hypothesis: As phagosomes mature, they fuse with cholesterol-rich endolysosomes to acquire cholesterol and membrane associated “raftophilic” proteins that promote and stabilize microdomain formation on the LP membrane. Rab7 interacts with cholesterol-bound ORP1L and is therefore recruited preferentially within cholesterol-rich microdomains on LPs. Rab7-ORP1L binding stabilizes a GTP-bound state of Rab7, which in turn recruits Rab-interacting lysosomal protein, dynactin, and dynein to the microdomains on LPs. ORP1L-Rab7-RILP bound dyneins therefore cluster within microdomains. Multiple dyneins clustered within a microdomain can simultaneously engage a single MT to generate robust directed transport of LPs. Blocking the vacuolar proton pump ATPase with bafilomycin prevents fusion of phagosomes with late endosomes and also blocks the recruitment of flotillin-1 to late phagosomes. Cholesterol is therefore likely acquired by phagosomes via interactions with the endosome membrane. Rab7 may also have a role in regulating dynein function on LPs, but we do not believe that it directly regulates dynein’s single molecule function. Rather, Rab7 possibly first localizes to microdomains using its lipid anchor and then acts as a local scaffold to recruit dyneins preferentially within the microdomains. It is also likely that Rab7-GTP stabilizes the formation of microdomains, because Rab7-GTP can dimerize on the lipid membrane. We are unable to comment on the possible co-clustering of kinesin with dynein into microdomains or the exclusion of kinesin from microdomains. Kinesin-1 could not be detected on LPs by immunofluorescence and western blots of DRM fractions, possibly because there is ∼20-fold less kinesin-1 compared to dynein on LPs. It also appears more physiologically relevant to cluster dynein into microdomains, because dynein is adapted to work in large teams. Effect of Cholesterol Depletion on Late Phagosomes To verify a role for cholesterol in dynein-driven LP motion, we performed in vitro motility assays with purified LPs after incubation with methyl-beta-cyclodextrin, which removes cholesterol from lipid membranes. MβCD did not influence dynein’s molecular function, because beads passively coated with purified dynein showed no change in velocity and motile fraction after addition of MβCD. In contrast, motile fraction of dynein driven LPs was significantly reduced after MβCD treatment. MβCD had no effect on velocity of the few minus-end-directed LPs that moved. These observations suggest that MβCD disrupts transport of LPs without interfering with the single-molecule function of dynein. We observed infrequent minus-end-directed stalls of LPs with lower forces after MβCD treatment. The plateau-like regions usually seen for LPs were missing, and T STALL was significantly lowered. Multiple dyneins therefore failed to generate force cooperatively and detached abruptly against load after MβCD treatment. A reduction in filipin staining confirmed that MβCD removed cholesterol from LP membranes. The sharp punctate staining of dynein on LPs subtly changed to a more diffuse distribution after MβCD treatment. Interestingly, the mean intensity for dynein staining along circumference was unchanged, suggesting no loss of dynein from LPs upon MβCD treatment. This was verified by western blotting experiments, where no change in dynein amount on purified LPs was seen after MβCD treatment. Analysis of the fluctuations in fluorescence intensity also suggested a more diffuse distribution of dynein after MβCD treatment of LPs. Figure 5 Effect of Cyclodextrin and Lipophosphoglycans on Dynein’s Function and Organization on LPs Since MβCD did not remove dynein from LPs and did not interfere with motion of dynein-coated beads, it could inhibit LP motion by disrupting dynein clusters or by removing dynein-associated regulatory proteins from the LP membrane. Indeed, we detected reduced intensity of Rab7 and flotillin staining on LPs after MβCD treatment. Approximately 50% reduction in Rab7 and flotillin was estimated by measuring fluorescence intensity on treated and untreated LPs and by performing western blots of purified LPs. MβCD experiments therefore suggested a role of cholesterol in dynein-driven LP motility but could not distinguish between two possible mechanisms of motility reduction, namely disruption of dynein’s clustered organization versus loss of dynein regulators. To address this issue, we next devised experiments to disrupt the microdomains on LPs without removing cholesterol and Rab7 from LPs. Effect of Leishmania Lipophosphoglycans on Late Phagosomes The protozoan parasite Leishmania donovani causes visceral Leishmaniasis or kala-azar, the second largest parasitic killer disease in the world after malaria. Leishmania targets a liver-specific microRNA to reduce serum cholesterol, and liposomal delivery of cholesterol can protect against leishmaniasis. This suggests that cholesterol is a major player in Leishmania pathogenesis. The Leishmania promastigote resides within phagosomes inside macrophages but avoids degradation by altering its fusion with late endosomes and lysosomes. Similar to LPs, flotillin has been observed in punctate arrangement on Leishmania -containing phagosomes. Leishmania expresses a cell-surface glycolipid called lipophosphoglycan. Studies with mutant Leishmania lacking LPG show that LPG is the main molecule that blocks fusion of Leishmania with lysosomes. LPG is a GPI-anchored glycolipid with a glycan core and a polymer of GalManα1-PO 4 repeating units. The GPI lipid anchor presumably localizes LPG to cholesterol-rich domains on the surface of Leishmania -containing phagosomes. Western blot and slot blot experiments showed no change in amount of flotillin and GM1 on phagosomes after LPG treatment—this suggests that LPG treatment may not remove microdomain-associated proteins from the phagosome membrane. We therefore assayed minus-end-directed motility of LPs in presence of LPG to observe a reduction in the motile fraction after LPG treatment. The few LPs that moved in presence of LPG showed velocity equivalent to untreated LPs, suggesting that enzymatic function of dynein is not perturbed by LPG. We next measured cooperative force generation by dynein on LPs in presence of LPG. Infrequent stalls at lower force were observed, with the plateau-like region typical of untreated LPs absent. This was also evident from the significantly lower values of T STALL after LPG treatment. Motility and cooperative force generation of LPs was therefore inhibited by LPG in a manner similar to MβCD. Similar to the experiments with MβCD, LPG had no effect on motile fraction and velocity of beads coated with dynein. This suggests that LPG does not inhibit dynein’s single-molecule function. Figure 5 D shows filipin staining of LPG-treated LPs, and Figure 5 E plots the mean filipin intensity measured along circumference of untreated and LPG-treated LPs. No reduction in filipin staining was seen, suggesting that LPG does not remove cholesterol from the phagosome membrane. This observation agrees with reports that LPG does not remove flotillin from phagosomes. If cholesterol is not removed, cholesterol-associated proteins may also not be removed after LPG treatment. This was indeed suggested by the unchanged total intensity of dynein and Rab7 staining on LPs after LPG treatment. Quantification of dynein and Rab7 fluorescence intensity along circumference of LPs also confirmed that dynein and Rab7 are not removed after LPG treatment. While LPG did not remove dynein and Rab7, the punctate staining of these proteins changed to a more uniform distribution after LPG treatment. Analysis of the fluctuations in fluorescence intensity also suggested a more diffuse distribution of dynein after LPG treatment of LPs. A cross-correlation analysis suggested that dynein and Rab7 still continue to colocalize on the LP membrane after LPG treatment. These experiments suggest that LPG does not remove but merely redistributes microdomain-associated proteins from clustered to more uniform organization on phagosomes. We therefore conclude that robust long-distance transport of LPs by dyneins is primarily caused by the cholesterol-dependent geometrical clustering of dynein into microdomains. Discussion Dynein-driven transport promotes physical interactions between phagosomes and endolysosomes. This likely enables pathogen clearance by allowing phagosomes to acquire microbicidal properties and low pH. We show here that an increase in cholesterol and cholesterol-associated proteins clusters dynein within cholesterol-rich microdomains to assemble dynein teams on the phagosome membrane. Once clustered, many dyneins within a microdomain can simultaneously engage a single MT to bias the transport of LPs in the minus direction. This mechanism of geometrical clustering is very different from the widely discussed single-molecule regulation of motors by regulatory proteins. The proposed clustering mechanism is schematized in Figure 6 and appears primarily responsible for the bidirectional-to-retrograde switch in motion during phagosome maturation. Because micron-sized cellular cargoes are common, clustering of motors may have general relevance in regulating intracellular transport. However, the mechanism of clustering could be cargo specific. Cholesterol also enhances transport of artificial liposomes by kinesin-3, which is a monomeric motor in mammals and binds to the phospholipid PtdInsP 2. Cholesterol induces clustering of PtdInsP 2, and therefore of kinesin-3, whereupon the monomers assemble into a dimeric kinesin-3 that is highly processive. Thus, a cooperative increase in kinesin-3-driven transport is observed. Unlike monomeric mammalian kinesin-3, native cytoplasmic dynein exists as a homodimer of heavy chains in all known organisms. A monomer-dimer transition is therefore ruled out for dynein, and the improved minus-end-directed LP motion must arise from clustering of inherently dimeric dyneins into microdomains. Figure 6 Model for the Bidirectional to Retrograde Switch in Phagosome Transport What are the advantages of clustering dynein on a cellular cargo? Clustering should favor directed linear motion along a single MT by preventing simultaneous engagement of dynein present all over the cargo with multiple randomly oriented MTs. Membrane microdomains are also suggested to support, confine, and redirect force within the lipid membrane by behaving as a mechanically stiff platform. It is therefore possible that phagosomal microdomains behave as force-generating platforms, on which force from multiple dyneins can be oriented and directed more effectively. Earlier reports show a gear-like behavior in dynein and a large collective force by dynein teams on LPs inside cells, perhaps facilitated by this gear-like behavior. Here, we show that geometrical clustering into microdomains assembles dynein teams to facilitate such large forces. A hierarchy of cellular mechanisms therefore appears to harness dynein function for a crucial biological process, namely endophagosome maturation and degradation of pathogens. There exists a vast literature on the mechanisms of membrane microdomain formation in cells and implications thereof. However, the downstream biological consequences of such microdomain formation have remained elusive. Our work brings out an experimentally observable, direct functional consequence of lipid microdomain formation to intracellular transport and phagosome/pathogen biology. Experimental Procedures Phagosomes created by phagocytosing 759-nm-diameter latex beads were observed using differential interference contrast microscopy. For further details, see sections 3 and 4 of Supplemental Experimental Procedures. Phagosome motion was visualized inside agar-flattened Dictyostelium cells. Purification and in vitro motility of latex bead phagosomes has been described. Further details can be found in Supplemental Experimental Procedures. Phagosomes were prepared using silica beads or latex beads from J774, RAW264.7, or Dictyostelium cells. Purity of latex bead phagosomes was confirmed using markers against endosomal, cytosolic, and membrane proteins. Confocal imaging was used to detect proteins on the phagosome membrane. EPs/LPs were treated with filipin and imaged under epifluorescence illumination. Further details can be found in Supplemental Experimental Procedures, section 7 and section 9. Measurement of fluorescence intensity on phagosomes is described in Supplemental Experimental Procedures, section 8. Statistical hypothesis testing was done using Student’s t test. Two-tailed p values were calculated. Error bars are SD or SEM, as indicated. DRM isolation from purified phagosomes was done as described previously. Further details can be found in in section 11 of Supplemental Experimental Procedures. Lipids were extracted from phagosomes using a methanol-chloroform mixture for thin-layer chromatography experiments. Silica TLC plates were used to separate the lipids with an appropriate solvent system, followed by visualization on a Bio-Rad instrument. Further details can be found in section 12 of Supplemental Experimental Procedures. MβCD prepared in buffer was incubated with LPs at final concentrations ranging from 10 mM to 30 mM. Further details can be found in section 13 of Supplemental Experimental Procedures. LPG purified from Leishmania donovani was obtained as a gift. The stock solution was diluted appropriately. LPs were incubated with LPG before observation. Further details can be found in section 13 of Supplemental Experimental Procedures. Bead motility with dynein using an ATP releasate from Dictyostelium cells has been described elsewhere. Further details can be found in section 14 of Supplemental Experimental Procedures. See Supplemental Experimental Procedures, section 12 for details of lipidomics measurements. PC and free cholesterol was measured on lipids obtained from EPs and LPs purified from RAW264.7 cells. Author Contributions A.R., D.P., S.T., S.S., A.K.D., and R.M. performed research and analyzed data. A.R., D.P., and R.M. wrote the paper. R.M. designed the research. 