 Phosphatase and tensin homolog, which negatively regulates tumorigenic PIP3 signaling, is a commonly mutated tumor suppressor. The majority of cancer-associated PTEN mutations block its essential PIP3 phosphatase activity. However, there is a group of clinically identified PTEN mutations that maintain enzymatic activity, and it is unknown how these mutations contribute to tumor pathogenesis. Here, we show that these enzymatically competent PTEN mutants fail to translocate to the plasma membrane where PTEN converts PIP3 to PIP2. Artificial membrane tethering of the PTEN mutants effectively restores tumor suppressor activity and represses excess PIP3 signaling in cells. Thus, our findings reveal a novel mechanism of tumorigenic PTEN deficiency. Keywords: PTEN, Membrane localization, PIP3, Dictyostelium Introduction More than 1,500 different mutations in the PTEN gene have been identified in different cancers. Approximately 40% of these are substitution missense mutations. These cancer-associated amino acid substitutions are distributed along the entire length of PTEN with the highest frequency in the lipid phosphatase catalytic residues, mutations of which abolish lipid phosphatase activity. However, there is a group of PTEN substitutions that maintain PTEN enzymatic activity, and it is currently unknown how these mutations disrupt the tumor suppressor function of PTEN. The membrane recruitment of PTEN is important for its lipid phosphatase function in PIP3 signaling. Membrane association of PTEN is negatively regulated by phosphorylation of the inhibitory C-terminal tail domain. When phosphorylated at four serine/threonine residues, the C-terminal tail binds to the membrane-binding regulatory interface and masks the membrane binding domain containing the CBR3 loop of the C2 domain. When the phosphorylation sites are mutated to alanine, the C-terminal tail dissociates from the membrane-binding regulatory interface and promotes membrane recruitment of PTEN. Therefore, we hypothesized that the cancer-associated mutations that sustain enzymatic activity might affect the membrane recruitment of PTEN. To test our hypothesis and determine whether the enzymatically competent mutants represent a new class of tumorigenic PTEN deficiency, we took advantage of PTEN A4. Although functionally important, PTEN membrane association is difficult to analyze because a large number of PTEN molecules are present in the cytosol. The use of PTEN A4 dramatically decreases the cytosolic pool of PTEN and allows us to visualize membrane localization. Results and Discussion We focused on a group of PTEN missense mutants selected by two criteria. We first chose mutations that do not inhibit phosphatase activity. Among these, we further narrowed the choice down to four mutations, S10N, G20E, L42R, and F90S, that are located in or near the membrane-binding regulatory interface. We first biochemically confirmed intact PIP3 phosphatase activity of these mutants using purified PTEN as we described previously. WT and mutant forms of human PTEN fused with GFP were expressed and immunopurified from Dictyostelium cells using agarose bead-coupled anti-GFP antibodies. PTEN S10N, PTEN G20E, PTEN L42R, and PTEN F90S showed enzymatic activities indistinguishable from that of WT PTEN. Activity was completely abolished in the negative control PTEN C124S, which carries a substitution in the catalytic residue C124. Fluorescence microscopy of Dictyostelium cells ( Fig. 1C and D ) and the human cell line HEK293T ( Fig. 1F and G ) expressing PTEN mutants fused to GFP showed that PTEN-GFP, PTEN S10N -GFP, PTEN G20E -GFP, PTEN L42R -GFP, and PTEN F90S -GFP were mainly located in the cytosol and nucleus. Figure 1 Cancer-associated PTEN mutations inhibit membrane association To determine whether the S10N, G20E, L42R, and F90S mutations affect membrane association, we combined them with the A4 mutations. PTEN A4 -GFP was located at the plasma membrane in addition to the nucleus in Dictyostelium cells ( Fig. 1C and E ) and HEK293T cells ( Fig. 1F and H ), as previously reported. In contrast, PTEN S10N,A4 -GFP, PTEN G20E,A4 -GFP, PTEN L42R,A4 -GFP, and PTEN F90S,A4 -GFP were unable to localize at the plasma membrane in both cell types. Their nuclear localization was increased, as expected from our previous study showing that dissociation of PTEN from the plasma membrane leads to accumulation in the nucleus. The negative control PTEN CBR3 -GFP, which carries mutations in the CBR3 loop of the membrane binding C2 domain, showed cytosolic localization. Because decreased stability of PTEN contributes to tumorigenesis, we tested whether the S10N, G20E, L42R, and F90S mutations affect the turnover of PTEN. Immunoblotting revealed similar levels of PTEN-GFP, PTEN S10N -GFP, PTEN G20E -GFP, PTEN L42R -GFP, and PTEN F90S -GFP in HEK293T cells. In contrast, PTEN A4 -GFP, which has decreased stability, showed lower steady-state levels. Consistent with these results, PTEN-GFP, PTEN S10N -GFP, PTEN G20E -GFP, PTEN L42R -GFP, and PTEN F90S -GFP had comparable half-lives in the presence of the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide, whereas PTEN A4 -GFP showed a shorter half-life. PTEN binds to another tumor suppressor, p53. We tested whether the four mutations defective in membrane localization affected this protein-protein interaction using co-immunoprecipitation. The results showed similar binding for WT and mutant PTEN to p53. Figure 2 S10N, G20E, L42R, and F90S mutations block interaction of PTEN with membrane lipids To probe the mechanism by which the S10N, G20E, L42R, and F90S mutations inhibited membrane localization of PTEN, we performed an in vitro liposome binding assay. Liposomes containing PC, PS, PIP2, and PE-biotin were incubated with lysates of Dictyostelium cells expressing different PTEN-GFP proteins. Consistent with its cytoplasmic localization, WT PTEN-GFP bound only weakly to the liposomes. In contrast, PTEN A4, which was enriched at the plasma membrane, showed approximately10-fold higher association with the liposomes. The PTEN A4 -liposome interactions were reduced to the WT level by the mutations S10N, G20E, L42R, and F90S, thus PTEN S10N,A4 -GFP, PTEN G20E,A4 -GFP, PTEN L42R,A4 -GFP, and PTEN F90S,A4 -GFP only weakly interacted with the liposomes. Therefore, the decreased localization of the PTEN mutants at the plasma membrane likely results from their inability to bind to membrane phospholipids. The C-terminal tail of PTEN binds to the membrane-binding regulatory interface and closes the protein conformation, physically limiting access of the membrane-binding site to the membrane. Mutations in the C-terminal phosphorylation sites in PTEN A4 release this inhibitory interaction. To determine whether the S10N, G20E, L42R, and F90S mutations restore this interaction in PTEN A4 we performed an “in trans” interaction assay and examined the binding of PTEN-GFP to a separate tail domain fused to FLAG after immunoprecipitation with anti-FLAG antibodies. As previously reported, although PTEN-GFP did not interact with PTEN 352–403 -FLAG, PTEN A4 -GFP showed a strong interaction. The S10N, G20E, L42R, and F90S mutations did not affect the interaction of PTEN A4 -GFP with PTEN 352–403 -FLAG. A negative control, PTEN CBR3,A4 -GFP which carries mutation in the tail-binding CBR3 loop, did not interact with PTEN 352–403 -FLAG. Therefore, S10N, G20E, L42R, and F90S mutations do not stimulate interaction of the membrane-binding regulatory interface with the C-terminal tail. To determine the function of PTEN S10N, PTEN G20E, PTEN L42R, and PTEN F90S, we first investigated cell proliferation and starvation-induced differentiation of Dictyostelium cells. PTEN function is evolutionarily conserved in Dictyostelium and human cells. The loss of PTEN in Dictyostelium causes defects in cell proliferation and differentiation into stress-resistant fruiting bodies under starvation conditions. Expression of WT PTEN and PTEN A4 restored these phenotypes in Dictyostelium PTEN-null cells. However, PTEN S10N, PTEN G20E, PTEN L42R, and PTEN F90S were unable to rescue the defects in the presence or absence of the A4 mutation ( Fig. 3A and B ). We then examined the role of PTEN in PIP3 signaling in HEK293T cells, in which PIP3 is overproduced, by measuring phosphorylation of AKT, a major downstream event of PIP3 signaling. PTEN A4 suppressed AKT phosphorylation by approximately 2.5 fold, whereas addition of the mutations blocked the suppressive activity of PTEN A4 ( Fig. 3C and D ). Furthermore, we examined the effect of these cancer mutations on PIP3-dependent cell proliferation and migration in the MCF-10A PIK3CA cell line, which carries a constitutively active form of PI3Kα and has increased PIP3 signaling. When WT PTEN-GFP was expressed in MCF-10A PIK3CA cells, cell proliferation was significantly decreased approximately 2.5 fold compared with expression of the negative controls of GFP alone or the catalytic mutant PTEN C124S. S10N, G20E, L42R, and F90S mutations completely blocked the ability of PTEN to decrease proliferation rates. Similarly, the function of PTEN in cell migration was significantly impaired by these four cancer mutations. Figure 3 S10N, G20E, L42R, and F90S mutations interfere with PTEN function in the regulation of PIP3 signaling Finally, we tested whether artificial tethering of PTEN to the plasma membrane restored the function of PTEN S10N, PTEN G20E, PTEN L42R, and PTEN F90S. For this, we added a myristoylation motif derived from the plasma membrane protein PKBR1 to the N-terminus of PTEN. The lipid anchor motif effectively recruited WT and mutant PTEN to the plasma membrane as revealed by fluorescence microscopy. To assess the effect of membrane recruitment on the amount of PIP3 in the plasma membrane, we co-expressed a biosensor for PIP3, RFP fused to the PIP3-binding PH domain from AKT1. Bringing PTEN to the plasma membrane significantly improved the ability of PTEN S10N,A4, PTEN G20E,A4, PTEN L42R,A4, and PTEN F90S,A4 to remove PIP3 in the plasma membrane. These data further show that the primary defect of the PTEN cancer mutations can be traced to the defects in their membrane association. Figure 4 Artificial tethering to the plasma membrane neutralizes the effect of S10N, G20E, L42R, and F90S on PIP3 signaling and PIP3-regulated cancer cell behavior In summary, we identified a new class of cancer-associated PTEN mutations that specifically inhibit the recruitment of PTEN to the plasma membrane as a result of impaired interactions with phospholipids. Our findings reveal the importance of membrane binding of PTEN in tumorigenic PIP3 signaling. Since this class of mutations maintains normal PIP3 phosphatase activity and can be rescued by tethering to the plasma membrane, we envision that pharmacologic promotion of membrane localization may be an effective strategy for anticancer therapy for this class of PTEN deficiency. According to the cBioportal and COSMIC databases, the four PTEN mutations analyzed in our study occur in ~1% of all human cancer sequencing studies. Thus, associations with progression and prognosis cannot currently be assessed given the relatively small number of patients in these studies and the lack of follow-up information for most sequencing studies outside of the Cancer Genome Atlas. However, the fact that these mutations recur, albeit at low frequencies, substantiates the functional relevance. In addition, as stated in our Table S1, these mutations appear to occur in a variety of cancer types. The cBioportal database suggests that these mutations are more frequent in breast, lung, brain, and uterine cancers. Although the overall frequency is small, 1% of breast cancers is equivalent to ~15,000 cases globally. This demonstrates the impact of our work; low-frequency mutations, which were previously of uncertain significance, now appear to be mutations of functional consequence. Thus, these mutations offer new insights into molecular mechanisms of cancer and possible new avenues for therapeutic intervention. Supplementary Material 1 Click here to view. 2 Click here to view. 3 Click here to view. 4 Click here to view. 5 Click here to view. 6 Click here to view. Acknowledgements We thank Dr. Todd Waldman for lentiviral constructs. The mutation data was obtained from the Sanger Institute Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer web site. This work was supported by NIH grants to MI, PND, HS and to RP (CA082783 and CA155117). Footnotes Conflict of interest The authors declare no conflict of interest. Article information Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 Jan 1. Published in final edited form as: Oncogene. 2015 Jul; 34: 3737–3743. Published online 2014 Sep 29. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.293 PMCID: PMC4377315 NIHMSID: NIHMS619140 PMID: 25263454 Hoai-Nghia Nguyen, 1 Jr-Ming Yang, 1 Meghdad Rahdar, 1, 2 Megan Keniry, 3, 4 Kristen F. Swaney, 1 Ramon Parsons, 3 Ben Ho Park, 5 Hiromi Sesaki, 1 Peter N. Devreotes, 1, * and Miho Iijima 1, * Hoai-Nghia Nguyen 1 Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD Find articles by Hoai-Nghia Nguyen Jr-Ming Yang 1 Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD Find articles by Jr-Ming Yang Meghdad Rahdar 1 Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD Find articles by Meghdad Rahdar Megan Keniry 3 Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY Find articles by Megan Keniry Kristen F. Swaney 1 Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD Find articles by Kristen F. Swaney Ramon Parsons 3 Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY Find articles by Ramon Parsons Ben Ho Park 5 The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD Find articles by Ben Ho Park Hiromi Sesaki 1 Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD Find articles by Hiromi Sesaki Peter N. Devreotes 1 Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD Find articles by Peter N. Devreotes Miho Iijima 1 Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD Find articles by Miho Iijima 1 Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 3 Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 5 The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD * Correspondence: ude.imhj@amijiim, ude.imhj@dnp 2 Current address: Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 4 Department of Biology, University of Texas- Pan American, Edinburg, TX PMC Copyright notice Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject always to the full Conditions of use: The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at Oncogene 