 Glycoside hydrolase family 7 cellobiohydrolases are enzymes commonly employed in plant cell wall degradation across eukaryotic kingdoms of life, as they provide significant hydrolytic potential in cellulose turnover. To date, many fungal GH7 CBHs have been examined, yet many questions regarding structure-activity relationships in these important natural and commercial enzymes remain. Here, we present the crystal structures and a biochemical analysis of two GH7 CBHs from social amoeba: Dictyostelium discoideum Cel7A and Dictyostelium purpureum Cel7A. Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A natively consist of a catalytic domain and do not exhibit a carbohydrate-binding module. The structures of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A, resolved to 2.1 Å and 2.7 Å, respectively, are homologous to those of other GH7 CBHs with an enclosed active-site tunnel. Two primary differences between the Dictyostelium CBHs and the archetypal model GH7 CBH, Trichoderma reesei Cel7A, occur near the hydrolytic active site and the product-binding sites. To compare the activities of these enzymes with the activity of Tre Cel7A, the family 1 Tre Cel7A CBM and linker were added to the C terminus of each of the Dictyostelium enzymes, creating Ddi Cel7A CBM and Dpu Cel7A CBM, which were recombinantly expressed in T. reesei. Ddi Cel7A CBM and Dpu Cel7A CBM hydrolyzed Avicel, pretreated corn stover, and phosphoric acid-swollen cellulose as efficiently as Tre Cel7A when hydrolysis was compared at their temperature optima. The K i of cellobiose was significantly higher for Ddi Cel7A CBM and Dpu Cel7A CBM than for Tre Cel7A: 205, 130, and 29 μM, respectively. Taken together, the present study highlights the remarkable degree of conservation of the activity of these key natural and industrial enzymes across quite distant phylogenetic trees of life. IMPORTANCE GH7 CBHs are among the most important cellulolytic enzymes both in nature and for emerging industrial applications for cellulose breakdown. Understanding the diversity of these key industrial enzymes is critical to engineering them for higher levels of activity and greater stability. The present work demonstrates that two GH7 CBHs from social amoeba are surprisingly quite similar in structure and activity to the canonical GH7 CBH from the model biomass-degrading fungus T. reesei when tested under equivalent conditions on an industrially relevant substrate. INTRODUCTION Dictyostelia are a class of social amoebae containing four different groups of terrestrial bacterivores from the kingdom Amoebozoa. During vegetative growth, dictyostelia exist as single-celled organisms; upon starvation, a lack of nutrients becomes preventive for vegetative growth and the cells aggregate into a multicellular slug. Slugs have a defined posterior and anterior, have the ability to migrate, are sensitive to light and temperature, and exhibit an innate immune system. When conditions are sufficiently severe, the slug can form a fruiting body, where cells differentiate into a spore and stalk. During the formation of the slug and fruiting body, proteins and cellulose are deposited as an extracellular matrix, providing the organism with environmental protection and structural rigidity. Cellulose is also found in the sheath that surrounds the cell aggregates and is deposited in the stalk, stalk cell walls, and spore coats. Thus, the deposition and reorganization of cellulose upon morphogenesis into the fruiting body are crucial to the development and propagation of the organism. Cellulose is the homopolymer of β-- d -glucose, and individual cellulose chains pack into dense, recalcitrant crystalline microfibrils in plant cell walls and other biological tissues. In nature, the intrinsic crystallinity and recalcitrance of cellulose are of significant benefit to plants and other organisms that employ it as a structural material, such as those in the genus Dictyostelium. Besides providing a structural framework for biological tissues, cellulose also provides significant protection from physical, chemical, and biological damage. The genomes of Dictyostelium discoideum and Dictyostelium purpureum exhibit >40 genes related to cellulose synthesis and hydrolysis, including glycoside hydrolase family 3 β-glucosidases, glycoside hydrolase family 5 and 9 endoglucanases, and a single gene with sequence homology to the gene for a GH family 7 cellobiohydrolase. GH7 CBHs are of particular interest, in that they exhibit significant hydrolytic potential and are commonly used by fungi and other biomass-degrading eukaryotes for cellulose hydrolysis. GH7 CBHs also form the basis of most industrial cellulase cocktails for industrial lignocellulosic biomass conversion. The D. discoideum GH7 CBH, Cel7A, is a developmentally regulated enzyme, with the highest levels of expression occurring during formation of the fruiting body. The deletion of Ddi Cel7A results in normal phenotypes but delayed morphogenesis from slug to fruiting body, suggesting that Ddi Cel7A is required for the breakdown and rearrangement of cellulose during these phases of development. Given the similarities in organism development between D. discoideum and D. purpureum, it is likely that D. purpureum Cel7A serves a similar function. Structural and biochemical data for GH7s obtained over the last several decades have revealed that they have similar overall folds and catalytic arrangements. The structures of GH7 catalytic domains are known from 10 CBHs, Trichoderma reesei Cel7A, Heterobasidion irregulare Cel7A, Phanerochaete chrysosporium Cel7D, Talaromyces emersonii Cel7A, Trichoderma harzianum Cel7A, Melanocarpus albomyces Cel7B, Aspergillus fumigatus Cel7A, Humicola grisea var. thermoidea Cel7A Limnoria quadripunctata Cel7B, and Geotrichum candidum Cel7A, and three endoglucanases, T. reesei Cel7B, Humicola insolens Cel7B, and Fusarium oxysporum Cel7B. All GH7s share a β-jelly roll fold, with two antiparallel β-sheets packing face to face to form a curved β-sandwich. Long loops extend the edges of the β-sandwich and form an ∼45-Å-long binding groove along the entire length of the enzyme. In CBHs, loops A1 to A4 and B1 to B4 are further elongated and enclose the cellulose chain in a tunnel using a threading-like mechanism, whereas EGs exhibit a more open cleft. Many GH7 enzymes are bimodular in nature, having a family 1 carbohydrate-binding module connected to the catalytic domain by a glycosylated, flexible linker comprised of about 30 amino acids. Deconstruction of cellulose by GH7 CBHs is a multistep process that includes substrate binding, formation of the catalytically active complex, hydrolysis, product release, and processive translation along the substrate chain. These cellulases act from the reducing end of cellulose chains and perform multiple, processive hydrolytic events before disassociating from a cellulose chain. For cellulases, such as the model GH7 CBH from T. reesei, this process continues until the enzyme either runs into an obstruction where the enzyme is stalled and eventually releases the substrate or the end of the cellulose chain is reached. Tre Cel7A exhibits the most extensively enclosed tunnel among known GH7 CBH structures, while Pch Cel7D displays the most open active site due to several loop deletions and residue size reductions on the tips of tunnel-enclosing loops. It has been suggested that this more open active site can have increased activity on microcrystalline cellulose by increasing the rate of endoinitiation while decreasing the effect of product inhibition. While the posthydrolysis release of cellobiose is important for processivity, it also has an undesired consequence of becoming a strong inhibitor of hydrolysis. Product inhibition slows the overall conversion rate of cellulose to glucose, particularly when substrate concentrations are high. In commercial cellulase cocktails and natural organismal secretomes, this product inhibition is relieved by the action of β-glucosidases, glycoside hydrolases that cleave cellobiose into two glucose molecules. As GH7 CBHs comprise the majority of industrial cellulase mixtures and are significantly inhibited by cellobiose, overcoming product inhibition in GH7 CBHs is of paramount importance for achieving high product yields in the enzymatic hydrolysis of biomass. Although the study of GH7 CBHs has now spanned several decades, our collective understanding of their action is still being revealed. The development of accurate structure-activity relationships of these enzymes, especially given their significant societal importance in the renewable fuels industry as well as their natural importance in the turnover of the most abundant biological material on Earth, warrants concerted efforts to elucidate, understand, and improve their function. With the wealth of new genomics and metagenomics data, new GH7 CBHs have recently been revealed, as described above, outside the fungal kingdom, thus presenting new opportunities to study these key enzymes in branches of life phylogenetically distant from fungi. To that end, we present here the structures of two GH7 CBHs from the social amoebas D. discoideum and D. purpureum from the Amoebozoa kingdom and a corresponding biochemical characterization of these CBHs. We also constructed and expressed chimeras of these GH7 CBHs in an industrially relevant fungal host, T. reesei, with the family 1 CBM and linker from Tre Cel7A such that performance characterizations could be conducted on the basis of equivalence to the full-length model GH7 CBH Tre Cel7A. Approaches such as this, wherein full-length enzymes are produced in the same expression host to ensure similar glycosylation patterns, will be essential to conduct comparisons of cellulase activities on a consistent basis. Using this approach, we demonstrate that both Dictyostelium GH7 CBHs are equally as efficient as Tre Cel7A in the hydrolysis of crystalline cellulose at their relative temperature and pH optima and also exhibit increased tolerance to product inhibition. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cloning and protein expression. The genomes of D. discoideum and D. purpureum have been fully sequenced, and each has been shown to contain one GH7 CBH, herein referred to as Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A, respectively, to conform with current nomenclature. The Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A sequences were obtained from the Joint Genome Institute genome database. Dictyostelium GH7 CBH genes were codon optimized and synthesized without introns and cloned into and expressed in the linearized pTrEno plasmid, and plasmid pTrEno was transformed into T. reesei strain QM6a from which cbh1 was deleted as described previously. In nature, Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A do not exhibit a CBM; thus, the Tre Cel7A linker, which connects the CD and family 1 CBM, was added to the 3′ end to generate a chimeric Cel7A, referred to here as Ddi Cel7A CBM and Dpu Cel7A CBM, respectively. The linker sequence starts at the GNPPGGNPP motif from the Tre Cel7A linker. Expression medium was inoculated with spores from transformed spore stocks, and the production volume was scaled up stepwise from 0.1 liter to a final volume of 8 liters in a 14-liter bioreactor as previously described. Protein purification. Prior to protein purification, expression of the Dictyostelium GH7 CBHs with and without the Tre Cel7A CBM-linker domain was verified by determination of their activity on p -nitrophenyl-β- d -lactopyranoside and visualization on SDS-polyacrylamide gels and Western blots with rabbit anti-Cel7A polyclonal IgG. For protein purification, fermentation broths were filtered through a 0.45-μm-pore-size filter, concentrated ∼40 times, and exchanged into 20 mM bis-Tris buffer, pH 6.5, by ultrafiltration through a hollow fiber with a 10,000-Da-molecular-mass cutoff. The filtrate was adjusted to 1.5 M 2 SO 4 by the addition of 4.0 M 2 SO 4 in 20 mM bis-Tris buffer, pH 6.5, and filtered through a 0.2-μm-pore-size polyethersulfone membrane prior to hydrophobic interaction chromatography on a 26/10 phenyl Sepharose fast-flow column eluted with a 1.5 M to 0.0 M 2 SO 4 gradient in 20 mM bis-Tris buffer, pH 6.5, over 8 column volumes. Fractions containing Cel7s, identified by activity on p NPL, were pooled, desalted, and separated on a Source 15Q 10/100 Tricorn anion-exchange column with a gradient of 0 to 500 mM NaCl in 20 mM bis-Tris buffer, pH 6.5, for 30 column volumes. Purity was assessed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. The anion-exchange chromatography was completed twice for the native recombinant Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A enzymes only. Finally, the enzymes were size separated and buffer exchanged over a 26/60 Superdex 75 size exclusion column in 20 mM acetate buffer, pH 5.0, 100 mM NaCl containing 0.02% NaN 3. Purity was determined by SDS-PAGE. Trypsin digestion, followed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and peptide mapping, confirmed the protein identities. DSC. Thermal stability was evaluated by differential scanning microcalorimetry using a MicroCal model VP-DSC calorimeter. Data were collected by Origin for DSC software. Samples contained 50 μg/ml protein at pH 5.0 in 20 mM acetate buffer, 100 mM NaCl. The calorimeter scan rate was 60°C/h over a temperature range of from 30°C to 110°C. pH and temperature optima. pH profiles for enzymatic activity were generated in duplicate by incubating 1.6 mM p NPL with 0.66 μM the indicated enzyme in 150 μl of MacIlvaine buffer with a constant conductivity of between 19 and 21 mS/cm in a 96-well plate at pH 2.9, 3.9, 5.0, 6.1, 7.1, and 8.3 at 30°C for 0, 1, 5, 10, 20, and 30 min. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 25 μl of 1.0 M sodium carbonate, and the A 405 was determined by use of a colorimetric microtiter plate reader. The absorbance values were correlated to the p -nitrophenol concentration by the use of p NP standards, and the pH profile graphs were generated by plotting the linear rate of p NP production as a function of pH. Temperature profiles were generated in duplicate by incubating 1.6 mM p NPL with 0.66 μM enzyme in 2.0 ml of 20 mM sodium acetate buffer, pH 5.0, 100 mM NaCl, and 0.02% NaN 3. Reaction mixtures were incubated at 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, and 65°C in a water bath. At 0, 1, 5, 10, 20, and 30 min, 150 μl was removed from the reaction vial and placed in a 96-well plate containing 25 μl of 1.0 M sodium carbonate. The absorbance values were determined as described above for pH, and temperature profile graphs were generated by plotting the linear rate of p NPL turnover as a function of temperature. Enzyme kinetics. V max and apparent K m values were determined in p NPL solutions of 0.0, 0.8, 1.6, 2.5, 4.2, 5.8 6.6, and 8.3 mM. p NPL was incubated with 0.66 μM CBH at 40°C or 45°C in 20 mM acetate buffer, pH 5.0, 100 mM NaCl in 96-well microtiter plates. The reactions were quenched by the addition of 25 μl of 1.0 M sodium carbonate at 0, 1, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 30 min. The absorbance values were converted to molar product concentrations using p NP standard curves. The data were fit to the Michaelis-Menten expression. Fitting and plots were generated using Kaleidagraph software. Inhibition experiments were completed with 0, 0.16.6, 41.6, 75.0, 91.6, and 108.3 μM cellobiose and 0.0, 0.8, 1.7, 2.5, and 4.2 mM p NPL incubated with 0.6 μM Cel7A for 0, 5, 10, 15, and 20 min. The reactions were quenched by the addition of 25 μl of 1.0 M sodium carbonate, and the A 405 was recorded. To fit kinetic parameters, theoretical rates were calculated from starting input values of V max, K m app, and K i using the Michaelis-Menten expression for competitive enzyme inhibition. Data were also evaluated for noncompetitive, uncompetitive, and mixed inhibition. Nonlinear regression fitting was accomplished using the Excel Solver add-in. Weighted squared residuals were calculated for each data point using three different weighting schemes—simple, 2 ; proportional, 2 ; and statistical,, where ν obs is the observed value of ν and ν calc is the calculated value of ν—and the sum of residuals was minimized. The best fit to the experimental data obtained was used for the reported kinetic parameters derived. Hydrolysis of crystalline and amorphous cellulose. Hydrolysis reaction mixtures contained 5.0 mg/ml of the following cellulose substrates: Avicel, pretreated corn stover, or phosphoric acid-swollen cellulose. The substrates were incubated with 20 mg CBH per gram of glucan, 1.0 mg β-glucosidase per gram of glucan, and 1.0 mg Cel5A CD with a Y245G substitution per gram of glucan in 20 mM sodium acetate buffer, pH 5.0, 100 mM NaCl, and 0.02% NaN 3. Reactions were conducted in triplicate in 1.8-ml sealed cryogenic vials with continuous mixing by rotational inversion at ∼10 rpm and incubation at 50°C or 40°C, as specified below. At the time points indicated below, 100-μl samples were removed from the reaction vials and diluted in water, and the mixture was boiled for 5 min to quench the reaction. Boiled samples were filtered through a 0.22-μm-pore-size syringe filter into glass high-performance liquid chromatography vials. Glucose and cellobiose were determined by HPLC analysis on an Aminex HPX-87P column operated at 65°C with water as the mobile phase. Crystallization and X-ray data collection. The purified Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A proteins were desalted to 20 mM sodium acetate buffer, pH 5.0, prior to crystallization. Initial screens for crystallization conditions were performed by sitting-drop vapor diffusion in 96-well plates and were set up using a Mosquito crystallization robot. Equal amounts of protein and well solution were mixed in 0.3-μl crystallization drops. The most promising crystallization hits for Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A were obtained with the Morpheus and PEG Ion II screens, respectively. Crystals used for data collection were grown at 20°C by the hanging-drop vapor diffusion method by mixing protein and precipitant solutions at a 1:1 ratio, as follows: Ddi Cel7A with 12.5% polyethylene glycol 1000, 12.5% PEG 3350, 12.5% MPD, 0.1 M sodium HEPES-MOPS, pH 7.5, 0.03 M MgCl 2, and 0.03 M CaCl 2 and Dpu Cel7A with 0.1 M sodium malonate, pH 7.0, and 12% PEG 3350. Data collection and processing and structure solution. X-ray diffraction data were collected at 100 K from single crystals of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A at the MAX-Lab I911-3 and the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility ID23-1 beam lines, respectively. The data were indexed and integrated using the IMOSFLM2 program and scaled with the SCALA3 tool in the CCP4 program suite. Five percent of the reflections were set aside for calculation of R free factors. The crystal structures were solved by molecular replacement using the Phaser program in the CCP4 package. A structure of Tre Cel7A was used as the search model for Ddi Cel7A, which was then used as the model for Dpu Cel7A. The Ddi Cel7A structure was solved in space group P2 1 2 1 2 1 with a single molecule in the asymmetric unit, and the Dpu Cel7A structure was solved in space group P2 1 2 1 2 1 with two molecules in the asymmetric unit. Both structures were refined by alternating cycles of maximum likelihood refinement with the REFMAC5 program and manual rebuilding using the Coot program. Statistics from diffraction data processing and structure refinement are summarized in Results. Sequence alignments and analyses. A structure-based sequence alignment was first generated using the Swiss-PdbViewer application by superimposing the structures of Ddi Cel7A, Dpu Cel7A, and GH7 CBHs from PDB. This alignment was opened in the Jalview program, and full-length sequences corresponding to the PDB entries and a collection of 38 nonfungal GH7 sequences were added, followed by multiple-sequence alignment using the MUSCLE web service with default settings. Regions flanking the GH7 domain were trimmed off. The sequences selected for use in Fig. 7 and Table 4 were realigned with the MUSCLE web service, and the program Indonesia was used to calculate pairwise sequence identities and similarities using the Gonnet substitution matrix. Phylogenetic analyses of an extended set of 113 GH7 protein sequences were conducted with the program MEGA. Sequences were collected by a pBLAST search of the sequence of each nonfungal GH7 against the sequences in the NCBI and UniProt databases, and a selection of taxonomically diverse hits among the many fungal entries was retrieved. The sequences were aligned by use of MUSCLE, and regions flanking the GH7 domain were trimmed off. A 90% identity threshold was applied to remove redundancy, and endoglucanases lacking the B4 loop were excluded. The evolutionary history was inferred using the minimum evolution method and bootstrap phylogeny testing with 700 replicates. The optimal tree with the sum of the branch length of 19.8 is shown below. Branch lengths are drawn to scale, with evolutionary distances, computed using the Dayhoff matrix-based method, being in units of number of amino acid substitutions per site. The minimum evolution tree was searched using the close-neighbor-interchange algorithm at a search level of 1. The neighbor-joining algorithm was used to generate the initial tree. All ambiguous positions were removed for each sequence pair. There were a total of 520 positions in the final data set. FIG 1 Sequence alignment of the GH7 CBHs that have been structurally characterized to date. The regions highlighted in blue denote N -glycosylation motifs, the residues in red denote the catalytic residues, and the residues enclosed in boxes represent... FIG 4 Superposition of the structures of Dpu Cel7A and Ddi Cel7A with the structure of the cellononaose Michaelis complex of Tre Cel7A. The key substrate-binding loops are labeled in panel A, and the substrate-binding sites... FIG 7 Eukaryote evolution timeline of branches where GH7 genes have been found and the percent identities and similarities of the protein sequences within the GH7 domain to the D. discoideum Cel7A sequence. Branch names and time points of divergence... TABLE 4 Pairwise protein sequence identities and similarities within the GH7 CD a Protein structure accession numbers. The coordinates and structure factors for the Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A structures have been deposited in PDB under accession numbers 4ZZQ and 4ZZP, respectively. RESULTS Expression and purification of enzymes. Ddi Cel7A, Ddi Cel7A CBM, Dpu Cel7A, Dpu Cel7A CBM, and Tre Cel7A were recombinantly expressed in a newly developed T. reesei eno expression system. The constitutive eno promoter drives expression of Cel7A to allow growth on glucose, which represses the native cellulase system. Coupling of this system with the Δ cbh strain of T. reesei ensures that only the recombinant Cel7A protein is expressed, as previously described. For evaluation of cellulose digestion on various solid substrates, we added the family 1 CBM from Tre Cel7A to the CD of native Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A. Fed-batch fermentations typically yielded 5 to 25 mg/liter recombinant protein after processing and purification. All proteins were purified to electrophoretic homogeneity, with the exception of Dpu Cel7A, which exhibited a doublet band by SDS-PAGE. Sequencing mass spectrometry identified both bands to be native Dpu CelA, and it is thus unclear why there were two populations. However, as we were not able to separate the two populations, the mixed population was provided for crystallization. Temperature, pH, and thermostability profiles. The dependence of activity on temperature and pH for Ddi Cel7A CBM, Dpu Cel7A CBM, and, for comparison, Tre Cel7A was determined using pNPL as the substrate. Activities were measured at eight temperatures at pH 5.0, and the data point with the highest activity was recorded as the temperature optimum in Table 1. Ddi Cel7A CBM exhibited a lower temperature optimum, 45°C, than Dpu Cel7A CBM and Tre Cel7A, which exhibited optimal activity at about 55°C, as shown in Fig. 2. For consistency, the optimal pH was determined in MacIlvaine buffer with a constant ionic strength. Activity was evaluated at 40°C for Ddi Cel7A CBM and 45°C for Dpu Cel7A CBM and Tre Cel7A to account for the difference in temperature optima. The pH of maximum p NPL turnover for Dpu Cel7A and Ddi Cel7A, pH 5, was higher than that of Tre Cel7A, pH 4, as shown in Fig. 2. TABLE 1 Biochemical and kinetic characterization on p NPL FIG 2 Biochemical and kinetic characterization of Ddi Cel7A CBM, Dpu Cel7A CBM, and Tre Cel7A. Comparison of activity on 2 mM p NPL at 40°C and at various pH values; comparison of activity on 2 mM p NPL at pH 5 and various temperatures; DSC traces... The denaturation temperature was measured by DSC in the absence of substrate. The melting temperatures of Ddi Cel7A CBM, Dpu Cel7A CBM, and Tre Cel7A were 53°C, 62°C, and 64°C, respectively, as shown in Table 1 and Fig. 2. Enzyme kinetics on p NPL. The kinetic properties of Ddi Cel7A CBM, Dpu Cel7A CBM, and Tre Cel7A on p NPL were compared. V max and K m app were determined by plotting the turnover rate on p NPL for increasing substrate concentrations and evaluated by use of the Michaelis-Menten model, as shown in Fig. 2. The catalytic rate constant of Dpu Cel7A CBM was significantly higher at 36.2 min −1 than the k cat s of Ddi Cel7A CBM and Tre Cel7A, which were nearly equal at 16.2 and 15.9 min −1, respectively. However, the K m app values of both Dpu Cel7A CBM and Ddi Cel7A CBM were 3.4 mM, which was higher than the K m app value of Tre Cel7A, 1.2 mM, indicating a lower binding affinity for p NPL. Cellulose hydrolysis. Enzymatic activity comparisons were conducted on 0.5% Avicel, pretreated corn stover, and phosphoric acid-swollen cellulose substrates. The enzyme cocktails comprised β-glucosidase from Novozymes 188, the E1 endoglucanase from A. cellulolyticus, and Dpu Cel7A CBM, Ddi Cel7A CBM, or Tre Cel7A. Assays were completed near the previously determined pH and temperature optima for Dpu Cel7A CBM and Ddi Cel7A CBM, at pH 5.0 and 50°C and 40°C, respectively. Glucose and cellobiose concentrations were determined by HPLC and plotted as a function of time. Curves were fit to a single exponential; the time constant for cellulose hydrolysis is reported in Table 2 and indicates that cocktails with both Dpu Cel7A CBM and Ddi Cel7A CBM convert cellulose to glucose in a manner equivalent to that for Tre Cel7A on all three cellulose substrates. All hydrolysis profiles were strikingly similar, with only one minor difference in the hydrolysis of Avicel by Dpu Cel7A CBM being seen, where the enzyme reached a lower maximum conversion than Tre Cel7A but did so faster than Tre Cel7A. TABLE 2 Cellulose hydrolysis kinetic parameters determined by use of a single exponential curve a FIG 3 Cellulose hydrolysis on Avicel, PCS, and PASC in a three-enzyme cocktail consisting of the experimental CBH, endoglucanase, and β-glucosidase. Comparison of Dpu Cel7A CBM and Tre Cel7A at 40°C and pH 5.0;... Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A structures. After extensive screening, crystals of the T. reesei -expressed Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A proteins that could be used for synchrotron radiation diffraction data collection were obtained. However, in both cases the crystals were small and the diffraction data were notoriously weak and suffered from twinning and high degrees of mosaicity. This is reflected by high R and R free factors of 0.25 and 0.35, respectively, for the Ddi Cel7A structure and 0.23 and 0.31, respectively, for the Dpu Cel7A structure, which were refined at resolutions of 2.1 and 2.7 Å, respectively, and a rather high average temperature factor of 28.5 Å 2 for Ddi Cel7A. Nevertheless, almost the entire backbone could be traced with confidence. All amino acid side chains were placed and refined, apart from Lys-438 of Ddi Cel7A and Asn-438 and Asn-439 of Dpu Cel7A, which were not visible in the electron density and thus excluded from the final models. The Ddi Cel7A structure was solved in space group P2 1 2 1 2 1 with a single protein chain in the asymmetric unit, and Dpu Cel7A was solved in space group P2 1 2 1 2 1 with two chains, A and B, in the asymmetric unit. In both structures, the N-terminal glutamine residue is cyclized to pyroglutamate, Pro-388 is cis -proline, all 18 cysteines form disulfide bonds, N -glycosylation is evident at Asn-269 with density for one N -acetylglucosamine unit, and Lys437 is the last visible residue. In Dpu Cel7A, an additional GlcNAc is attached to Asn-112. Statistics for diffraction data processing and structure refinement are summarized in Table 3. TABLE 3 Data collection and refinement statistics for Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A Structural alignments and analysis. As expected from the high degree of amino acid sequence identity, the folds of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A were very similar to one another as well as to the fold of the catalytic module of Tre Cel7A. The catalytic residues for the Dictyostelium Cel7A structures and aromatic residues that stack on the binding sites at positions −7, −4, −2, and +1 overlap the positions of the analogous residues in Tre Cel7A. Figures 4A and ​ andB B show the superposition of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A with the cellononaose Michaelis complex of Tre Cel7A, where surface loops of interest and glucoside-binding subsites are indicated. The corresponding loop regions are also highlighted in the structure-based sequence alignment of the catalytic modules of the GH7 CBH structures available in PDB. Alignments of the structures of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A to the known structures of other GH7 CBHs showed that the eight major binding tunnel loops of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A are exceptionally similar to each other and to those of Tre Cel7A, revealing a highly enclosed active site. Loops A3 and B3 of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A lack at their tips the Tyr residues that are present in Tre Cel7A. However, the Dictyostelium Cel7A enzymes have a tyrosine that protrudes from the base of the B2 loop whose side chain resides in the same general space as the B3 tyrosine in the other GH7 structures. The opposing residue on loop A3 is Gln377 in Ddi Cel7A and Leu377 in Dpu Cel7A. Glutamine at this position is a rare motif among GH7 CBHs and is found only in another protist, Pseudotrichonympha grassii, a parabasilian symbiont in the gut of termites. A few distantly related basidiomycetes have glutamate at this position; e.g., in Hir Cel7A, molecular dynamics simulations showed that the glutamate side chain can interact with a bound cellulose chain. Dpu Cel7A and Ddi Cel7A also possess on the A1 loop two glutamine residues that would be in direct contact with the cellulose surface when the enzyme is adsorbed ; Tre Cel7A possesses only the former of these. Near the entrance to the tunnel, an aromatic residue in Dpu Cel7A may potentially provide an additional subsite at position −8 and help to guide a cellulose chain into the tunnel. Leucine is found at the corresponding position in Ddi Cel7A and Tre Cel7A. FIG 5 Space-fill GH7 structures comparing the substrate tunnel enclosures of CBHs from T. reesei, D. discoideum, D. purpureum, H. irregulare, P. chrysosporium, and the endoglucanase... FIG 6 Alignments of the structures of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A with the known structures of other GH7 CBHs. Alignment around the active site illustrating the interactions of the B2, B3, and A3 loops discussed in the text. Product-binding sites illustrating... Tre Cel7A has four attachment sites on the CD for N -glycosylation: N45, N64, N270, and N384. Only the N270 glycan site is maintained in Dpu Cel7A and Ddi Cel7A, where one attached N -acetylglucosamine is visible in both structures. At the position analogous to Tre Cel7A N45, both Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A have a 1-residue deletion, and Tre Cel7A N384 is replaced by a threonine. Instead, the Dictyostelium sequences exhibit an N -glycosylation site at N112, which is also found in Tha Cel7A and where GlcNAc is seen in the Dpu Cel7A structure, and at an additional site in Dpu Cel7A, N433, although there is not clear electron density to observe glycan attachment. We also note that Tre Cel7A has 10 disulfide bridges, whereas the Dictyostelium Cel7A enzymes have only 9. The more common scenario in GH7 cellulases is for them to lack this extra disulfide bridge between Cys4 and Cys72. In fact, Tre Cel7A and T. harzianum Cel7A are the only GH7 members with a solved structure that possess the 10th disulfide bridge. Lastly, the product-binding sites of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A are quite similar to those of Tre Cel7A, with the exception of a few notable differences among residues that have been extensively studied and discussed in past GH7 studies. Thr246 at the tip of loop B3 in Tre Cel7A is replaced by Ala245 in Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A, resulting in the loss of a hydrogen bond to the substrate at the subsite at position +1. At the same time, the side chain of Asp345 in loop B4 of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A is suitably positioned for H bonding to OH1 of the glucosyl unit at position +2 of the reducing end. Actually, most GH7 CBHs have aspartate at the corresponding position, but Tre Cel7A and other Trichoderma species lack this interaction due to a 1-residue deletion in loop B4. Cellobiose inhibition. In light of the structural differences found in the product-binding site, K i studies for product inhibition were carried out using p NPL as the substrate. Simultaneous nonlinear regression was used to evaluate the events for competitive, uncompetitive, noncompetitive, and mixed inhibition. The data collected suggest that these enzymes are competitively inhibited by cellobiose, and the K i s for competitive inhibition are reported in Table 1. Cellobiose is 5 to 7 times less inhibitory to Ddi Cel7A CBM and Dpu Cel7A CBM than to Tre Cel7A, with K i values of 205, 130, and 29 μM, respectively. This is consistent with the findings of previous studies investigating similar structural changes in the GH7 CBH active site. DISCUSSION GH7 CBHs are complex, important enzymes in both nature and the growing biofuels industry. Continued structural and biochemical studies of these enzymes are essential to developing detailed structure-function relationships, given their importance. The GH7 CBHs from D. discoideum and D. purpureum are now the second and third known nonfungal GH7 enzyme structures, with the first one being from a salt water-inhabiting, wood-boring isopod, L. quadripunctata. Although many GH7 CBHs are bimodular, exhibiting a catalytic domain connected to a carbohydrate-binding module by an ∼30-amino-acid flexible linker, the native sequences of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A do not exhibit a CBM-linker domain. It has long been known that the CBM aids the enzyme by increasing the binding to its crystalline cellulose substrate ; however, it is likely that there are evolutionary reasons for the lack of a CBM, such as environments of high cellulose density where the substrate concentration greatly surpasses the K m of the CBM or CD. Indeed, a recent study by Varnai et al. demonstrated that Tre Cel7A without the CBM-linker is able to achieve the same extent of conversion on Avicel and pretreated wheat straw at a high level of solids loadings, while at a lower level of solids loading, such as the 0.5% used here, the CBM-linker aids in conversion by binding crystalline cellulose and increasing the local concentration. Consequently, for biochemical studies, we have added the family 1 CBM and linker from Tre Cel7A to the CD of native Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A to be able to compare more directly GH7 CBH conversion at low levels of solids loadings. Going forward, self-consistent comparisons of GH7 CBHs with CBM-linkers, enabled by the development of a T. reesei expression host from which Cel7A is deleted, will be important to the continued development of structure-activity relationships and the development of the baseline activity of GH7 CBHs from natural diversity in the context of a background enzyme cocktail on process-relevant substrates. Since T. reesei is known to be one of the most cellulolytic organisms, it is surprising that both Dictyostelium GH7s were equally active on biomass and crystalline cellulose at their respective temperature optima. However, previous investigations of the cellulose synthase in D. discoideum have shown that the cellulose deposited in the sheath is highly crystalline cellulose I and that the high crystallinity is positively correlated with an increased strength and rigidity of the stalk. Thus, it is not unreasonable to surmise that the Dictyostelium Cel7s have evolved a highly efficient mechanism for rearrangement of crystalline cellulose I to resourcefully modify the cell wall and sheath structure and potentially recycle glucose during formation of the stalk and fruiting body. Additionally, Eichinger et al. speculate that dictyostelia may also utilize the cellulose- and hemicellulose-degrading enzymes in their genomes to degrade plant tissue for food. Immunolabeling of GH7 CBHs is a well-known technique to visualize these enzymes and could potentially be used to examine the distribution of these enzymes when they are expressed in the presence and absence of either self-generated cellulose or exogenous sources to determine the function of GH7 CBHs in the life cycle of dictyostelia. In a previous report, following the in vivo expression of GH7 CBH in D. discoideum, the enzyme was found to be highly controlled by the developmental phase of the organism. While the actual quantity of GH7 CBH at each stage was not reported, it may be that this organism expresses only a small amount of Cel7 at critical developmental phases and that the expression of large quantities, like those secreted by T. reesei during biomass degradation, could perhaps be detrimental to the organism. It is also possible that the hydrolytic ability of these enzymes is advantageous, in that it enables the organism to progress through morphogenesis quickly, therefore allowing it to rapidly escape ill-fated environments. Given this tight regulation of expression, it would also be interesting to investigate the regulation of the GH7 CBH promoter during morphogenesis to better understand the process of morphogenesis or the mechanism of transcription regulation, as well as for its potential use in future GH7 expression systems for industrial applications. The crystal structures of native Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A are exceptionally similar to each other and to the crystal structure of Tre Cel7A. Indeed, the degree of binding tunnel closure of native Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A is the closest to that of Tre Cel7A to have been observed among GH7 structures to date. Functionally, this suggests increased processivity and a reduced dissociation constant that are perhaps similar to those of Tre Cel7A. Of particular significance is the lack of tyrosine in the B3 and A3 loops, whose side chains maintain some degree of flexibility and partially enclose the binding tunnel at the catalytic center. To compensate, the Dictyostelium Cel7A enzymes have a unique tyrosine that protrudes from the base of the B2 loop, whose side chain resides in the same general space as the side chains of the A3 and B3 tyrosines in the other GH7 structures. The result is that the degree of binding tunnel enclosure in Dpu Cel7A and Ddi Cel7A in this region is comparable to or greater than that in the other GH7 CBHs. In addition to the aforementioned implications for processivity and the dissociation constant, this may suggest that the Dictyostelium Cel7A enzymes may have elevated probabilities of endoinitiation compared with the probability for Tre Cel7A. The product-binding sites of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A are similar to those of Tre Cel7A with a few notable, potentially important differences, namely, T246 and D345. Ståhlberg et al. speculated on the flexibility of the T246 side chain, as evidenced by elevated temperature factors and weaker electron density when the binding site at position +1 was vacant. However, when the binding site at position +1 was filled, the position of T246 was as stable as the rest of the protein, thus providing further evidence for the importance of this hydrogen bond. von Ossowski et al. discussed the impact of this residue's absence in Pch Cel7D, as did Ubhayasekera et al.. Ubhayasekera et al. concluded that the two most significant differences in ligand binding between Tre Cel7A and Pch Cel7D are the direct hydrogen bond with T246 and the D336 interaction at the binding tunnel exit, in which the interaction is present in Pch Cel7D but in which D336 is replaced by glycine in Tre Cel7A. Like Pch Cel7D, both Dictyostelium structures possess an aspartate at this position, as illustrated in Fig. 6B. The conservation of this interaction in GH7 cellulases has been discussed ; as mentioned in Results, the aspartate residue here is rather well conserved in all GH7 CBHs except those in the Trichoderma genus and a few others, where the B4 loop is 1 residue shorter. This aspartate is additionally absent in GH7 EGs due to deletion of the B4 loop, implying that this residue may play a role in cellulose chain processivity in some GH7 CBHs. To verify the functional significance of the unique product site motif, we investigated the biochemical characteristics and activities of Ddi Cel7A CBM and Dpu Cel7A CBM on soluble and insoluble substrates. We found that on the soluble substrate p NPL, Dpu Cel7A CBM has a higher specific activity than either Ddi Cel7A CBM or Tre Cel7A. Interestingly, we could find no structural difference between the CDs of Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A to fully explain the differences in activities. Evolutionarily, it is unclear why the Dictyostelium Cel7s are more cellobiose tolerant. Perhaps the high viscosity of the extracellular matrix amplifies the effective cellobiose concentration due to limited diffusion. Both Dictyostelium organisms studied here contain multiple genes predicted to have β-glucosidase activity ; however, to our knowledge, it has not been reported if the organism utilizes the glucose for energy or for some other purpose, such as feeding a bacterial symbiote, as has been suggested previously. The cosecretion of β-glucosidases alongside the GH7 CBHs has also not been examined, to our knowledge. GH7 genes occur in branches of the eukaryotic tree of life that diverged over 1 billion years ago, suggesting either an ancient ancestral GH7 gene or gene uptake via horizontal gene transfer. These genes have been well characterized and identified in many cellulolytic fungi and, more recently, in animals, such as marine wood borers. Moreover, they have been found in additional eukaryote branches, such as amoeba, oomycetes, haptophytes, and parabasilids. Compared to other GH families, GH7 CBHs are noteworthy in how conserved they are in terms of sequence identity. If GH7 cellulases were derived from a single ancestor before the earliest point of divergence in the eukaryotic tree of life, the sequence conservation is remarkable, given the early event of divergence. If this is indeed the case, these findings suggest that GH7 CBHs cannot accommodate a broad sequence space for primary function. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that HGT occurred on a more recent time scale, thus limiting the extent of sequence divergence. We performed a phylogenetic analysis of taxonomically diverse GH7 protein sequences to construct an evolutionary tree on the basis of the sequence of the GH7 domain alone. A simplified tree is shown in Fig. 8, and the complete tree with all sequence names is shown in Fig. S2 in the supplemental material. The amoebae are placed among ascomycete sequences, indeed suggesting HGT from an early ascomycete to a dictyostelial ancestor. The event should then have occurred after the separation of the Ascomycota and Basidiomycota but before the divergence of D. discoideum and D. purpureum, which is estimated to have been about 400 million years ago, and supposedly much earlier, as indicated by additional nodes further down in the Amoebozoa subtree and the high degree of similarity between Ddi Cel7A and Dpu Cel7A. HGT has been hypothesized to be a primary means of genome evolution in D. discoideum. Given the lifestyle of dictyostelia, which inhabit forest soil, it seems plausible that HGT of the genes for GH7 CBHs from fungi may have been the primary mechanism for the presence of these enzymes present in slime mold genomes. Similar arguments have been made for HGT into wood-boring crustaceans, such as L. quadripunctata. We note, however, that all the genes in dictyostelia that are strongly supported to have been acquired by HGT are genes of bacterial origin and prokaryote-eukaryote HGT is generally easier to detect than HGT of nuclear genes between eukaryotes. For oomycetes, extensive whole-genome, gene-to-gene phylogenetic analysis has been applied to detect putative HGT between fungi and plant-pathogenic oomycetes, and the results indicate that HGT has been fundamental to the evolution of plant-parasitic traits within the oomycetes. Interestingly, though, the GH7 gene was not present among the 34 candidate genes acquired by HGT identified in the analysis, suggesting that it does not show strong signs of being acquired by HGT in oomycetes, which is also consistent with the findings of our phylogenetic analysis. Regardless of the gene transfer mechanism or ancestry, we find it remarkable that, despite a distant phylogenetic and temporal relationship between dictyostelial GH7 CBHs and their more well-studied fungal counterparts, such high degrees of homology and similarity in activity and structure are preserved. FIG 8 Phylogenetic tree of 113 GH7 CBH protein sequences. The evolutionary history was inferred using the minimum evolution method with 700 bootstrap replicates in MEGA software from a multiple-sequence alignment of the GH7 domain by MUSCLE,... In conclusion, this study presents the crystal structures of the GH7 CBHs of two social amoebae and shows that they are structurally and functionally very similar to the crystal structure of the well-studied Tre Cel7A, revealing a remarkable degree of conservation in these important cellulose-degrading enzymes across distant phylogenetic branches on the eukaryotic tree of life. Several key differences in the makeup of the binding tunnel loops and the product-binding sites likely give rise to the observed differences in kinetics on the small-molecule substrate p NPL and the reduction in product inhibition by cellobiose compared to the results for Tre Cel7A. Lastly, this study presents an approach to append a CBM-linker on GH7 CBHs to produce chimeric cellulases for direct comparison on insoluble cellulose-rich substrates. This approach will be essential to building a large collection of self-consistent results in the study of GH7 CBH activities and for determining accurate structure-function relationships for these important enzymes. The functional relevance of the GH7 CBHs in dictyostelia, likely intimately related to the reshaping of the extracellular matrix important to the slime mold life cycle in its morphogenesis from slug to fruiting body or in its ability to digest cellulose-containing organisms in the forest soil, remains a question of particular interest to understand the evolutionary pressures on the activities of slime mold GH7 CBHs. Supplementary Material Supplemental material: Click here to view. ACKNOWLEDGMENT We are grateful to Nils Högberg, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, for advice on phylogenetic analysis. Funding Statement S.E.H., B.C.K., L.E.T., K.K.P., T.A.V., M.E.H., S.R.D., and G.T.B. acknowledge the U.S. Department of Energy BioEnergy Technologies Office for funding. M.H.M., A.S.B., and J.S. acknowledge the Swedish Research Council Formas and the Faculty for Natural Resources and Agriculture at the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences through the research program MicroDrivE. B.C.K. also thanks the National Renewable Energy Laboratory's Director's Fellowship Program for funding. Footnotes Supplemental material for this article may be found at. Article information Appl Environ Microbiol. 2016 Jun 1; 82: 3395–3409. Published online 2016 May 16. Prepublished online 2016 Apr 1. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00163-16 PMCID: PMC4959224 PMID: 27037126 Sarah E. Hobdey, a, * Brandon C. Knott, b Majid Haddad Momeni, c, * Larry E. Taylor, II, a Anna S. Borisova, c Kara K. Podkaminer, a Todd A. VanderWall, a Michael E. Himmel, a Stephen R. Decker, a Gregg T. Beckham, b and Jerry Ståhlberg c Sarah E. Hobdey a Biosciences Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, USA Find articles by Sarah E. Hobdey Brandon C. Knott b National Bioenergy Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, USA Find articles by Brandon C. Knott Majid Haddad Momeni c Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden Find articles by Majid Haddad Momeni Larry E. Taylor, II a Biosciences Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, USA Find articles by Larry E. Taylor, II Anna S. Borisova c Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden Find articles by Anna S. Borisova Kara K. Podkaminer a Biosciences Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, USA Find articles by Kara K. Podkaminer Todd A. VanderWall a Biosciences Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, USA Find articles by Todd A. VanderWall Michael E. Himmel a Biosciences Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, USA Find articles by Michael E. Himmel Stephen R. Decker a Biosciences Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, USA Find articles by Stephen R. Decker Gregg T. Beckham b National Bioenergy Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, USA Find articles by Gregg T. Beckham Jerry Ståhlberg c Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden Find articles by Jerry Ståhlberg D. Cullen, Editor USDA Forest Products Laboratory a Biosciences Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, USA b National Bioenergy Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, USA c Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden Corresponding author. Address correspondence to Gregg T. Beckham, vog.lern@mahkceb.ggerg, or Jerry Ståhlberg, es.uls@greblhats.yrrej. * Present address: Sarah E. Hobdey, Idaho Veterans Research and Education Foundation, VA Medical Center, Boise, Idaho, USA; Majid Haddad Momeni, Enzyme and Protein Chemistry, Department of Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. Citation Hobdey SE, Knott BC, Haddad Momeni M, Taylor LE, II, Borisova AS, Podkaminer KK, VanderWall TA, Himmel ME, Decker SR, Beckham GT, Ståhlberg J. 2016. Biochemical and structural characterizations of two Dictyostelium cellobiohydrolases from the Amoebozoa kingdom reveal a high level of conservation between distant phylogenetic trees of life. Appl Environ Microbiol 82:3395–3409. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00163-16. Received 2016 Jan 17; Accepted 2016 Mar 25. Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved. Articles from Applied and Environmental Microbiology are provided here courtesy of American Society for Microbiology 