 Extracellular cAMP functions as a primary ligand for cell surface cAMP receptors throughout Dictyostelium discoideum development, controlling chemotaxis and morphogenesis. The developmental consequences of cAMP signaling and the metabolism of cAMP have been studied in great detail, but it has been unclear how cells export cAMP across the plasma membrane. Here we show pharmacologically and genetically that ABC transporters mediate cAMP export. Using an evolutionary-developmental biology approach, we identified several candidate abc genes and characterized one of them, abcB3, in more detail. Genetic and biochemical evidence suggest that AbcB3 is a component of the cAMP export mechanism in D. discoideum development. Keywords: ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters, Dictyostelium, cAMP Introduction When starved, the single-celled social amoeba D. discoideum undergoes a remarkable developmental process that includes chemotaxis, aggregation, kin recognition, and morphogenesis, resulting in a multicellular fruiting body. Over 40 years ago, cAMP was identified as the chemotactic signal for aggregation. Extracellular cAMP also functions as a first messenger to specify cell fate during development. Despite the developmental importance of extracellular cAMP, how cAMP export occurs has remained unknown. Several groups have proposed mechanisms for cAMP export, including a vesicular transport mechanism. However, cAMP export occurs simultaneously with intracellular synthesis with virtually no lag time during the initial stages of development, suggesting that vesicular transport is not at play. Adenylyl cyclase A synthesizes intracellular cAMP and contains a structure similar to ATP Binding Cassette transporters, which are known to export anionic cargoes like cAMP in other organisms. While ACA is an attractive candidate for cAMP export, acaA -null mutants can export cAMP when another adenylyl cyclase, ACG, is engineered to produce intracellular cAMP, indicating that ACA is not the only possible cAMP exporter. Interestingly, several human ABC transporters can export cAMP, prompting us to hypothesize that ABC transporters export cAMP in Dictyostelium. ABC transporters contain two ATP-binding domains and two membrane-spanning domains that transport a variety of cargo molecules. In D. discoideum there are 68 abc genes, which have been classified into 8 groups based on sequence and predicted structural features, but their functions are largely unknown. We recently characterized the transcriptional and morphological phenotypes of 35 abc mutants during development and found that most mutants exhibited subtle phenotypes, suggesting that many of the ABC transporters could have overlapping functions. We hypothesized that cAMP exporters may be among the uncharacterized abc genes. Here we show that ABC transporter inhibitors disrupt development in a manner consistent with a lack of cAMP export. We also identify several abc genes with cAMP-responsive transcription in D. discoideum and in D. purpureum. Using genetic and biochemical approaches, we show that one of these genes, abcB3, exports cAMP. Results ABC-transporter inhibitors disrupt D. discoideum development Bacterial and human ABC transporters that export similar cargo molecules exhibit overlap in inhibitor sensitivity, suggesting that pharmacological properties of ABC transporters may be similar when they share cargo molecules. The drugs Indomethicin, Probenecid, Dipyridamole, and Sulfynpyrazone inhibit the human cAMP exporters, ABCC4 and ABCC5. To test whether ABC transporters export cAMP in D. discoideum, we examined the effect of these inhibitors on development. Development of wild-type D. discoideum cells without inhibitors for 22 hours resulted in synchronous development and the formation of culminants. Addition of inhibitors disrupted development and caused asynchronous morphogenesis. Sulfynpyrazone caused the earliest arrest at the loose aggregate stage and dipyridamole treatment had the least effect, resulting in semi-clear, frail fruiting bodies. Transferring cells that were initially developed on inhibitor-containing filters to inhibitor-free conditions reversed the developmental arrests, and the cells developed into fruiting bodies after another 24 hours. The reversibility of the drug effects indicates that the treatment was not lethal. Figure 1 ABC transporter inhibitors disrupt D. discoideum development Before individual cells form multicellular structures, they stream towards aggregation centers in an extracellular cAMP-dependent manner. We tested the effect of ABC-transporter inhibitors on the streaming of developing cells in submerged cultures. In the absence of inhibitor, we observed aggregation centers with radial tracks of cells aggregating towards the center. Addition of any one of the inhibitors abolished developmental streaming and aggregation. In the previous experiment we used a high concentration of inhibitors because the drugs were added to buffer-soaked paper pads beneath the developmental filters. However, inhibition of developmental streaming in submerged cultures occurred at drug concentrations of 50μM, similar to the concentrations used in human cell culture experiments. These results demonstrate that inhibitors of ABC transporters disrupt cAMP-mediated development and support the hypothesis that ABC transporters export cAMP in D. discoideum. Figure 2 ABC transporter inhibitors prevent D. discoideum developmental streaming Several abc genes are cAMP responsive To identify candidate cAMP exporters among the 68 ABC transporter genes in D. discoideum we relied on the observation that excess cargo molecules induce the transcription of their respective ABC transporters in other organisms. We developed D. discoideum cells for 0-, 3-, and 6-hours and treated them with the membrane permeable cAMP analog, 8-Br-cAMP, for 2 hours to mimic intracellular cAMP cargo overload. We then measured the transcript abundance of each of the 68 ABC transporters by quantitative RT-PCR and compared them between treated and untreated cells. We found that abc -transcript abundance was not altered at 0 and 3 hours, but abcA5, abcB3, abcC5, abcC12, abcC13, and abcG21 transcripts accumulated in cells developed for 6 hours in the presence of 8-Br-cAMP. Figure 3 Cargo overload increases abc transporter mRNA abundance To further refine our candidate gene list, we took a comparative evolutionary-developmental biology approach. Similar to D. discoideum, D. purpureum utilizes cAMP signaling for chemotactic aggregation. However, these two species diverged about 300–450 million years ago and possess divergent genomes. We hypothesized that abc genes responsible for cAMP export would be shared between the two species. To test this hypothesis, we repeated the cargo overload experiments with D. purpureum and measured transcript abundance of the orthologs of the abc genes up-regulated in D. discoideum. The qRT-PCR results showed that abcA5, abcB3, and abcG21 transcript abundance increased with the addition of 8-Br-cAMP, whereas abcC5 and abcC12 did not. There is no obvious ortholog for abcC13 in the D. purpureum genome. These findings suggest that abcA5, abcB3, and abcG21 encode cAMP exporters, since cargo overload up-regulated the respective transcripts in two evolutionary divergent organisms that use cAMP for chemotaxis. The cAMP analog 8-Br-cAMP is a potent activator of Protein Kinase A, and at least one abc gene, abcA1, is up-regulated through the PKA pathway in another system even though cAMP is not a cargo molecule for this transporter. To distinguish between PKA-regulated and cAMP cargo-regulated abc transcripts, we analyzed transcript levels in two mutants with constitutively active forms of PKA in D. discoideum. In cells overexpressing the PKA catalytic subunit, abcC13 and abcG21 transcript abundance was increased more than twofold compared to the wild type. Knockout of the gene that encodes the inhibitory regulatory subunit of PKA, pkaR, caused an increased in abcA5 and abcG21 transcripts. These results implicate abcB3 as the most likely candidate because its expression was up-regulated in response to cargo overload in an evolutionarily conserved manner, and because it was not regulated by PKA. abcB3 knockdown delays D. discoideum development We hypothesized that abcB3 exports cAMP during D. discoideum development and predicted that knockout of the gene would result in developmental defects, similar to those seen with the inhibitor experiments. However, we were unable to generate a knockout strain, suggesting that abcB3 might be required for vegetative growth. As an alternative approach, we created abcB3 -RNAi strains. During development, abcB3 expression increases at 4 hours and peaks by 8 hours, so we drove expression of the abcB3 shRNA using the tgrB1 element of the bidirectional tgrB1/C1 promoter. Since tgrB1 expression begins at the onset of development, peaks at 4 hours, and remains high until 8 hours, we reasoned that the construct would allow for high levels of shRNA to be present when abcB3 expression increases and peaks, but not during growth. The bidirectional promoter also allowed us to co-express GFP from the tgrC1 element, confirming expression of the abcB3 shRNA by visualizing GFP positive cells during development. After 10 hours of development, wild-type cells showed low background levels of green fluorescence, whereas two independent strains transformed with the abcB3 shRNA construct showed strong GFP expression. To test abcB3 mRNA abundance in these cells, we measured mRNA levels at 10 hours of development by qRT-PCR and found that abcB3 expression was significantly reduced in both strains compared to the wild type. The level of knockdown was different between the two abcB3 -RNAi strains, so we used both strains in subsequent experiments. Figure 4 Expression of abcB3 shRNA reduces abcB3 transcripts To test the effects of reduced abcB3 expression, we followed the wild type and both abcB3 -RNAi strains during development. At 6 hours, the wild type formed loose aggregates while strain abcB3 -RNAi #1 began to form loose aggregates. Strain abcB3 -RNAi #2, however, failed to form loose aggregates by 6 hours. These results are consistent with the greater reduction of abcB3 mRNA in strain #2. At 10 hours, the developmental differences between the wild type and the abcB3 RNAi strains were clearest. The wild-type cells formed tipped aggregates while abcB3 -RNAi #1 and #2 cells remained at the tight aggregate and loose aggregate stages, respectively. The developmental delays persisted at 17, 22, and 27 hours. By 27 hours the majority of the wild-type cells formed fruiting bodies while the abcB3 -RNAi strains did not. The developmental delay displayed by the abcB3 -RNAi cells is consistent with reduced cAMP export. Figure 5 abcB3 knockdown delays D. discoideum development abcB3 knockdown reduces extracellular cAMP levels To test whether abcB3 -RNAi expression resulted in altered cAMP levels, we developed cells for 6 hours, collected them and stimulated cAMP production with the cAMP analog 2’-deoxy-cAMP. This analog binds to cell surface cAMP receptors and induces cAMP production and export, but it is not detected by the cAMP detection method we used. We found that stimulation caused a twofold increase in the levels of extracellular cAMP in the wild type but no significant increase in the two abcB3 -RNAi cells. This finding supports the hypothesis that AbcB3 exports cAMP during development. In wild-type cells, intracellular cAMP levels did not significantly differ between unstimulated and stimulated conditions, probably because most of the newly synthesized cAMP was exported. We observed that intracellular cAMP levels did not increase significantly in abcB3 -RNAi cells either. We suspect that reduced cAMP export could cause reduced cAMP production because cAMP levels are tightly regulated through feedback mechanisms. Figure 6 abcB3 knockdown reduces extracellular levels of cAMP in D. discoideum AbcB3 is an exporter of cAMP To examine the cAMP-exporter activity of AbcB3 more directly, we tested whether abcB3 expression in an ectopic system could facilitate cAMP export. We transiently transfected human HEK293T cells with abcB3 cDNA or with an empty vector control, stimulated the endogenous human adenyl cyclase with the addition of Forskolin, and measured cAMP levels. In vector control cells, Forskolin addition caused an increase in extracellular cAMP levels. Ectopic expression of AbcB3 caused an additional 30% increase in extracellular cAMP accumulation with Forskolin addition. Moreover, addition of the ABC-transporter inhibitor Probenicid reduced extracellular cAMP levels in AbcB3 transfected cells to that of the control cells. This increase in cAMP export is accompanied by a decrease in intracellular cAMP levels after Forskolin treatment in AbcB3 expressing cells compared to control cells. Consistent with other studies in mammalian cells, inhibitor treatment did not raise intracellular cAMP levels likely due to negative feedback regulation of cAMP production. These data further support the hypothesis that AbcB3 can export cAMP. Figure 7 Ectopically expressed abcB3 exports cAMP in mammalian cells Discussion Our data suggest that AbcB3 functions as a cAMP exporter in Dictyostelium. abcB3 mRNA accumulates in response to cAMP overload in D. discoideum and in the evolutionary distant relative, D. purpureum, which also uses cAMP as an aggregation chemoattractant. RNAi-mediated knockdown of abcB3 results in decreased extracellular cAMP levels and leads to perturbed D. discoideum development and ectopic expression of abcB3 is sufficient to increase cAMP export in mammalian cells. Pharmacological inhibition of ABC transporters disrupted developmental aggregation and caused developmental delay, suggesting that ABC transporters are involved in cAMP export. The ABC transporter inhibitors used are chemically distinct and their potential off-target effects are probably different. However, all inhibitors disrupted development similarly and in a manner consistent with a defect in cAMP export, suggesting that their common effects are due to reduced cAMP export. In our genetics studies we used three criteria to select abc genes for further analysis: 1) cAMP-induced transcriptional regulation, 2) PKA-independent transcriptional regulation, and 3) evolutionary conservation of cAMP-dependent transcriptional regulation. Remarkably, of the 68 abc genes, abcB3 was the only gene that satisfied all three criteria. While our data suggests that abcB3 is indeed a cAMP exporter, we have not excluded the possibility that other cAMP-responsive abc genes encode potential cAMP exporters. In gene silencing experiments, we observed a developmental delay that began at the aggregation stage. The initiation of the delay at the aggregation stage is in line with a defect in cAMP signaling. The delay persisted throughout development; however, some cells were able to form fruiting bodies eventually. The lack of complete developmental arrest suggests that there are other cAMP exporters in D. discoideum. This would not be surprising considering that ABC proteins are promiscuous transporters. A more interesting rationale for multiple cAMP exporters is that D. discoideum development is controlled by several cAMP receptors expressed at different times and in specific cell types with varying degrees of affinity to cAMP. It is conceivable that multiple cAMP exporters exist and are also differentially expressed temporally and spatially during multicellular development. The other cAMP-responsive abc genes we identified might compensate when abcB3 is down-regulated. Additionally, it is still formally possible that Adenylyl Cyclase A exports cAMP because the experiments done to test its potential export activity only showed that it was not the only exporter. Another explanation for a lack of developmental arrest with abcB3 -RNAi is that abcB3 knockdown was transient and incomplete. We were unable to knockout the abcB3 gene, which suggests that it might have an additional role in D. discoideum growth. Instead, we used the tgrB1-C1 promoter to drive abcB3 -RNAi expression. The tgrB1-C1 promoter becomes active at around 4 hours of development in all cells and remains active for about 6 hours, after which it is mostly active in prestalk cells. It is possible that once the tgrB1-C1 promoter became inactive, the levels of abcB3 -RNAi expression were insufficient to reduce the accumulation of abcB3 mRNA, and the cells were able to recover and develop. The reversibility of the phenotype is also supported by the observation that the ABC-transporter inhibitors effects were reversible. Both insufficient knockdown and the presence of multiple cAMP exporters likely contribute to the developmental phenotype observed in our experiments. We measured cAMP levels inside and outside of D. discoideum cells and found a positive relationship between AbcB3 expression and levels of extracellular cAMP. We do not have direct binding evidence or structural data to further support that AbcB3 exports cAMP. It is therefore formally possible that AbcB3 may function in some ancillary capacity to the real cAMP exporter. However, the most compelling evidence that AbcB3 exports cAMP is that expressing abcB3 in mammalian cells was sufficient to increase extracellular cAMP levels without any additional D. discoideum genes. Moreover, ABC transporter inhibitors blocked that increase in extracellular export. ABC transporters are present in every domain of life, transport an incredible array of molecules, and show a considerable level of functional and structural homology from bacteria to vertebrates. Human ABC transporters can export cAMP, and our data suggest that this function is also conserved in Dictyostelium. The physiological significance of cAMP export is clear in D. discoideum. Very little is known about the function of cAMP efflux in mammals, but the fact that it exists suggests that the ability to export cAMP evolved before the split between animals and amoebae. Much remains to be examined with regards to cAMP export and AbcB3 function and regulation. From a broader perspective, there are many abc genes in the D. discoideum genome, but their cargoes and functions are largely unknown. Multidrug resistance caused by ABC transporters has been an area of focused research and ABC transporter dysfunction causes 17 known genetic disorders. Our previous work and this study provide a framework for studying ABC transporter function in D. discoideum not only in the context of amoeba biology but also in the context of human biology and disease. Methods Dictyostelid strains, growth, and development D. discoideum AX4, pkaR −, and pkaC OE strains are described in. D. purpureum DpAX1 is described in. Cells were grown in shaking suspension at 220 rpm at 22°C in HL5 medium supplemented with penicillin and streptomycin. abcB3 shRNA expressing cells were maintained as above and supplemented with G418. For development on black nitrocellulose filters, cells were harvested at the logarithmic growth phase and washed twice with KK2 buffer. Cells were deposited onto a 5 cm filter atop a paper pad saturated with 2 mL PDF buffer and incubated in a dark humid chamber at 22°C. Where indicated, vehicle control or 1 mM of the ABC inhibitors Indomethacin, Probenecid, Dipyridamole, or Sulfynpyrazone was added to the PDF buffer. For developmental streaming assays, 1.56×10 6 cells/cm 2 were deposited in a 12 well plate under 666μL of PDF containing vehicle control or 50μM of one of the ABC transporter inhibitors. Cells were incubated at 22°C in a dark chamber and imaged at 16 hours. Plasmids, transformations, and transfections The abcB3 RNAi plasmid was constructed as described in. Briefly, bases 80–480 of the abcB3 coding sequence followed by sequences complementary to bases 302–480 were subcloned into an expression vector under control of the bidirectional tgrB1/tgrC1 promoter to facilitate RNAi during development. The final vector contained abcB3 sequences controlled by the tgrB1 promoter and a green fluorescence protein gene controlled by the tgrC1 promoter, resulting in co-expression of abcB3 RNAi sequences and GFP. This plasmid was transformed into the AX4 strain, and G418 resistant clones were selected as described in. Independent strains were isolated from independent transformations. abcB3 knockdown was confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR. abcB3 cDNA was cloned in the pcDNA3.1 plasmid. HEK293T cells were maintained in DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum. Cells were transfected with abcB3 expression vectors or empty pcDNA3.1 plasmid using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer's recommended protocol. Twenty-four hours after transfection, cells were counted, and re-seeded in a 6 well plate at 4.16×10 4 cm −2. The cells were used for cAMP export experiments 72 hours post-transfection. mRNA abundance analysis D. discoideum and D. purpureum were developed on black nitrocellulose filters at 22°C for 0, 3, or 6 hours. Cells were harvested with KK2 buffer containing 0.02M EDTA, and 3×10 7 cells were re-suspended in 30 mL of KK2 buffer containing no cargo or 20 mM of 8-Br-cAMP. Cells were incubated in shaking suspension at 220 rpm for 2 hours, harvested by centrifugation, and re-suspended in 1 mL of Trizol ®. Total RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer’s recommended protocol. RNA was treated with DNAse as described, cDNA prepared using Superscript II reverse transcriptase as described, and quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR performed with oligonucleotides specific to each abc gene as described. Two independent incubation experiments with three technical replicates of the qRT-PCR were performed. To determine abc transcript abundance in pkaR − and pkaC OE strains, experiments and analysis were performed similarly but without 8-Br-cAMP treatment. To confirm abcB3 knockdown, qRT-PCR was performed as above after 10 hours of development. Intracellular and extracellular cAMP measurement These experiments were conducted as described. Briefly, D. discoideum cells were developed on black nitrocellulose filters for 4–6 hours, harvested using KK2 buffer containing 0.02M EDTA, and re-suspended at 5×10 7 cells/mL in KK2 buffer. Using 4×10 6 cells of the suspension, cAMP export was stimulated with 20 μL of a stimulus solution containing 50μM 2’-deoxy-cAMP and 50 mM DTT for 5 minutes. Samples were centrifuged for 5 seconds at 14,000 × g and intracellular and supernatant fractions were separated. Stimulation was stopped by adding 100 μL of 3.5% perchloric acid to fractions and stored at −20°C for radiolabeled competitive cAMP binding assays. Human cells were washed with 2 mL of 1X Phosphate buffer saline without dislodging and incubated for 30 minutes with 1 mL of PBS containing 0.2 mM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine, or 0.2 mM IBMX and 100 μM Forskolin, or 0.2 mM IBMX, 100 μM of Forskolin, and 100 μM Probenecid. Cells were harvested, centrifuged at 600 × g for 5 minutes, and the cells suspension was separated into supernatant and pellet. Stimulation was terminated by adding 100 μL of 3.5% perchloric acid to the fractions. Samples were stored at −20°C for radiolabeled competitive cAMP binding assays. cAMP measurement was assayed as described in. Briefly, samples were neutralized using a 50% saturated solution of KHCO 3, centrifuged, and the supernatant collected for the assay. 20 μL of tracer, 20 μL of sample or standard, and 40μL of cAMP binding protein prepared from beef muscle were combined and incubated on ice for 1.5 hours. Binding reactions were stopped by addition of 40μL activated charcoal. 50μL of the supernatant was used to measure radioactivity via scintillation counting, and the amount of cAMP in samples was determined by comparing samples to standard amounts of cAMP as described. For each experiment, samples were prepared in at least duplicates. ​ Highlights Inhibitors of mammalian ABC transporters of cAMP delay Dictyostelium aggregation Cargo overload with 8-Br-cAMP induces conserved ABC transporter gene expression RNAi against abcB3 delays Dictyostelium aggregation and cAMP secretion Expression of abcB3 in mammalian cells increases cAMP secretion Acknowledgements We thank Olga Zuchenko for help at early stages of the research and for fruitful discussions. This work was supported by the Dictyostelium Functional Genomics Program Project Grant from the National institutes of Health. E.N. was supported by the IRACDA K12 GM084897 grant from the National Institutes of Health. The sponsors had no involvement in the study design, the data collection, analysis and interpretation, the decision to submit the work for publication or the writing of the report. Footnotes Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. Article information Dev Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 Jan 15. Published in final edited form as: Dev Biol. 2015 Jan 15; 397: 203–211. Published online 2014 Nov 20. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.11.006 PMCID: PMC4277735 NIHMSID: NIHMS643726 PMID: 25448698 Edward Roshan Miranda, a, b, c Edward A. Nam, a, c Adam Kuspa, c, d and Gad Shaulsky c, e Edward Roshan Miranda b Graduate Program in Developmental Biology c Department of Molecular and Human Genetics Find articles by Edward Roshan Miranda Edward A. Nam c Department of Molecular and Human Genetics Find articles by Edward A. Nam Adam Kuspa c Department of Molecular and Human Genetics d Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Find articles by Adam Kuspa Gad Shaulsky c Department of Molecular and Human Genetics Find articles by Gad Shaulsky b Graduate Program in Developmental Biology c Department of Molecular and Human Genetics d Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology e Corresponding author, Gad Shaulsky, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA, ude.mcb@idag, Phone: 713 798 8082 a Equal contribution PMC Copyright notice Publisher's Disclaimer The publisher's final edited version of this article is available free at Dev Biol 