 Background SCAR/WAVE is a principal regulator of pseudopod growth in crawling cells. It exists in a stable pentameric complex, which is regulated at multiple levels that are only beginning to be understood. SCAR/WAVE is phosphorylated at multiple sites, but how this affects its biological activity is unclear. Here we show that dephosphorylation of Dictyostelium SCAR controls normal pseudopod dynamics. Results We demonstrate that the C-terminal acidic domain of most Dictyostelium SCAR is basally phosphorylated at four serine residues. A small amount of singly phosphorylated SCAR is also found. SCAR phosphorylation site mutants cannot replace SCAR’s role in the pseudopod cycle, though they rescue cell size and growth. Unphosphorylatable SCAR is hyperactive – excessive recruitment to the front gives large pseudopods that fail to bifurcate because they continually grow forwards. Conversely, phosphomimetic SCAR is weakly active, causing frequent small, disorganised pseudopods. Even in its regulatory complex, SCAR is normally held inactive by an interaction between the phosphorylated acidic and basic domains. Loss of basic residues complementary to the acidic phosphosites yields a hyperactive protein similar to unphosphorylatable SCAR. Conclusions Regulated dephosphorylation of a fraction of the cellular SCAR pool is a key step in SCAR activation during pseudopod growth. Phosphorylation increases autoinhibition of the intact complex. Dephosphorylation weakens this interaction and facilitates SCAR activation, but also destabilizes the protein. We show that SCAR is specifically dephosphorylated in pseudopods, increasing activation by Rac and lipids and supporting positive feedback of pseudopod growth. Introduction SCAR/WAVE family members are fundamental regulators of actin polymerization and cell motility. They are essential mediators in the production and dynamics of most actin-rich protrusions, including pseudopods, lamellipods, and filopods. As part of a five-membered complex, they generate new actin filaments by recruiting and activating the Arp2/3 complex to the leading edge; this initiation of new F-actin is sufficient to drive protrusion of the front and movement of the whole cell. The entire complex is highly conserved through eukaryotic evolution, though it has been lost from the fungal/yeast lineage. PIR121, a member of the SCAR/WAVE regulatory complex, binds to Rac, while the complete complex binds to signalling lipids such as PIP 2. SCAR/WAVE’s ability to couple intracellular and extracellular signalling to actin polymerization makes it a key component of the machinery that mediates chemotaxis, as well as general migration. In neutrophils, the complex is localised to the membrane in rapidly-evolving travelling waves, implying a positive feedback loop that underpins both basic migration and chemotaxis. Despite this, the control of SCAR/WAVE’s activity is not well understood. SCAR/WAVE is thought to drive extension of essentially all actin pseudopods and lamellipods, so our incomplete understanding of its regulation is a serious hindrance for the cell motility field. In this work we analyze the role of phosphorylation of the acidic region at the C-terminus of SCAR. The A region is a key catalytic part of the SCAR/WAVE molecule – it binds directly to the Arp2/3 complex, in an interaction that is essential for actin nucleation. Previous work has shown that phosphorylation is important for the SCAR/WAVE complex’s activity, but the physiological roles and responses to stimulation of this process are contradictory. One report states that the complex is phosphorylated by ERK2 in response to signalling, which has not been supported elsewhere. A more recent paper suggests that the C-terminus is basally phosphorylated by casein kinase 2, and that this phosphorylation is essential for activity. However this result is compromised by overexpression of tagged SCAR/WAVE independently of its regulatory complex, and the presence of wild type protein. We conclude the opposite – that dephosphorylation provides a physiologically essential increase in SCAR/WAVE activity – using untagged proteins expressed at normal levels as part of the normal complex. SCAR/WAVEs may also be phosphorylated at several sites outside the acidic domain. A number of recent papers suggest that phosphorylation of SCAR is essential for function. As receptor-type tyrosine kinases, at least, evolved much more recently than the SCAR/WAVE complex, these phosphorylations are probably evolutionarily recent ways of modulating SCAR/WAVE function rather than an essential control mechanism. The neuron-specific SCAR/WAVE1 is also phosphorylated, but in the polyproline domain and by a different upstream pathway. Overall, the biggest limitation for the field has been an inability to convert biochemical observations about SCAR/WAVE activity to a cellular context. In this work we establish a physiological role for SCAR phosphorylation in Dictyostelium. We find the large cytoplasmic pool of SCAR is normally phosphorylated and relatively inactive. SCAR dephosphorylation loosens an intramolecular inhibition, leading to an increase in activity. Thus SCAR dephosphorylation is an important step for normal cell movement. Results SCAR is phosphorylated in resting cells To determine whether Dictyostelium SCAR is phosphorylated in vivo, we examined its electrophoretic mobility following phosphatase treatment. Calf intestinal phosphatase treatment of lysates from vegetative cells increased the mobility of the SCAR in western blots. Unphosphatased lysate contains a single, low-mobility SCAR band, indicating that nearly all of the endogenous SCAR protein is phosphorylated - a lower band is not seen. The same is true for chemotactically migrating cells. In order to obtain an accurate measurement of the levels of unphosphorylated SCAR, we separated lysates by isoelectric-point focussing, and examined SCAR after transfer to a membrane. This revealed that a small proportion of the SCAR – approximately 2% - is unphosphorylated throughout development. Partial phosphatase treatment revealed multiple intermediate bands corresponding to partially phosphorylated proteins. Five bands are clearly resolved, indicating that the majority of SCAR is fully phosphorylated at four sites. Figure 1 Phosphorylation of the SCAR acidic region The small amount of dephosphorylated SCAR seen in normal cells was at the position corresponding to a single phosphorylation. 2D gels show that the bandshift occurs after only one of the four phosphates is removed. To determine the phosphorylation sites in SCAR, we expressed a series of truncation mutants in a null background, and assessed the mobility shift after CIP treatment. Truncation of the C-terminal acidic region caused a complete loss of the band shift. This indicates that phosphorylation of the acidic region is the principal cause of the band-shift of SCAR protein. Recent studies reported high basal levels of phosphorylation of mammalian SCAR/WAVE2. The acidic region of this protein includes 5 serine residues, each of which is significantly phosphorylated in resting cells. The exact sequences surrounding the serines in human WAVE2 and Dictyostelium SCAR are different, but the composition is similar. All five Dictyostelium sites are predicted to be targets of the globally active serine/threonine kinase CK2. GSK3 and ERK2, which have each been proposed to control SCAR/WAVE, were not required for either the bandshift or IEF mobility of SCAR, showing that they are not responsible for the constitutive phosphorylation. Overall, the data unambiguously show that four of the five serine residues of the Dictyostelium SCAR acidic region are normally phosphorylated. Mutant proteins are functional and rescue growth defects We generated mutant SCARs in which all serines were replaced by unphosphorylatable alanines and phosphomimetic aspartic acid residues and expressed them in knockout mutants. They did not affect development and were expressed at normal levels. Neither protein band shifted after phosphatase treatment. The position of SA mutant was the same as CIP-treated wild type SCAR in both bandshift and IEF, confirming that all constitutive phosphorylation sites are in the acidic region. Previous biochemical work, showing relatively subtle effects of phosphorylation of the SCAR/WAVE2 acidic domain, used biochemical assays on isolated WCA domains, separate from the other members of the regulatory complex. We and others have observed that loss of Dictyostelium SCAR causes multiple defects, including loss of normal pseudopods, and also defective macropinocytosis and cytokinesis, resulting in a slower doubling time and smaller cells during vegetative growth. Expression of either mutant fully reverses the growth phenotypes. The smaller size of scar - cells is fully reversed by wild type and SA mutant, and partially reversed by the SD mutant. Thus the SCAR mutants are correctly expressed and functional. This shows that phosphorylation of the acidic domain is neither essential for SCAR function, nor does it keep SCAR completely inactive. Figure 2 Phenotypes caused by SCAR mutants. Phosphorylation mutants and pseudopod dynamics Dictyostelium is unusual in that cells are able to survive and migrate without SCAR, with smaller pseudopods and diminished speed. In Dictyostelium, like most cell types, new pseudopods are typically generated by splitting. SCAR knockouts, however, completely lose pseudopod splitting, moving instead with a single, slow-moving pseudopod with many blebs. Consequently the cells migrate much more slowly. Figure 3 Pseudopod extension caused by unphosphorylatable SCAR Both unphosphorylatable and phosphomimetic mutants partially rescued the speed of mutants, but exhibited contrasting defects in splitting. Cells expressing the unphosphorylatable SA mutant remained highly polarised and did not split pseudopods, but the behaviour was opposite to that of SCAR knockouts – the front pseudopod was unusually large, dominant and moved rapidly. Cells expressing the phosphomimetic SD mutant did split pseudopods, but in an irregular way – many of the new pseudopods were threadlike and small, and the regular pattern of splitting was lost leading to unpolarised and slowly-migrating cells. These results suggested an unexpected complexity in SCAR regulation. We therefore analyzed the cells’ pseudopod dynamics, revealing a key role for SCAR in pseudopod splitting and pseudopod extension. SCAR null cells rarely advance their leading edge with actin pseudopods. The majority of protrusion was by blebbing. Each bleb lasted less than a second, and new blebs were continuously generated, so kymographs from SCAR knockout cells have a stepped appearance. Wild type SCAR rescues normal pseudopod progression, giving kymographs with smooth runs interspersed with steps when the leading edge splits or stops moving. A similar analysis of SA-rescued cells revealed the opposite phenotype to the SCAR null. The leading edge of cells with unphosphorylatable SCAR progressed forwards like wild type cells, but with fewer blebs and pauses. This caused cells to move in a straight line, with fewer turns and a consistent direction. Kymographs showed smooth progression of the leading edge, at the same speed as with normal SCAR, bit with even rarer pauses. SCAR-SA cells are hyperpolarised because their leading pseudopods are large and dominant; splitting does not occur because existing pseudopods grow forwards rather than evolving outwards. Mutants in the first two serines yielded cells that were broadly similar to the fully unphosphorylatable SCAR-SA – pseudopods rarely split, and extended continually and for longer. Thus unphosphorylatable SCAR is if anything overactive. The phosphomimetic SCAR mutant gave a converse phenotype. While pseudopods were made more efficiently than in SCAR knockout cells, splitting occurred irregularly and often unusually frequently, but the resulting pseudopods rarely enlarged and steer the cell. Analysis using an under agar assay showed a combination of blebs and pseudopods, often in the same location – and lack of polarization as new pseudopods were not made at the front. Figure 4 Aberrant pseudopod extension caused by phosphomimetic SCAR Hyperaccumulation of unphosphorylatable SCAR In Dictyostelium, as in other rapidly-moving cells such as neutrophils, the SCAR complex is highly dynamic, and the proportion of the complex that is localised to the plasma membrane is small. To visualise the effect of mutations without prejudicing the results by tagging SCAR itself, we constructed cells containing a SCAR knockout and GFP-tagged HSPC300. This accurately revealed the transient localization of the SCAR complex to the pseudopod tip in cells expressing wild type SCAR. The unphosphorylatable SA mutant localised substantially more SCAR complex to the edge, and transients lasted longer. The SD mutant localised apparently normally. Quantitative analysis of movies confirmed that pseudopod accumulation of SCAR-SA was larger, each patch survived for longer, and patches were if anything made more frequently than wild type. The phosphomimetic SD mutant again showed a converse behaviour – patches lasted less time and were made at greater frequency. Figure 5 SCAR accumulation in mutants. To confirm that the large SCAR-SA accumulations represented activated SCAR, we cotransfected cells with mRFP-actin. Actin accumulated behind the SCAR, giving a striped appearance in the merged frames, confirming that SCAR drove the actin polymerization. Overall, these results indicate that phosphorylated SCAR can still be recruited to the edge, but for a short time and at a low level. SCAR dephosphorylation greatly increases its activity and accumulation. Degradation of unphosphorylatable SCAR Uncomplexed SCAR/WAVE in a range of species is unstable and removed, apparently by proteolysis. It is unclear whether or not this is a normal mechanism for removing activated SCAR/WAVE. Dictyostelium AX3 cells do not make SCAR-based pseudopods when growing axenically, but start doing so during multicellular development. We therefore examined the stability of SCAR mutants as cells developed and began to migrate. Normal and SD mutant SCARs remain at consistent levels throughout development. The unphosphorylatable SA mutant, however, declines substantially and continuously as cells migrate. To confirm that this was caused by breakdown, we treated cells with cycloheximide to block production of new SCAR. SA mutant SCAR levels dropped much faster than wild type under identical conditions. This shows the dephosphorylated, activated SCAR that has been used to make pseudopods is degraded, even when normally bound to its regulatory complex. Thus degradation is a physiological way of removing activated SCAR. Figure 6 Instability of SCAR mutants The basic domain and the mechanism of SCAR activation The A region of SCAR is strongly negatively charged. This suggests it interacts with a positively charged domain. Because SCAR is always found in a complex in vivo, we searched for positively charged domains in the sequences of all five members of the SCAR complex. The clearest such domain is the basic domain of SCAR itself. In the human SCAR/WAVE complex structure, the acidic domain is not resolved, but it lies next to the basic domain ; the complementary charges would make them interact strongly. Further, the basic region forms an α-helix with the positive residues on the same side, all facing the site of the acidic domain, and not facing outwards. This suggests that the SCAR acidic C-terminus, like that of WASP, is held inactive by an intramolecular interaction. Basal phosphorylation of the acidic region would strengthen this interaction, holding SCAR inactive, while dephosphorylation would make activation easier. We confirmed this by making a B-domain peptide, and testing its interaction with agarose-bound GST-WCA. GST-WCA bound more B-domain than GST alone, but phosphorylation substantially strengthened the interaction. Figure 7 Autoinhibition caused by phosphorylation-dependent interaction between basic and acidic motifs of complexed SCAR. To test whether a intramolecular interaction between B and A domains holds SCAR inactive, we examined whether changes to the basic domain mimic dephosphorylation of the acidic region. We mutated the basic residues predicted to face the acidic domain and expressed the resulting BN mutant in SCAR null cells. It partially rescued the cell size phenotype. Most literature asserts that the basic domain is needed for interactions with membrane PIP 2 or PIP 3, in which case the BN mutant would be inactive. However, we see the opposite. Cells expressing BN mutant SCAR resemble the unphosphorylatable SA mutant in hyperpolarisation and lack of splitting, rapid bleb-free extension of the leading edge, and hyperaccumulation of SCAR complex at the leading edge. Note that SCAR accumulation, though excessive, is always in the correct location. It is not mislocalized as is seen when dominant mutants of signalling proteins such as Rac1 are expressed. Thus the BN mutant is not misfolded or constitutively active, but hypersensitive, just like the unphosphorylatable SA mutant. The similarity of the two mutants further confirms that SCAR/WAVE, like WASP, is regulated by intramolecular autoinhibition between the acidic C-terminus and the central basic domain. Discussion Actin-driven pseudopod extension is a key driver of cell migration in all crawling eukaryotic cells. Actin is found in many structures, but the actin polymers in pseudopods are principally formed under the control of SCAR/WAVEs, though there may be a difference between small, Rac-independent pseudopods and larger, Rac-requiring ones. Our data suggest that SCAR phosphorylation is an important regulator of the amount of SCAR activation, and thus the initiation and growth of pseudopods. It is therefore an essential part of the control of cell movement. The acidic domain is basally phosphorylated, apparently on several sites, in Dictyostelium as in human cells. The combination of a number of acidic residues and several phosphates generates a strongly negatively charged region. Our data show that this region forms an intramolecular interaction with the basic domain, which opposes activation of SCAR by lipids and Rac1, increases the rate of inactivation after a stimulus, or both. Recent data indicate that positive feedback acting through the SCAR/WAVE complex is particularly important for the pattern of pseudopod generation during migration and chemotaxis. This provides a possible basis for the difference in the effects of SCAR phosphorylation on growth & endocytosis and pseudopod formation. If signals such as Rac activation directly cause actin polymerization during macropinocytosis, modulation of SCAR activity will have a limited effect – even attenuated actin polymerization will be sufficient to build a macropinosome of sorts. However, if pseudopod behaviour is also driven by positive feedback, relatively small changes in the efficiency of propagation will have large effects on pseudopod evolution. This would enable small changes in the rate of SCAR dephosphorylation to modulate cell polarity and the rate of splitting, as is seen during Dictyostelium growth or neutrophil activation. SCAR phosphorylation does not appear to control the position where SCAR is activated. The morphology of cells with either SA or BN mutations is excessively polarised, but the pseudopods look large rather than misshapen, and do not cover a disproportionate amount of the cell surface. Overall, therefore, we conclude that phosphorylation controls the extent rather than the initiation of SCAR activation. Rac is the best-understood upstream activator of the SCAR complex, through binding to the PIR121 subunit, with inositol lipids also thought to be important. It remains a mystery what happens when Rac binds to PIR121. However, it appears that Rac and inositides, together perhaps with other signals such as adhesion, control the start of new pseudopods, with SCAR phosphorylation controlling their eventual size and persistence. This implies that SCAR activation by Rac and dephosphorylation of SCAR are independent steps in the pseudopod cycle. Pocha et al. suggest that phosphorylation is needed for SCAR/WAVE2 activity, but their physiological analysis is limited by a number of issues. First, they were unable to remove or diminish endogenous SCAR/WAVE2 due to crossregulation with SCAR/WAVE1. Second, their assays for Arp2/3 activation were performed with isolated, GST-tagged WCA domains. However GST causes an artifactual activation, while physiological SCAR binds to Arp2/3 as part of a large multiprotein complex. Thirdly, the assays performed on living cells give subtle changes in the proportions of cells making ruffles after GFP-SCAR and mutants are overexpressed. These slight effects, against a background of wild type SCAR/WAVE2, are hard to interpret physiologically. This compares with the work we describe in which endogenous SCAR is replaced by physiologically normal levels of untagged mutant protein. Our data more closely resemble observations from SCAR/WAVE1 in human neurones. Several papers have shown that SCAR/WAVE1 is basally phosphorylated, and the phosphorylation level diminishes at the time when migration and neuronal pathfinding are activated. However this work describes a different phosphorylation site – in the polyproline domain, nearer the middle of the protein – that is phosphorylated by a different kinase. We speculate that this may be a SCAR/WAVE1-specific regulation that has evolved after the SCAR/WAVE genes duplicated in metazoa. Overall, we have shown that SCAR dephosphorylation is a key step in the regulation of actin polymerization during cell movement. This work opens up a large number of experimental avenues, in particular how dephosphorylation is regulated and which molecules are involved. Methods Cell culture and development Dictyostelium discoideum were grown in HL-5 medium at 22°C in Petri dishes. For vegetative growth curves, and cell diameter measurement, cells were shaken in flasks. Numbers and diameters of cells were measured using a CASY Model TT. For development, cells were washed, shaken for 2 hours at 1 × 10 7 /ml in DB, then treated with 100 nM cAMP every 6 minutes for 2 hours. To film development 10 7 cells were washed in KK2, then cells were seeded on 60 mm Petri dish covered with 1.5% agar in KK2 at 22°C. Streaming was observed by ×20 phase contrast, and recorded at 3 second intervals using a QImaging RETIGA EXi CCD camera controlled by MicroManager software. Plasmids and transformation For details of plasmid construction see supplementary methods Western Blotting 1 × 10 6 cells were lysed in 100 μl TNE buffer, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100) containing Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. Lysates included Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail Set II or were incubated with 20 U calf intestine phosphatase for 1 hour at 37°C. Proteins were then electrophoresed in 7.5% SDS-PAGE gels, then transferred to PVDF membranes and blocked in TBS/5% skim milk for 1 h, before incubation with rabbit anti-SCAR for 1h and HRP anti-rabbit for 30min. They were then washed 3x in TBS-Tween 20, and visualized using Immobilon HRP and CHEMI GENIUS bio imaging system. Equal sample loading was verified with SimplyBlue CBB staining solution. Isoelectric-point focusing 1 × 10 7 cells were harvested, lysed in 500μl boiling Lysis buffer, 2% SDS, 5% 2-mercaptoethanol) containing Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail Set II or incubated with 50 U CIP for 1 hour at 37°C. 20 μl of lysate was precipitated by acetone in -20°C overnight, resuspended in IEF sample buffer, fractionated by gel IEF containing 2% SERVALYT pH 2-11 ampholyte ), and transferred to PVDF membranes in 0.7% acetic acid. The membrane was then screened for SCAR as described above. Chemotaxis assays To observe migration on agar, 1 × 10 6 developed cells were seeded on a 35 mm glass-bottomed dish covered with a thin layer of DB/1.5% agar, observed using DIC at ×40 DIC, and recorded at 2s intervals with a QImaging RETIGA EXi CCD camera controlled by MicroManager software. cAMP under agar was measured as described. Kymographs were created from DIC time-lapse movies by using the “reslice” command in ImageJ. GST pull-down assay GST and GST- WCA fusions were induced in BL21 cells by 1 mM IPTG for 4 hrs at 30°C. Proteins were extracted by sonication, then purified on Glutathione-Sepharose beads. Where appropriate, beads were treated with 0.25 U CK2 in CK2 assay buffer at 30°C for 1 hr. CK2 treated or untreated beads were incubated with 3.5 μg B region peptide in binding buffer at 4°C for 1 hr. Binding peptide amount was calculated by measuring fluorescent peptide unbound in the supernatant. ​ Highlights SCAR/WAVE is constitutively phosphorylated at four sites in the acidic domain SCAR dephosphorylation is not essential, but greatly stimulates pseudopod growth Dephosphorylated SCAR is hyperactive and very unstable Complexed SCAR is regulated by intramolecular interaction between basic and acidic domains Supplementary Material Movie S1 Click here to view. Movie S2 Click here to view. Movie S3 Click here to view. Movie S4 Click here to view. Movie S5 Click here to view. Movie S6 Click here to view. Movie S7 Click here to view. Movie S8 Click here to view. Movie S9 Click here to view. Supplemental Experimental Procedures and Figures S1-S4 Click here to view. Acknowledgements We are very grateful to the Medical Research Council and Cancer Research UK for funding. We have been greatly assisted by Margaret O’Prey of the Beatson Advanced Imaging Resource, by David Sumpton with protein handling, and to Willy Bienvenut, David Sumpton and Sergio Lilla with proteomics. Footnotes Contributed by Author Contributions SU planned and performed the majority of experiments and drafted the paper AP initiated this work and developed assays for SCAR phosphorylation DV provided the fluorescent markers and helped acquire the fluorescence images and movies LM helped plan, discussed the work, and edited the paper NM planned, developed and performed mass spectrometry and assisted with protein methods RI planned the work, helped interpret the experiments and edited the paper. Article information Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 Jul 26. Published in final edited form as: Curr Biol. 2012 Apr 10; 22: 553–561. Published online 2012 Mar 1. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.02.020 PMCID: PMC4961229 EMSID: EMS55976 PMID: 22386315 Seiji Ura, Alice Y. Pollitt, * Douwe M. Veltman, Nicholas A. Morrice, Laura M. Machesky, and Robert H. Insall & Alice Y. Pollitt * Institute of Biomedical Research, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK Find articles by Alice Y. Pollitt Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK * Institute of Biomedical Research, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK & Corresponding author. ku.ca.alg.nostaeb@llasnI.R PMC Copyright notice The publisher's final edited version of this article is available free at Curr Biol 