 The second messenger molecule cAMP regulates the activation phase of the cAMP signaling pathway through high-affinity interactions with the cytosolic cAMP receptor, the protein kinase A regulatory subunit. Phosphodiesterases are enzymes responsible for catalyzing hydrolysis of cAMP to 5′ AMP. It was recently shown that PDEs interact with PKAR to initiate the termination phase of the cAMP signaling pathway. While the steps in the activation phase are well understood, steps in the termination pathway are unknown. Specifically, the binding and allosteric networks that regulate the dynamic interplay between PKAR, PDE, and cAMP are unclear. In this study, PKAR and PDE from Dictyostelium discoideum were used as a model system to monitor complex formation in the presence and absence of cAMP. Amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry was used to monitor slow conformational transitions in R D, using disordered regions as conformational probes. Our results reveal that R D regulates its interactions with cAMP and RegA at distinct loci by undergoing slow conformational transitions between two metastable states. In the presence of cAMP, R D and RegA form a stable ternary complex, while in the absence of cAMP they maintain transient interactions. RegA and cAMP each bind at orthogonal sites on R D with resultant contrasting effects on its dynamics through parallel allosteric relays at multiple important loci. R D thus serves as an integrative node in cAMP termination by coordinating multiple allosteric relays and governing the output signal response. Introduction Signaling pathways are exquisitely regulated by a complex interplay of reversible interactions with partner proteins, ligand cofactors, and posttranslational modifications. These multivalent interactions modulate the cell’s spatiotemporal recognition of and response to extracellular stimuli. Signaling pathways are also characterized by distinct activation and termination phases that govern the duration, intensity, and amplification of the signal as it is propagated through the cell. Signaling proteins are intrinsically dynamic and populate multiple conformational states in equilibrium and its ligands/partner proteins alter these conformational equilibria. Indeed, an overlay of protein dynamics is fundamental for bridging structure and function of signaling proteins and consequently for a molecular understanding of signal transduction. Reversible protein ligand and protein-protein interactions play a critical role in altering dynamic properties of signaling molecules. At a molecular level, signals mediated by specific ligands or partner proteins are propagated across the target protein from active sites to effector sites through allostery. This allosteric communication from one protein locus to another constitutes the basis of signaling proteins’ function. Consequently, signaling proteins have distinct loci for binding diverse ligands and partner proteins and these sites are allosterically coupled. An emerging challenge in protein chemistry lies in delineating binding interactions from long-range propagation of multivalent allosteric relays in signaling proteins. Amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry has emerged as a powerful tool for mapping allosteric communication in proteins. The method relies on tracking the acid- and base-catalyzed abstraction of protein backbone amides and replacement by different protons. The rate of amide exchange is dependent on solvent accessibility as well as H-bond propensities and strengths and provides an overview of protein dynamics. In addition to mapping allosteric changes in proteins, HDXMS also has been useful for mapping dynamics of transient interactions in ternary complexes of multiple proteins with ligands and for monitoring progression of enzyme reactions in solution. In this study, we set out to apply HDXMS to characterize protein-ligand interactions and map associated allosteric networks in the second messenger cyclic AMP /protein kinase A signaling pathway. In this pathway, a single protein functions as a cAMP receptor and interacts with two important effector proteins: the kinase and a phosphodiesterase. In this study we describe how this protein functions as an integrative node in the signaling pathway by responding allosterically in myriad ways to cAMP and two antagonistic effector proteins to modulate the output response. The second messenger 3′, 5′- cyclic adenosine monophosphate transduces the effects of external hormonal stimulation and mediates a myriad of intracellular responses. In Dictyostelium discoideum, cAMP is both a chemoattractant and intracellular signaling molecule. Its most profound role is in initiating important physiological changes associated with transformation from a unicellular to a multicellular state in response to starvation. One of the main targets of cAMP is cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase, also referred to as PKA, which consists of catalytic and regulatory subunits. In the absence of cAMP, PKA exists as an inactive complex of R- and C-subunits. cAMP binding to the holoenzyme induces conformational changes and facilitates the release of the active C-subunit. This constitutes the activation phase of the cAMP signaling pathway. PDEs, enzymes responsible for catalyzing hydrolysis of cAMP to 5′AMP, initiate the termination phase of the cAMP signaling pathway by forming direct interactions with the cyclic-nucleotide-binding pocket domains of PKA R-subunit and hydrolyzing the bound cAMP. The R-subunit of D. discoideum differs from its mammalian homologs in being monomeric, and lacks an N-terminal dimerization domain, but contains two canonical cyclic AMP binding sites in two distinct domains, CNB domains A and B. The CNB domains have a conserved fold with a cAMP binding site containing a characteristic motif for cAMP binding. The binding site forms a buried pocket shielding cAMP from the action of phosphodiesterases. Previous studies have shown that in R D, CNB:A binds to cAMP with high affinity, while cAMP binding to CNB:B has not been detected and assumed to be a low-affinity site, despite having all the motifs typical of high-affinity cAMP binding domains across PKA R-subunits. Figure 1 Dynamic modulators of PKA regulatory subunit in cAMP signaling pathway. The PKAR exhibits multiple end-point conformations in the course of the cAMP signaling pathway. Here PKAR is represented in cartoon form with CNB:A domain and CNB:B... R D is the primary receptor of cAMP and mediates multivalent interactions with the C-subunit and phosphodiesterases. The D. discoideum phosphodiesterase RegA, important in different stages of cell development, was shown to interact with PKA R-subunit and control PKA-mediated differentiation of prestalk and spore cells, and regulate encystation. We have earlier shown that the catalytic domain of RegA is sufficient for hydrolysis of cAMP tightly bound to the mammalian R-subunit. Distinct conformations of mammalian R-subunit have been captured by crystallography and NMR and the endpoint states have been denoted as B and H forms. These conformational transitions have been the focus of several studies to map the allosteric transitions in response to cAMP and C-subunit binding. There have been far fewer studies on how PDEs interact to hydrolyze cAMP bound to PKA R-subunit and initiate cAMP signal termination. Further, how signals in the cAMP signaling pathway converge and branch off from a target through alternate allosteric pathways is of enormous interest. R D is the primary cAMP receptor and a great model system for mapping interactions with ligand, cAMP, and partner proteins. This has been achieved using HDXMS, which allows monitoring cAMP through the activation and termination phases of the pathway by following backbone amide hydrogens as reporters across R D. In the course of following cAMP, we also describe binding and allosteric networks associated with signal termination in cAMP signaling mediated via R D -RegA C -cAMP interactions. Our results reveal how cAMP and the effector protein, RegA C, interact with R D at spatially distal sites, allosterically coupled to regulate the output response. We describe how PDEs access cAMP bound to the receptor, R-subunit, to mediate signal termination in cAMP signaling. We show that effects of cAMP binding and PDE interactions are transmitted through distinct, nonoverlapping allosteric relays. This underscores how the intracellular cAMP receptor, R D, functions as an integrative node by mediating multiple interactions with effector proteins, to regulate the output response. Materials and Methods Materials A plasmid encoding full-length R D with codon optimization for Escherichia coli expression was obtained from DNA2.0. Chemically competent E. coli BL21 bacterial strains were from Life Technologies. TALON Cobalt affinity resin for His-tag purification was from Clontech. LC/MS grade acetonitrile and water were from Fisher Scientific. Poroszyme immobilized pepsin cartridge was from Applied Biosystems ; deuterium oxide was from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories. All other reagents were research grade from Sigma-Aldrich. Protein expression and purification R D was first subcloned into pET28a plasmid and transformed into E. coli BL21 for bacterial expression and purification. Bacterial cell pellet was subject to sonication in lysis buffer for 20 min. Lysate was centrifuged at 17,000 × g for 30 min and supernatant was then incubated with Cobalt metal affinity chromatography resin for 1 h. R D was eluted in lysis buffer containing 300 mM imidazole. Eluate was subsequently subjected to size-exclusion chromatography on a Superdex S-200 column as a finishing step. Purity of the purified R D was confirmed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. We factor that cAMP in E. coli would bind R D during expression and this dissociates during size-exclusion chromatography to generate apo R D. GST-tagged catalytic domain of RegA was purified as previously described in Moorthy et al.. Briefly, GST-tagged RegA C was overexpressed in E. coli BL21 and purified using glutathione sepharose 4B resin-based affinity chromatography followed by size-exclusion chromatography. Isothermal titration calorimetry Isothermal titration calorimetry measurements were carried out to monitor the binding and determine the dissociation constant of cAMP and RegAc to apo R D protein using a VP-ITC MicroCalorimeter. The cell reservoir was filled with 1.8 mL of 10 μ M R D protein, reference cell with 1.8 mL of buffer and syringe with final volume ∼400 μ L of 200 μ M cAMP prepared in the same buffer. The binding reaction was started with first injection volume of 2 μ L followed by 39 sequential injections each of 4 μ L cAMP at intervals of 240 s and set to stirring speed of 350 rpm. Continuous measurement of heat change inside the cell allowed determination of enthalpy change during the process Δ H and the equilibrium association constant K A ∼1 μ M. Three independent titration experiments were carried out at 298 K with similar results and a representative ITC graph is depicted in Fig. S2 in the Supporting Material. Similar experiments were carried out for probing binding of RegA C to R D. Amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry Deuterium exchange experiments were first carried out on cAMP-free R D. To test effects of cAMP on R D dynamics, cAMP at final reaction concentration of 300 μ M, was added to apo R D. This high concentration of cAMP was used to fully saturate the CNB:A site and possibly the CNB:B site, which has been predicted to not bind at lower concentrations of cAMP. To capture dynamics of apo R D in a binary complex with RegA C, RegA C was complexed with apo R D in a 1:3 molar ratio of RegA C to R D. A ternary complex of R D, cAMP, and RegA C was obtained by complexing RegA C with apo R D in the presence of 300 μ M cAMP. In all conditions, complexation reaction was initiated simultaneously with the deuterium exchange reaction in the presence of deuterated buffer. Buffer for deuterium exchange reaction was prepared by vacuum evaporation of aqueous buffer until dry, which was subsequently reconstituted in 99.9% D 2 O. The deuterium exchange reaction was initiated by diluting the sample 10-fold in deuterated exchange buffer resulting in a final deuterium concentration of 90% in the deuterium labeling reaction. The deuterium-oxide-exchanged buffer was maintained at a final pH read of 7.5. Deuterium exchange reactions were carried out for the following times: 30 s, and 1, 5, 10, 30, 60, and 100 min. The exchange reaction was quenched by lowering the pH read of the reaction to 2.5, using 0.1% trifluoro acetic acid. Samples were injected onto a nano-UPLC HDX sample manager as described in Wales et al.. Online immobilized pepsin digestion and reverse phase liquid chromatography were carried out as previously described in Krishnamurthy et al.. Peptides separated from previous liquid chromatography were subsequently sprayed onto a SYNAPT G2-Si mass spectrometer acquiring in MS E mode. Continuous instrument calibration was carried out using Glu-fibrinogen peptide, according to manufacturer’s recommendations. Back-exchange factor for the system was found on average to be ∼30%, but in this study only the uncorrected raw values are reported. Peptide identification and mass spectral data analysis Peptides from MS E spectra of undeuterated samples were identified using PROTEIN LYNX GLOBAL SERVER, Ver. 3.0. Deuterium exchange data was quantified by DYNAMX software. The reported values are an average of three independent hydrogen/deuterium exchange experiments. Peptides showing EX1 kinetics of amide exchange were additionally analyzed using GRAPHPAD PRISM 6.0. The bimodal deconvolutions were carried out by fitting the curves to a sum of Gaussian equation. Amplitudes and centroid values for each deconvoluted envelope are reported in Table S2. Results R D CNB:B domain exhibits distinct HDX bimodal spectra consistent with local unfolding It has been previously shown that the mammalian PKA R-subunit is an intrinsically dynamic protein that forms high-affinity complexes with cAMP, and cAMP-mediated allostery in the R-subunit has been explained by conformational selection. PKA is a highly conserved protein widely found in all eukaryotes, and we hypothesized that R D from D. discoideum with ∼51% sequence homology with mammalian PKA regulatory domain isoform I α would exhibit similar dynamic properties to its mammalian homolog. To test this, we first set out to characterize protein dynamics of apo R D. HDXMS experiments of apo R D were carried out as described in the Materials and Methods and a total of 24 peptides was identified and analyzed, corresponding to ∼71% of the primary sequence of R D. The overall dynamic profile of R D is provided in a relative exchange plot. A relative exchange plot is a plot of the ratio of average deuterons exchanged to the total number of exchangeable amides available for each peptide. Regions of the protein that are dynamic in nature have higher relative deuterium uptake values. Figure 2 Apo R D is a dynamic protein with regions that undergo slow structural transitions/local unfolding. The relative deuterium uptake value for each... Closer examination of the mass spectral envelopes of all peptides revealed that three regions showed a bimodal distribution of mass spectra. Bimodal distributions are characterized by the presence of multiple spectral envelopes within the same mass spectrum. The most common reason for the presence of bimodal spectra in HDXMS experiments is attributed to the EX1 deuterium exchange regime. EX1 kinetics are rarely seen in soluble proteins at physiological conditions and are indicative of local unfolding events coupled to slow conformational changes. They also report on the dynamic interconversion between alternate population states of the protein. EX1 kinetics can serve as conformational probes and provide important insights into protein dynamics and function. Mass spectra from shorter deuterium exchange labeling time experiments exhibited bimodal characteristics, but as labeling time increased, the bimodality of the spectrum decreased and shifted toward a binomial spectrum. These phenomena are typical of EX1 kinetics in HDXMS experiments. The peptides exhibiting bimodal distribution were found to span loci important for R D function, mainly the putative C-helix and the conserved arginine containing the CNB region in domain B. Deconvolution of the bimodal spectral envelopes confirmed EX1 kinetics, and the interpretation of these results is described in a later section. A peptide spanning residues 191–201 is binomial in nature, thus by subtractive analysis we can localize the region showing bimodal distribution to the residues 171–190. To better visualize these results, the results were mapped onto the three-dimensional model of R D. A structural model for R D was generated using the structure of a close homolog, PKA RI α from Bos taurus using SWISS-MODELER. Figure 6 Deconvolution of EX1 deuterium exchange kinetics for a CNB:B domain peptide. Stacked three-dimensional graphs represent the distribution of the bimodal kinetics of the R D in its different conditions. apo R D ; R D with... HDX bimodal signatures as conformational probes to monitor perturbations in protein dynamics Our results indicated at least three distinct loci showing bimodal kinetics of deuterium exchange and therefore highlighting these sites as undergoing slow conformational transitions in apo R D. We next examined the effects of cAMP on the overall dynamics of R D, including the above loci by HDXMS analysis of R D, in the presence of 300 μ M cAMP. Like other regulatory subunits from homologous protein kinases, the R D CNB:A site has been shown to have a high affinity for cAMP with a dissociation constant in nanomolar range, K D = ∼3 nM. On the other hand, the binding affinity of cAMP at the CNB:B site, measured using isothermal titration calorimetry, was found to be K D ∼1 μ M. Knowledge of the binding constants guided concentrations of cAMP used in the HDXMS experiments to ensure ligand saturation of the cAMP binding pocket at both the high-affinity CNB:A and the low-affinity CNB:B domains in the HDXMS experiments. Results from cAMP-bound R D were compared with apo R D and revealed three regions showing significant differences in deuterium exchange. A difference plot depicting differences between apo R D and R D :cAMP is shown in Fig. 3 A. This plot shows the average difference between the two states for each peptide and deuterium labeling time. The average error between replicate runs for each peptide was between 0.1 and 0.2 Da in our experimental setup, and a difference of 0.5 Da or more is considered significant. Two of the three regions showed significant decreases in deuterium exchange and are located within the cAMP binding pockets of CNB:A and CNB:B, respectively. A third region spanning residues 287–302 also showed significant differences at shorter deuterium labeling times, but at increased labeling times the difference between apo R D and R D :cAMP were negligible. This region is distal to both cAMP binding pockets and represents an allosteric effect upon ligand binding. We also observed increased deuterium exchange in a peptide spanning residues 31–50, which flanks the putative PKAC binding site. These results are mapped onto the modeled structure of R D in Fig. 3 B. Representative mass spectra for peptides in CNB:A and CNB:B are shown in Fig. 3 C. Figure 3 Effects of cAMP binding on R D dynamics. Difference plot, plotting absolute difference in deuterons between apo R D and R D :cAMP for each pepsin fragment peptide listed from the N- to C-terminus. Points in the negative scale. This bimodal distribution is seen for the entire time course of the deuterium-labeling experiment. Interestingly, the centroid of the higher-exchanging population did not show any shifts, but the centroid of the lower-exchanging population shifted to the right with increasing labeling time. The spectra for the lower-exchanging species are representative of EX2 deuterium exchange kinetics seen in stably folded regions. In comparison, apo R D showed bimodal distributions at shorter labeling times and binomial distribution after 10-min deuterium labeling times. Interestingly, the interdomain linker with its characteristic bimodal spectra did not show any significant differences upon cAMP binding. R D and RegA C form a stable ternary complex with cAMP In a previous study, we monitored RegA C mediated cAMP dissociation in mammalian R-subunit prebound to a nonhydrolyzable cAMP analog by HDXMS and observed a short-lived ternary complex of R D :RegA C :Sp-cAMPS. The main goal of this study was to characterize the dynamics of the ternary complex in greater detail to gain important insights into how the cAMP signal termination pathway is initiated. R D was added at a threefold molar excess to RegA C in the presence of 300 μ M cAMP to prime formation of the termination complex. Simultaneous addition of the two proteins with cAMP in the deuterium labeling reaction allowed us to monitor the time-course dependent kinetics/dynamics as the reaction progresses, eventually leading to ternary complex formation. The rationale behind using excess R D was to channel all of the RegA C toward complex formation and to obviate any hydrolysis of cAMP by unbound RegA C in the experiment. HDXMS results from the R D :RegA C complex in the presence of cAMP provide conclusive evidence for a stable ternary complex at the same loci. Importantly, regions in CNB:B of R D showed decreased exchange for the entire time course of the experiment in the ternary complex. HDXMS results, comparing the ternary complex with R D :cAMP, are summarized in Fig. 4 A in a difference plot. It was also seen that the interdomain linker showed increased exchange. Interestingly, we also observed decreased deuterium exchange at cAMP binding pocket at domain A in the ternary complex, at longer labeling times. Figure 4 Mapping the R D :RegA C :cAMP ternary complex by HDXMS. Difference plot, plotting absolute difference in deuterons between R D :cAMP and the R D :cAMP:RegA C ternary complex for each pepsin fragment peptide listed from the N- to C-terminus.... The results from the HDXMS experiment were mapped onto the modeled structure of R D in Fig. 4 B. Close examination of the structure showed that the interaction interface can be localized to the cAMP binding pocket of CNB:B. Increased dynamics in the C-helix suggests a mode for allosteric communication between the two cAMP binding pockets. Further confirmation of the stable nature of the ternary complex came from observing the bimodal spectra at residues 266–279. Surprisingly, bimodality was almost negligible, with the entire population shifting to the lower-exchanging, ordered conformation. Deuterium exchange plots also depict the large differences in deuterium exchange between the R D :cAMP and ternary complex. RegA C forms a transient complex with R D in the absence of cAMP Previously we had shown that the mammalian PKA regulatory subunit -PDE interaction interface between the cAMP binding pocket of mammalian PKAR and the catalytic pocket of PDE is indicative of active site coupling. While these complexes represent stable endpoint complexes, we set out to monitor the dynamics of the R D -RegA C complex by HDXMS experiments with R D at a threefold molar excess to RegA C in the absence of excess cAMP. ITC experiments revealed no detectable binding between RegA C and apo R D at the experimental conditions, suggesting that the K D for the R D -RegA C complex to be weaker than 1 μ M. Importantly, complex formation was initiated simultaneously with the deuterium exchange reaction to better follow steps in complex formation as well as dissociation. HDXMS results from the binary complex were compared with apo R D and are presented as a difference plot in Fig. 5 A. Figure 5 Mapping transient R D :RegA C interactions by HDXMS. Difference plot, plotting absolute difference in deuterons between apo R D and R D :RegA C binary complex for each pepsin fragment peptide listed from the N- to C-terminus. Points in... Most regions of R D showed increased deuterium exchange in the presence of RegA C, implying an overall increase in dynamics of R D in the binary complex. We observed decreased deuterium exchange for many regions in R D domain B for 30 s and 1-min labeling times, but interestingly, this trend is inversed as labeling time increases, with the same regions showing increased dynamics. These results are consistent with the formation of a R D -PDE complex with the interaction interface at R D CNB:B. With increasing labeling time, dissociation of the complex occurs, leading to deuterium exchange even at the interaction interface. While this should eventually result in no differences in deuterium exchange between the apo state and binary complex state, we see increased deuterium exchange at most loci of the CNB-B in the binary complex. Time-dependent differences in deuterium exchange were also observed in contiguous peptides spanning residues 14–52 and 31–50, which showed increased dynamics with increasing reaction time. We can gain more detailed insights into complex formation and dissociation by using the bimodal spectra as conformational probes, to monitor the degree of disorder in residues 266–279. While ligand binding did not result in a significant ordering of structure in this region, RegA C binding results in significant ordering in early stages of the reaction. As the reaction progressed, the degree of disorder increased and by the end of the reaction, the peptide is completely deuterated, suggesting complete disorder in this region. This inversion is better visualized in deuterium uptake plots. We next probed conformational changes associated with complex formation at CNB:A. The bimodal spectra at the interdomain linker serve as conformational probes to monitor interconversion of various short-lived conformations of the interdomain linker. As described in the previous section, cAMP binding had no significant effects at the interdomain linker, but RegA C binding resulted in increased disorder in the linker. We can infer this increased disorder from mass spectral envelopes of peptides from this region. When comparing mass spectra for apo R D with R D :RegA C binary complex, we see the apo spectra showed greater bimodality indicative of residual structure. Upon RegA C binding, this residual structure is eliminated and we observe a binomial distribution corresponding to increased dynamics. Deuterium exchange plots show that this increased dynamics is observed for the entire time course of the experiment. These results indicate that RegA C binds to R D at CNB:B and causes ordering in R D domain B while simultaneously inducing long-range conformational changes in domain A as perceived by increased dynamics in domain A. Ordering in CNB:B is transient, and with increases in reaction time, we observed increased overall dynamics across most regions of R D, providing evidence for the transient nature of the R D :RegA C interaction in the absence of cAMP. While cAMP binding showed local effects in deuterium exchange at the cAMP binding pocket, RegA C binding has a proteinwide effect, providing a case for RegA C -mediated allosteric effects on R D. Deconvolution and quantitation of EX1 kinetics at cAMP binding pocket of CNB:B EX1 kinetics at the cAMP binding pocket of CNB:B were quantitated by deconvolution of the bimodal spectra to obtain centroid and amplitude values for the low-exchanging and high-exchanging envelopes. The key parameters in quantitating EX1 kinetics data are the amplitude ratios between the envelopes, centroids of each envelope, and the changes with respect to time. The quantitated data are summarized in Fig. 6. In apo R D, the centroid of the lower-exchanging envelope shifts with time while the higher-exchanging envelope stays constant. Upon addition of cAMP, it is seen that the centroids of both the lower- and higher-exchanging populations stay constant with time. In the R D :RegA C binary complex, it is once again seen that the centroid of the lower-exchanging population shifts with time. In the binary complex, the amplitude ratio shows an inversion with time with lower-exchanging population predominating at earlier time points and the higher-exchanging population predominating at higher time points. R D :RegA C :cAMP ternary complex data shows that the lower-exchanging population predominates through the entire time course and the centroids stay constant with time. These results highlight the role of cAMP in stabilizing conformations and preventing interchange between the different conformations of R D. Discussion In this study we set out to monitor steps in the cAMP signal termination pathway by probing the dynamic interplay between phosphodiesterases and the regulatory subunit of PKA. We have used HDXMS as a tool to study complex formation and dissociation by monitoring protein dynamics as a function of reaction time. These results build on previous work mapping PDE-R-subunit interactions with evidence for substrate channeling in the PKA R-subunit-PDE signaling complex. Importantly, these results also give key insights into PDE-mediated allosteric regulation in cAMP signal termination. While this work was carried out with proteins from a lower eukaryote, D. discoideum, the broad conservation of the components in the cAMP signaling pathway suggests that these results provide a universal model for the various steps in cAMP signal termination pathway. Steps in the PDE-mediated cAMP signal termination pathway Our previous work has proposed active site coupling and substrate channeling as a mode for signal termination, whereby PDEs interact with the active site of R D and hydrolyze cAMP bound to the receptor. Here we have deciphered how complex formation and dissociation occurs in the various stages of the cAMP signal termination pathway. After cAMP-mediated activation of the PKA, the high local concentrations of cAMP would prevent reassociation of the PKA holoenzyme. Thus signal termination would occur only when cAMP is depleted by the action of phosphodiesterases. We have shown here that, in the presence of high concentrations of cAMP, R D and RegA C form a stable ternary complex at CNB:B of R D, which also causes increased exchange at important loci in CNB:A. This is further corroborated by deconvolution analysis of EX1 kinetics observed for a peptide spanning residues 266–279 in CNB:B domain. The envelope distribution in this peptide is distinct for the ternary complex and is not merely a sum of profiles seen for the R D :RegA C and R D :cAMP states. This is inferred from the greatly diminished profile for the higher-exchanging envelope seen in this condition, compared to the R D :RegA C and R D :cAMP states. This provides important evidence for formation of a stable ternary complex in cAMP signal termination and warrants further characterization. Formation of the ternary complex lends itself to the substrate-channeling model for coordinated cAMP hydrolysis proposed earlier. Figure 7 Steps in PDE-mediated cAMP signal termination pathway. cAMP binding at CNB:A of R D results in an allosteric relay that stabilizes structural transitions in CNB:B. This presents an interaction interface... The dynamic loci spanning α :C helix and CNBs A and B are involved in allosteric regulation of R D, and suggest a role for RegA C in allosterically modulating R D function. In a cAMP-depleted state, the complex at CNB:B of R D is transient in nature, but CNB:A exhibits all the allosteric effects observed in the ternary complex. Importantly, increased dynamics is seen at the N-terminal PKAC binding motif of R D. The dynamics of the PKA binding motif has been shown to play a critical role in tuning PKAC interactions. NMR has provided the most detailed insights into the role of the dynamic linkers that connect CNB:A and CNB:B domains and have been implicated in both cAMP cooperativity and PKA activation. The α :B-C helical segment serves as more than a passive covalent linker and functions to allosterically respond to cAMP binding to the PBC regions in CNBs A and B. Our results indicate that cAMP and RegA C modulate the dynamics of R D via parallel allosteric pathways. These results together suggest that in the presence of a large pool of cAMP, the RegA C and R D stay associated and function as a stable catalytic multiprotein complex, whereby cAMP that binds to R D is channeled to the PDE’s active site. We predict that this complex would stay stably bound until all cAMP is depleted, suggesting a role for substrate channeling in cAMP signal termination. After depletion of pools of cAMP, the only cAMP molecules left in the system are those associated with R D receptors. We hypothesize that, without cAMP to stabilize the complex, the PDE forms transient complexes with all R D molecules in the vicinity. In the process, the PDE dissociates and hydrolyzes all bound cAMP, thereby ensuring signal resetting. Allosteric effects in R D, particularly at the PKAC binding motif, suggest that the PDE is priming R D to reassociate with PKAC to terminate the cAMP signaling pathway. This provides a model for how the cAMP signaling pathway can rapidly reset itself to respond to subsequent stimuli. This also provides a model for how the pathway responds to fluxes of cAMP rather than steady-state levels. Allosteric networks in R D ’s role as integrative node in cAMP signaling HDXMS studies of cAMP-free R D showed that many regions of the proteins showed a bimodal distribution of mass spectra, specifically the cAMP-binding pocket at CNB:B showed significant bimodal characteristics. Bimodal distributions are indicative of local unfolding/slow structural transitions, while binomial distributions are representative of folded states. Local unfolding at the cAMP binding pocket provides a structural explanation for the proposed low cAMP affinity at the CNB:B cAMP binding pocket. Ligand binding to dynamic proteins is known to shift the equilibrium of a protein from an inactive conformation to an active conformation. These effects are more prominent for proteins with disordered regions or in a state of constant structural transitions, with ligand binding causing large-scale ordering in protein structure. Thus it was interesting to observe that cAMP did not cause significant ordering at CNB-B, as evidenced from the bimodal nature of the mass spectra. By closely monitoring time-dependent changes in the bimodality of the spectra, it is possible to gain insights into the rate at which structural transitions occur. In apo R D, the transition from predominantly bimodal to predominantly binomial spectra occurs within 5 min of deuterium exchange reaction. In the cAMP-bound form, although bimodal spectra are observed, the relative ratio of the lower-exchanging and higher-exchanging populations do not change with labeling time. This implies that cAMP binding at CNB:A results in a major decrease in the rate of the structural transitions at CNB:B, without causing significant ordering at the binding pocket. The interdomain linker C-helix undergoes drastic conformational changes in mammalian R D between the cAMP-bound conformation and the PKAC-bound conformation. This helix serves as an important locus for allosteric communication between the two cAMP binding domains. In R D, the interdomain linker region also shows significant local unfolding, but cAMP binding does not have any effect at this loci. These results show cAMP-mediated effects localized mainly to the binding pockets with distinct allosteric communication relays connecting CNB:A to CNB:B. PDE-mediated effects on R D are in contrast to cAMP, with RegA C influencing R D protein dynamics at many important loci. Importantly, RegA C causes stabilization of the cAMP binding pocket at CNB:B, as seen from reduced bimodality in spectra in the binary and ternary complex. Furthermore, RegA C also causes long-range conformational changes that lead to increased dynamics in the interdomain linker of R D. Dynamics of R D play an important in the different stages of the cAMP signaling pathway. The R-subunit has been shown to allosterically respond to both C-subunit binding as well as cAMP. These highlight the importance of allostery in the R-subunit for coordinating the activation phase and proceed primarily through CNB:A. Our results reported here indicate the importance of CNB:B in binding PDEs and this interaction is then allosterically coupled to CNB:A through relays that are independent from that mediated by cAMP and the C-subunit. CNB:B domain of R D from D. discoideum is distinct as it has a very low affinity for cAMP compared to the mammalian homologs. Despite this low affinity, our results highlight its importance as a dynamic node for PDE action. This underscores the importance of R-subunits in serving as integrative nodes by coordinating multiple allosteric relays that ultimately govern the output response in both activation and termination phases of the cAMP signalosome. Author Contributions S.K. and N.K.T. designed and performed the experiments; S.K., N.K.T., A.C., and G.S.A. analyzed and interpreted data; and all four authors wrote the article. 