 Cooperators who pay a cost to produce publically-available benefits can be exploited by cheaters who do not contribute fairly. How might cooperation persist against cheaters? Two classes of mechanisms are known to promote cooperation: 'partner choice', where a cooperator preferentially interacts with cooperative over cheating partners; and 'partner fidelity feedback', where repeated interactions between individuals ensure that cheaters suffer as their cooperative partners languish. However when both mechanisms can act, differentiating them has generated controversy. Here, I resolve this controversy by noting that selection can operate on organismal and sub-organismal 'entities' such that partner fidelity feedback at sub-organismal level can appear as partner choice at organismal level. I also show that cooperation between multicellular eukaryotes and mitochondria is promoted by partner fidelity feedback and partner choice between sub-organismal entities, in addition to being promoted by partner fidelity feedback between hosts and symbionts, as was previously known. DOI: Research Organism: Dictyostelium, <i>D. melanogaster</i>, <i>E. coli</i>, Mouse, <i>S. cerevisiae</i> Introduction Cooperation: why is it important and how can it persist? Cooperation is wide-spread. Cooperation is thought to drive major evolutionary transitions such as the emergence of eukaryotes and multicellularity. Cooperation between pathogenic microbes can worsen microbial infection. Cooperation between cells in tumor microenvironment can hasten cancer progression. In industrial fermentation, we strive to keep microbes in a cooperative state, and exploit inter-species cooperation to increase product yield. Thus, understanding cooperation has broad implications in basic and applied biology. Cooperation poses an evolutionary puzzle. A cooperator pays a cost to help other individuals. If other individuals cooperate by reciprocating, then the original cooperator may enjoy a net gain. However, other individuals are better off not reciprocating, in which case, the original cooperator will suffer a net loss. How might cooperation evolve and persist despite the incentive to cheat? To state more formally, let us consider a community of interacting individuals. A focal cooperator pays a net fitness cost to generate benefits that can be shared or exchanged with partners. Partners may belong to the same species as the focal cooperator or a different species. Partners may cooperate by reciprocating to the focal cooperator a similar benefit or a different costly benefit, or cheat by not reciprocating. When cooperative and cheating partners share equal access to the focal cooperator, under certain circumstances cheating partners will always be more fit than cooperative partners. In this case, cooperation may persist only if the community is partitioned into interaction groups that are sufficiently variable in cooperator frequency. This way, since cooperator-dominated groups will produce more cooperative benefits than cheater-dominated groups, individuals in cooperator-dominated groups will reproduce more than individuals in cheater-dominated groups. Consequently, cooperator frequency can increase in a community despite decreasing in each group. Figure 1. Examples of cooperation, cheating, partner choice, and partner fidelity feedback. Figure 2. Variability in group cooperator frequency promotes cooperation. Current definitions of partner choice and partner fidelity feedback Identifying orthogonal mechanisms that independently promote cooperation will help us understand contributions from different sources. This will in turn move us closer toward predicting the persistence of cooperation in a natural or an industrial system. Several conceptual frameworks have attempted to classify pro-cooperation mechanisms. Unlike most frameworks which focus on kin cooperation, the framework by Sachs et al. considers both kin and mutualistic cooperation. It classifies pro-cooperation mechanisms known under a plethora of names to either 'partner choice ' or 'partner fidelity feedback '. In PC, a focal cooperator 'recognizes' and 'chooses' cooperative instead of cheating partners to interact with. Choice can occur before or after interacting with partners. Archetti et al. has broadened PC to include 'screening' where a focal individual displays a single fixed response, but this response favors cooperative over cheating partners. Thus, PC causes cooperator frequency to vary among groups as a focal cooperator favors cooperative over cheating partners during or after the formation of interaction groups. This leaves cheating partners isolated in groups devoid of cooperators. Figure 3. Revised definitions of PC and PFF. In PFF, individuals are "associated for an extended series of exchanges that last long enough that a feedback operates". That is, during repeated interactions, an individual who does not help its cooperative partner will eventually suffer because its cooperative partner suffers or even dies. In PFF, high inter-group variability in cooperator frequency, which is required for promoting cooperation, can be achieved via population bottlenecks. For example in kin cooperation, interaction groups originating from single individuals will comprise the founder and its progenies, thus exhibiting a cooperator frequency of either 1 or 0 depending on whether the founder is a cooperator or a cheater. Population bottlenecks can be realized through range expansion of a few individuals to new locations, population crashes caused by cheaters, and selection for rare adaptive mutants. Sachs et al framework is compatible with or simplifies other conceptual frameworks. For example in kin cooperation, Hamilton’s “'kin discrimination' and 'viscous population' would correspond to PC and PFF, respectively. To summarize current knowledge, PC promotes cooperation through 'active' recognition/screening by a focal individual. In contrast, PFF promotes cooperation through repeated interactions among group members in groups where cooperator frequencies vary significantly due to stochasticity. Ambiguities associated with current interpretations of PFF and PC What differentiates PC and PFF? Sachs et al. pointed out that unlike PFF, PC does not require repeated interactions between individuals. This is certainly true. However, PC can lead to PFF, thus blurring the distinction between PC and PFF. Sachs et al. and other further suggested that unlike PC, PFF is 'automatic', 'passive', and 'does not require recognition or conditional response'. However, definitions of these terms are unclear. For example, a biochemist might interpret 'passive' as not requiring ATP, while a geneticist might interpret 'passive' as not requiring genes. To further illustrate this problem, let’s examine PFF acting alone in the absence of PC in a community of engineered yeast strains. In this community, adenine-requiring cooperators release lysine while lysine-requiring partners cooperate by reciprocating adenine or cheat by not reciprocating adenine. Supplying metabolites is costly. PC does not operate here: lysine released from a focal cell is available to both and. In a spatially-structured environment without adenine or lysine supplements, and physically mix and grow to form tall 'hills' while cheating segregate to 'foothills' and fail to grow tall. Consistent with this being PFF, disruption of repeated interactions via frequent mixing favors cheater over cooperator. Furthermore, population bottleneck during spatial range expansion, which presumably increases variability in cooperator frequency across different locations, favors cooperator. However one could argue, albeit somewhat absurdly, that this PFF relies on the fact that cells can 'recognize' metabolites from partners via permeases and mount 'conditional responses'. And this process is not 'passive' either, because cell growth requires energy and numerous genes. Difficulties in distinguishing PFF and PC can lead to controversy, especially when interactions occur in a spatially-structured environment where both PFF and PC can operate. In fact, mutualisms such as those between fig trees and fig wasps, between yuccas and yucca moths, and between legumes and rhizobia have been thought to be stabilized by PC by some authors and PFF by other. For example, in yucca-yucca moth mutualisms, a yucca selectively aborts flowers dominated by cheating pollinator offspring. The PC camp argues that a plant partitions its resource into separate flowers, and 'decides' whether a flower has enough cheating pollinators to be aborted. The PFF camp counters that flower abortion is not PC, but rather the fitness consequence of being damaged by cheating pollinators during excessive oviposition, since experimentally-inflicted damages also trigger flower abortion. This controversy has led to the proposal of an alternative criterion for distinguishing PFF and PC: If an individual’s response is specific to the cheating behavior of a partner, then PC operates; if the response is toward general stress, then PFF operates. However, this alternative criterion can also encounter difficulties. Suppose that PC initially did not exist. It would seem reasonable that an evolved response to cheater-specific signals should be channeled to preexisting stress-response pathways which are already in place to facilitate survival. That is, flower abortion in response to physical damages does not preclude the possibility that the same flower abortion pathway can also be activated by cheater-specific signals. Thus, a clear criterion to differentiate PFF and PC is, to date, lacking. Defining PC and PFF in terms of 'entities' In hierarchically-organized biological systems, interactions and selections can occur at multiple levels. The controversy above arises from attempting to compress a multi-level process into a single-level process. If instead we consider 'entities' at multiple levels and allow PC and PFF to act on these entities, then this controversy is resolved. Definition of entity A biological entity is a biological structure with a boundary such that the birth, or growth, or survival, or death of an entity is separable from that of other similar entities due to chemical or physical coupling within an entity and the lack of equivalent coupling between entities. An organism such as a yucca is an entity, because different parts of the yucca are coupled not only physically but also chemically, and because equivalent intra-yucca coupling does not exist between yuccas. Consequently, the birth, or growth, or survival, or death of a yucca can be separated from other similar entities. Ascending above organism, an entity can be a collection of organisms. For example, a yucca and its internal moth offspring together can be considered an entity. This is because moth offspring depend on host yucca for survival, and this dependency does not extend to another yucca. The collection of moth offspring inside a yucca is also an entity, because the survival of these moth offspring are coupled through the survival of their shared host yucca, and such coupling does not exist with moth offspring in another yucca. Similarly, an ant colony where the task of maintaining the colony is divided among different castes is also an entity. In contrast, a collection of trees in a forest of similar trees does not constitute an entity, because coupling within a collection extends to between collections. Descending below organism, an entity can also be an organismal part. For example, a yucca flower is an entity because it can be aborted independently of other flowers. Similarly, a yucca flower and its internal moth offspring together can be considered an entity, and the collection of moth offspring inside a yucca flower can also be considered an entity. Cells or gametes are entities in a multicellular organism, because they can divide and/or die independently of other similar entities. Similarly, mitochondria are entities in a cell, and mitochondrial genomes are independently replicating entities in a mitochondrion. Thus, an entity can contain smaller entities which contain even smaller entities which contain even smaller entities, reflecting the hierarchical organization of multicellular organisms. Revised definition of PC PC requires that a focal cooperative entity can direct more cooperative benefits to cooperative over cheating partner entities despite their spatial equivalence. To a focal entity, partner entities are spatially-equivalent if the focal entity would have interacted with partner entities equally had they been identical. For example, partner entities of equal distance to a focal entity can be spatially-equivalent, so are partner entities in a well-mixed environment. As discussed earlier, PC may be achieved through conditional response of the focal entity or screening by the focal entity. I emphasize that PC must occur between a focal cooperative entity and partner entities. Otherwise, PFF could be mis-interpreted as PC. In essence, my definition of PC can serve as a definition for terms such as 'active' or 'recognition'. Revised definition of PFF Let us now consider potential mechanisms that promote cooperation when PC does not exist or does not operate fully to exclude all cheaters. One mechanism orthogonal to PC is PFF. PFF requires the formation of interaction groups that vary significantly in cooperator frequency due to stochasticity and that last long enough so that cooperators benefit from their cooperative acts. PFF can operate within a population of entities or between populations of entities. As an example of PFF, let’s consider 'proportional tit for tat ', a game theory strategy. In pTFT, the focal individual starts cooperating and subsequently cooperates with a probability equal to the fraction of cooperative partners from the previous round of interactions. PC does not operate in pTFT, since the focal individual does not differentiate cooperative versus cheating partners in the same interaction group. Indeed, for pTFT to survive cheaters, both requirements of PFF must be satisfied: repeated interactions in groups and large variation in the frequency of pTFT across groups. PC and PFF can act synergistically, an idea compatible with existing mathematical framework and can be found in the anti-competition cooperation among bacteria. Experimental tests of PC and PFF The revised definition of PC leads to a conceptually simple experimental test. One can place partner entities of varying cooperative qualities at the same distance to the focal entity or together in a well-mixed environment. One can then test whether the focal entity preferentially directs benefit to the cooperative instead of cheating partner entity. If so, then PC operates. To experimentally demonstrate the contribution of PFF in promoting cooperation, one will need to compare cooperator frequency when both PFF and PC are operative with when only PC is operative. Such an example is provided in Figure 3D. However, this experiment is sometimes not possible to do. For example, if PC also relies on a spatially-structured environment, then a well-mixed environment will destroy both PFF and PC. In this case, one can compare cooperator frequency when PFF acts alone with when neither PFF nor PC is operative. Ideally, one would quantify processes involved in PC and PFF, and mathematically model how they contribute to cooperator survival. I illustrate how to do so using the bacterial anti-competition cooperation as an example. If predictions on cooperator frequency match experimental observations without 'tweaking' experimentally-measured model parameters, then there is no need to invoke additional pro-cooperation mechanisms. Otherwise, we will need to look deeper into potential causes of model-experiment mismatch. Revisiting yucca-yucca moth cooperation We now return to the cooperation between yuccas and yucca moths. Selection against cheating pollinators can occur via PC between a focal yucca and its internal pollinator offspring. This is because despite the spatial equivalence of pollinator offspring, the focal yucca can selectively abort flowers dominated by cheating pollinator offspring. However, we can also view this as PFF between yucca flowers and pollinator offspring. Note that since a focal flower can not discriminate its internal, spatially-equivalent pollinator offspring, PC does not operate here. Instead, PFF between flowers and pollinator offspring requires the spatially-structured environment defined by flowers. In summary, a single mechanism can be viewed as PC between a focal yucca and its internal pollinator offspring and as PFF between yucca flowers and pollinator offspring. Even though Sachs et al. and Weyl et al. respectively classify this cooperation as being stabilized by PC and PFF, my revised definition suggests that both are correct depending on entities under consideration. Thus, to understand and potentially predict how persistent cooperation is, we will need to consider entities at all relevant levels. Between entities at given levels, we should be mindful that PC and PFF may independently promote cooperation. At the same time, since PFF at lower levels can appear as PC at higher levels, we should avoid double-counting. PFF and PC in mitochondrion-eukaryote mutualistic cooperation I will use the mutualistic cooperation between multicellular eukaryotes and mitochondria as an example to illustrate PFF and PC at various levels. A cooperative mitochondrial genome harbors genes that are necessary for the host eukaryote, but the transcription of these genes can slow down the replication of mtDNA itself because these two processes compete for the same protein factor. Thus, mtDNAs not performing host-serving functions can, though not always, gain an advantage in self-replication compared to normal mtDNAs. Here, I use 'dysfunctional mtDNAs' to describe mtDNAs that, compared to functional mtDNAs in the same 'heteroplasmic' mixture, can replicate themselves at least as well but generate less or no benefit for the host eukaryote. Dysfunctional mtDNAs can be devastating to the host eukaryote. In a heteroplasmic mixture of functional and dysfunctional mtDNAs, what mechanisms oppose dysfunctional mtDNAs and their dysfunctional mitochondria? The importance of identifying PFF and PC at various levels becomes evident if we are interested in mitochondrial disease prognosis. Consider a human mother who is heteroplasmic for functional and dysfunctional mtDNAs/mitochondria. Since her children would only inherit mitochondria from her, what would their disease prognosis be? Suppose that dysfunctional mtDNAs/mitochondria are purged from the human population solely because they harm the fitness of their host organisms, as traditionally thought. Then, offspring should on average suffer a similar or a severer fitness defect than their mother does, since dysfunctional mtDNAs/mitochondria accumulate and are not selected against in the mother. Fortunately, as I will discuss below, PFF and PC at sub-organismal levels create somatic and germline 'filters' against dysfunctional mtDNAs/mitochondria, thus increasing the fitness of the mother and her offspring. Figure 4. PFF and PC act at multiple levels in the mutualistic cooperation between mitochondria and multicellular eukaryotes. Starting from the lowest levels, selection against dysfunctional mtDNAs can occur via PFF between mitochondria and mtDNAs. Dysfunctional mtDNAs can be selected against if they harm the reproduction of their host mitochondria. Indeed, during Drosophila melanogaster oogenesis, mitochondria dominated by functional mtDNAs proliferate faster than mitochondria dominated by dysfunctional mtDNAs. This could occur if, for example, dysfunctional mtDNAs render their host mitochondria incapable of importing proteins required for mtDNA replication. Moving one level up, PC can operate between a focal cell and mitochondria/mtDNAs when the cell preferentially imports, inherits, or retains functional mitochondria. An example of PC can be found between an oocyte and spatially-equivalent nurse cell mitochondria during D. melanogaster oogenesis: To be transported into the developing oocyte, mitochondria from the surrounding nurse cells need to be localized to the cytoplasmic bridge connecting nurse cells to the oocyte, which in turn depends on mitochondrial function. A second example can be found during cell division when the stem daughter cell or the young daughter cell preferentially inherits young mitochondria, despite the spatial equivalence of mitochondria in the mother cell. A third example of PC is a host cell using mitophagy, cellular digestion of mitochondria, to selectively eliminate dysfunctional mitochondria while retaining functional mitochondria. Mitophagy-mediated elimination of dysfunctional mtDNAs/mitochondria can conceivably operate in germ cells, given that mitophagy is active in fertilized oocytes to eliminate paternal mitochondria. As discussed earlier, PFF mechanisms at a lower level may appear as PC mechanisms at a higher level. For example, slower net proliferation of dysfunctional mitochondria may or may not be linked to mitophagy. An important future challenge is to address the orthogonality of various mechanisms. For those dysfunctional mtDNAs/mitochondria that have escaped a cell’s PC capability, they can be further selected against via PFF between cells and mtDNAs/mitochondria. For example, in at least several types of mammalian cells, certain mutations in mtDNA will lead host cells to undergo programmed cell death or cell cycle arrest. At least some of these PFF mechanisms can operate in germ cells. For example, in birds and mammals, the majority of oocytes die via apoptosis, which has been hypothesized as a mechanism to purge dysfunctional mtDNAs/mitochondria. Furthermore, oocytes harboring dysfunctional mtDNAs/mitochondria are less likely to be fertilized. Thus, dysfunctional mtDNAs/mitochondria can be selected against because they lower the fitness of their host cells. Finally, when we move one level further up, dysfunctional mtDNAs/mitochondria that have survived PC and PFFs at lower levels can be selected against via PFF between host organisms and mtDNAs/mitochondria. A model based on the Price equation predicts that mtDNA bottleneck should facilitate PFF at the corresponding level. Indeed, mtDNA bottleneck has been observed during fly and mammalian oogenesis. This mtDNA bottleneck means that oocytes from a mother heteroplasmic for functional and dysfunctional mtDNAs will exhibit high variability in the frequency of functional mtDNAs that they inherit. Oocytes dominated by dysfunctional mtDNAs can be subsequently purged via apoptosis, thus creating a germline mtDNA filter that improves the prognosis of offspring. Conclusion To reflect the hierarchical organization of biological systems, I introduce the concept of 'entity'. I have revised the definitions of PC and PFF so that they are orthogonal and so that they can operate on organismal or sub-organismal entities. PC requires that a focal cooperative entity can direct more benefits to cooperative over cheating partner entities despite their spatial equivalence. PFF suppresses cheaters that have escaped PC via repeated interactions between entities in groups that, by chance, show high variability in cooperator frequency. By applying this revised definition, I show that sometimes, PFF at a lower level may appear as PC at a higher level. PFF and PC can also act in conjunction at multiple levels to promote cooperation, as exemplified in the mitochondrion-eukaryote cooperation. This framework brings conceptual clarity for understanding the persistence of cooperation. Acknowledgement I am grateful to the chance events that have induced this work. In 2013, Diethard Tautz kindly invited me to the EMBO EMBL Symposium 'New Model Systems for Linking Evolution and Ecology'. After my talk, Andrew Moore from BioEssays invited me to write about the evolution of cooperation. I decided to tackle the controversy raised by the very interesting Weyl et al. paper. I initially defined PC as being 'active' in the genetic sense. Reviewers were not happy with this definition. The verdict was that I should write a review instead, a task that I was not too enthusiastic about given the many existing reviews. To better understand PC versus PFF, I subsequently went through many versions of ideas. During this time, Babak Momeni tirelessly served as my intellectual sounding-board. I thank my colleagues and participants of the 2015 Microbial Population Biology Gordon Research Conference for discussions and to Ben Kerr for Figure 2. Finally, I thank all reviewers for constructive criticisms. I dedicate this work to my alma mater Pomona College, Claremont, California, United States. Appendix Note 1 Interactions between individuals are instances where an individual changes the physiology of another individual. Interactions can be mediated through, for example, diffusible chemicals or physical binding. Note 2 Excreting waste byproducts that happen to be useful to other species is not considered cooperation. Even though waste excretion may involve an energetic cost, not excreting waste is even more costly. Thus, waste excretion results in a net fitness benefit instead of a net fitness cost to the excretor. Note 3 Preys provide a costly benefit to predators. However, we do not consider preys to cooperate with predators when predators never reciprocate any benefit. Note 4 Kin cooperation can be homotypic or heterotypic. Although mutualistic cooperation is generally heterotypic, it can be homotypic. Note 5 Although cheaters invest less than cooperators in producing costly benefits, cheaters are not necessarily more fit than cooperators. First, cooperators and cheaters can accumulate different mutations while adapting to their abiotic environment, making it possible for cooperators to sometimes outcompete cheaters. Second, self-interest and the ability to cooperate can be genetically linked. For example in Dictyostelium discoideum, dimA couples the ability to cooperate with self-interest. Finally, the fitness difference between cheaters and cooperators can depend on the environment. For example, cooperative but not cheating yeast cells pay a cost to express cell-surface invertase which converts extracellular sucrose to usable monosaccharides. Rare cooperators are more fit than abundant cheaters. This is because a cooperator can privatize a very small amount of monosaccharides generated by its cell-surface invertase, and this benefit already exceeds the cost of cooperation when monosaccharides are scarce. On the other hand, rare cheaters are more fit than abundant cooperators. This is because abundant cooperators generate high levels of monosaccharides, and the privatization of monosaccharides by cooperators leads to only a negligible further increase in growth rate which can no longer offset the cost of invertase production. This frequency-dependent selection leads to the coexistence of cooperators and cheaters. Note 6 A group can have a well-defined boundary, or not. Even though a group generally contains multiple individuals, a group can also contain a single individual. Note 7 Although Sachs et al. differentiated 'partner fidelity feedback' and 'partner choice' from 'kin fidelity' and 'kin choice', I have consolidated them to 'partner fidelity feedback' and 'partner choice' since partners can belong to different species, or genetically unrelated individuals of the same species, or genetic relatives. One potential difference between homotypic kin cooperation and heterotypic mutualistic cooperation is that in kin cooperation, a focal individual can directly benefit from its own cooperative act. Such 'direct benefit' may be absent in mutualistic cooperation. However, direct benefit from cooperating with self may be considered as part of 'basal fitness'. Note 8 Too drastic a population bottleneck may destroy cooperation, because a critical density of cooperators is often required for effective reciprocation. Note 9 Sachs et al. classified mechanisms such as 'sanctioning/policing' and 'indirect reciprocity' under PC. The 'green-beard' mechanism, where an allele produces a perceptible trait which allows the recognition of and preferential treatment to those bearing the same trait, belongs to PC. For example, adhesive cells preferentially bind to other adhesive cells ; cells harboring a toxin-antitoxin plasmid only kill cells without the plasmid. Sachs et al. further noted that both PC and PFF can contribute to 'direct reciprocity' and 'kin selection'. Fletcher and Doebeli have also tried to unify all pro-cooperation mechanisms under 'positive assortment' where cooperators mostly receive cooperative acts from their interaction environment. However, this still leaves open the question what mechanisms can create positive assortment. Note 10 Another alternative criterion has been proposed to me: if and only if a mechanism has evolved to exclude cheaters would it be considered PC. In reality, ascertaining why a mechanism has evolved is difficult unless the selective pressure is understood and the evolutionary history is available. Thus, I do not favor this definition, since a definition should be 'physical as contrasted with psychological' and should strive to exclude 'psychological factors of preferences and decision making'. Note 11 This definition requires that multiple entities exist. Thus, the entire earth ecosystem would not be considered an entity. However, this requirement should in general be easily satisfied. Note 12 Even though the birth of a tree depends on the birth of its parents, these birth events are temporally separable. Note 13 The contents of an entity can change. For example, in an entity comprising a yucca plant and its internal moth larvae, newly opened flowers receive new moth offspring as mature larvae exit. Note 14 Unlike concepts such as 'Darwinian individuals', entities do not have to show heritable phenotypic variations that result in differential fitness. For example, flowers on the same yucca share the same genotype, and the death of a flower is not due to its genotype but to its pollinators’. Note 15 Cooperative and cheating partner entities may or may not be simultaneously present. For example, a focal cooperative entity can withhold interactions until it encounters a cooperative partner entity. PC operates as long as the focal individual would have favored cooperative over spatially-equivalent cheating partner entities should they be simultaneously present. Note 16 Consider the engineered yeast community. Initially, the two partner populations and are spatially equivalent to the focal population due to their random spatial distributions. The preferential mixing of with instead of is driven by PFF not PC. Note 17 For example, PC may require a spatially-structured environment: Suppose that an imaginary cell could chemotax up an adenine gradient to interact with instead of despite their spatial equivalency. This PC would rely on adenine gradient whose formation requires a spatially-structured environment. Additionally, the imaginary chemotactic cell would not be able to distinguish cooperative versus cheating partner cells in a clump. Note 18 To establish a mathematical model, one would quantify in monocultures of cooperators and cheaters their rates of birth, non-suicidal death, and suicidal death under favorable and unfavorable environments. One would also quantify the amount of toxin released by dying cooperator, and how toxin at various concentrations increase the death rate of cheaters. If in addition to reducing competition, cell death supplies metabolites to increase the survival of living cells, then these metabolites may need to be quantified as well. In a spatially-structured environment, one would also quantify the diffusion of toxins and metabolites. Such a model can be used to predict the dynamics of cooperator frequency. Note 19 To see how this works, imagine a yucca where flowers are not spatially separated. In this imaginary yucca with only one flower, depending on whether the one flower is retained or aborted, cooperative pollinators will be less fit than or as unfit as cheating pollinators, respectively. Note 20 Eukaryotic cells and their intracellular mitochondria interact in mutualistic manners. For example, mitochondria generate ATP via the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, carry out steps in the synthesis of several amino acids and cofactors, and facilitate the maturation of essential cellular Fe-S proteins. In multicellular organisms, mitochondria also serve as the site for apoptotic signaling and anti-viral signaling. Conversely, mitochondria rely on the host cell for survival, as evidenced by their highly reduced genomes and the ongoing transfer of DNA from mitochondria to the nucleus. On the flip side, mitochondria produce reactive oxygen species which cause high mutation rate especially in mitochondrial genomes, creating dysfunctional mtDNAs. ROS also cause cellular damage and organismal ageing. Note 21 For example a cheating mtDNA in S. cerevisiae has replaced its genes with many copies of a DNA fragment containing the origin of replication, and is competitively superior to normal mtDNAs. This cheating mtDNA is defective in mitochondrial functions, and is deleterious to the host cell. As another example, in the aged human substantia nigra, the primary site of neurodegeneration in Parkinson disease, individual pigmented neurons often contain very high levels of clonally-expanded mutant mtDNAs containing various deletions. Because a neuron rarely undergoes mitosis, this age-dependent clonal expansion of a mutant mtDNA presumably occurs during the regular turnover of mitochondria and mtDNAs over the life time of a neuron, and likely reflects the fitness advantage of mutant over normal mtDNA. Note 22 For example in S. cerevisiae and female mammals, mutant and normal mtDNAs in a 'heteroplasmic' mixture can be transmitted to the next generation without any bias, depending on the mutation type. Note 23 Even though functional mtDNAs and functional mitochondria may not strictly correspond, this correspondence largely holds. Note 24 For example in S. cerevisiae, cells with normal mtDNAs grow significantly faster than cells with dysfunctional mtDNAs, thus rendering dysfunctional mtDNAs/mitochondria less competitive. In flies and mammals, an organism can even die at a young age if certain types of dysfunctional mtDNA reach sufficiently high levels. Note 25 An eukaryotic cell generally contains a population of mitochondria, and each mitochondrion on average contains multiple mtDNAs. Mitochondria undergo dynamic fusion and fission which mix organelle contents including mtDNAs. Thus inside a cell, a scenario similar to that modeled in the Price equation occurs: mtDNAs are divided into spatially-separated mitochondria that interact through fusion and fission. mtDNAs can cooperate with their host mitochondrion by, for example, generating the membrane potential required for resource import into mitochondrion, or cheat by not performing these tasks. A model based on the Price equation predicts that frequent fusion will homogenize mtDNAs across mitochondria, and thus allow competitively-superior cheating mtDNAs to rise to high frequency even if fusion temporarily allows functional mitochondria to complement dysfunctional mitochondria. Too little fusion or fission is also predicted to disfavor cooperative mtDNAs, because in isolated groups, cheating mtDNAs will eventually arise from cooperative mtDNAs via mutations and outcompete cooperative mtDNAs. Note 26 For example, in mammalian tissue culture cells, compromised membrane potential of a mitochondrion causes PINK1 to be stabilized on mitochondrial membrane instead of being imported and rapidly degraded. Stabilized PINK1 degrades proteins required for mitochondrial fusion, and a blockage in mitochondrial fusion attracts the mitophagy apparatus. Note 27 For example, a mature mouse oocyte harbors mtDNAs on the order of 10 5. The lack of new mtDNA synthesis and binary cell divisions cause a reduction in mtDNA to ~4000/cell before implantation. mtDNA copy number is further reduced to as low as 30, with a median of ~200, in primordial germ cells which eventually undergo meiosis and develop into oocytes or sperms. Note 28 Strikingly, species where individuals give birth to fewer offspring tend to experience severer mtDNA bottleneck as well as apoptosis in a larger fraction of oocytes. This is consistent with the idea that if the number of offspring per individual is small, then selection for functional mtDNA in germ cells becomes critical. Funding Statement The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication. Funding Information This paper was supported by the following grants: W.M. Keck Foundation Distinguished Young Scholars Program to Wenying Shou. NIH Office of the Director NIH Director's New Innovator Award DP2 OD006498-01 to Wenying Shou. Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center New Development to Wenying Shou. Additional information Competing interests WS: Reviewing editor, eLife. Author contributions WS, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article. Article information eLife. 2015; 4: e10106. Published online 2015 Dec 29. doi: 10.7554/eLife.10106 PMCID: PMC4798966 PMID: 26714105 Wenying Shou * Wenying Shou Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, United States Find articles by Wenying Shou Diethard Tautz, Reviewing editor Diethard Tautz, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, Germany; Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, United States Email: moc.liamg@uohs.gniynew Received 2015 Jul 15; Accepted 2015 Dec 21. Copyright © 2015, Shou et al This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use and redistribution provided that the original author and source are credited. See " Spatial self-organization favors heterotypic cooperation over cheating " in volume 2, e00960. Articles from eLife are provided here courtesy of eLife Sciences Publications, Ltd 