An Excitable Compass Guides Chemotaxis? You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF An Excitable Compass Guides Chemotaxis? Biophys J. 2014 Mar 4; 106: 989–990. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Biophys J v.106; 2014 Mar 4 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Biophysical Journal The Biophysical Society An Excitable Compass Guides Chemotaxis? William R. Holmes Additional article information Directional cell migration in response to external stimuli is vital for numerous physiological processes ranging from the inflammatory response to embryonic development. The striking similarity of migration characteristics among evolutionarily divergent cell types ranging from human leukocytes to amoeba suggests a conserved underlying mechanism is responsible for chemotaxis. This mechanism can be loosely broken into three distinct subprocesses: 1. Signal detection, 2. Amplification, and 3. Motility. Subprocesses 1 and 2 collectively form an internal biochemical compass that directs biophysical processes responsible for motility. Nishikawa et al. use a microfluidic technique to investigate the amplification mechanism in Dictyostelium. They perfuse cells in a flow containing a caged form of cAMP that is released upon photoactivation. Using this technique, they generate precisely controlled perturbations used to probe the properties of the amplification process. While numerous molecular constituents are inevitably involved in this compass, it is well established that phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate localizes to the front of protruding pseudopods during chemotaxis and is indispensible for sensing shallow gradients. Past investigations have sought to explain a number of important observations of the PIP3 response, including: 1. Adaptation to persistent stimulation; 2. Remarkable amplification of shallow stimulus gradients; 3. Spontaneous formation of transient patches of activity; and 4. Presence of patches that persistently move within cells subjected to uniform stimulation. Observation 1 is a feature of the signal detection mechanism which has been explained by models accounting for the interaction between membrane-bound activators and cytosolic inhibitors. Observations 2–4 provide insight into the form of the amplification mechanism, which is the source of more controversy. In the past, this amplifier was hypothesized to result from either a feedforward ultrasensitive response or a feedback-based excitability. Nishikawa et al. microfluidically generate spatiotemporally controlled stimuli and show the downstream PIP3 response exhibits the hallmarks of excitability, supporting the latter viewpoint, with the following procedures: 1. They apply spatially homogeneous step-function perturbations of varying sizes and show the amplitude of the membrane-bound PIP3 response is independent of the perturbation. 2. They then apply pulselike perturbations with durations much shorter than the characteristic response time and observe the response amplitude is independent of the stimulus duration. Combined, these results demonstrate the perturbation initiates a response but that the response is sustained and driven by an intrinsic, independent mechanism. 3. They next apply multiple pulselike perturbations in succession to probe the presence of a refractory period, characteristic of excitability. Their results show a minimum time delay between perturbations is required for subsequent responses to occur. Further, when the delay is larger than this refractory time, subsequent perturbations yield responses of nearly identical amplitude. 4. Finally, they stimulate cells with a spatial gradient and show the front localized patches of PIP3 are nearly identical in intensity to those that form spontaneously in the absence of stimulation. These results support the view that the amplification mechanism responsible for interpreting noisy, shallow gradients is a biased excitable process. Although these findings are compelling, they do not rule out the alternative. The primary criticism of ultrasensitivity is the inability to account for persistent patches of PIP3, which seemingly requires feedback and can be driven by excitability. The ultrasensitive hypothesis does, however, have its own supporting evidence, some of which is seemingly inconsistent with excitability. In particular, it was shown there is a large degree of variability in the PIP3 response duration among cells. This investigation, however, challenged cells with much larger perturbations than Nishikawa et al., raising the possibility that these results reflect additional actions of the perturbation rather than a property of the intrinsic response mechanism. Beyond this specific issue, there are alternative theoretical models capable of capturing Observations 2–4 above and Holmes et al. ), which have yet to be explored in this context. Nonetheless, this investigation further tilts the scales in favor of the biased excitable view of amplification. Moving forward from this point will require additional direct evidence for this hypothesis. In particular, identification of the source of the PIP3 positive feedback and the mediator of a slower negative feedback, the key ingredients for excitability, is still needed. The properties of these elements have been constrained by previous investigations, but their source remains a mystery. Article information Biophys J. 2014 Mar 4; 106: 989–990. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2014.01.030 PMCID: PMC4026793 PMID: 24606923 William R. Holmes ∗ Center for Complex Biological Systems, Department of Mathematics, University of California, Irvine William R. Holmes: ude.icu@semlohrw ∗ Corresponding author ude.icu@semlohrw Received 2013 Dec 30; Accepted 2014 Jan 23. Copyright © 2014 by the Biophysical Society. Articles from Biophysical Journal are provided here courtesy of The Biophysical Society 