 Dnmt2 enzymes are conserved in eukaryotes, where they methylate C38 of tRNA-Asp with high activity. Here, the activity of one of the very few prokaryotic Dnmt2 homologs from Geobacter species was investigated. GsDnmt2 was observed to methylate tRNA-Asp from flies and mice. Unexpectedly, it had only a weak activity toward its matching Geobacter tRNA-Asp, but methylated Geobacter tRNA-Glu with good activity. In agreement with this result, we show that tRNA-Glu is methylated in Geobacter while the methylation is absent in tRNA-Asp. The activities of Dnmt2 enzymes from Homo sapiens, Drosophila melanogaster, Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Dictyostelium discoideum for methylation of the Geobacter tRNA-Asp and tRNA-Glu were determined showing that all these Dnmt2s preferentially methylate tRNA-Asp. Hence, the GsDnmt2 enzyme has a swapped transfer ribonucleic acid specificity. By comparing the different tRNAs, a characteristic sequence pattern was identified in the variable loop of all preferred tRNA substrates. An exchange of two nucleotides in the variable loop of murine tRNA-Asp converted it to the corresponding variable loop of tRNA-Glu and led to a strong reduction of GsDnmt2 activity. Interestingly, the same loss of activity was observed with human DNMT2, indicating that the variable loop functions as a specificity determinant in tRNA recognition of Dnmt2 enzymes. INTRODUCTION Several chemical modifications of the bases in deoxyribonucleic acid and ribonucleic acid have been discovered in the last decades of research, which include methylation, pseudouridylation, hydroxymethylation, formylation and carboxylation. In eukaryotes, three families of enzymes with strong sequence similarity to DNA--methyltransferases have been found, namely Dnmt1, Dnmt2 and Dnmt3. Dnmt2 enzymes are highly conserved with homologs present from lower eukaryotes like Schizosaccharomyces pombe to higher eukaryotes like Homo sapiens. These enzymes contain all motifs characteristic for DNA methyltransferases, but lack the large N-terminal domain found in the Dnmt1 and Dnmt3 enzymes. Later, in a seminal paper by Goll et al., Dnmt2 enzymes were reported to have a robust methylation activity on tRNA Asp at position C38. After the initial discovery of tRNA Asp methylation by Dnmt2, many studies have confirmed this activity in different organisms. However, even though Dnmt2 methylates transfer RNA, it utilizes a DNA methyltransferase-like catalytic mechanism in the methyl transfer reactions, which also explains the conservation of the corresponding amino acid motifs in the catalytic center. Dnmt2 knockout studies have indicated a connection to stress response and methylation of small RNAs, non-random sister chromatid segregation in stem cells, mobile element and RNA virus control in Drosophila melanogaster, paramutation in mice and adaptation to different growth conditions in lower eukaryotes. However, it is still unclear whether these effects stem from the loss of methylation of C38 in tRNA Asp or whether other Dnmt2 targets are responsible for the phenotypes. Many of the studies have also investigated methylation of alternate tRNA substrates by Dnmt2. In Dictyostelium discoideum, Dnmt2 was reported to methylate tRNA Glu and tRNA Gly very weakly in vitro. The S. pombe Dnmt2 homolog, Pmt1, was shown to have a weaker methylation activity on tRNA Glu as well. D. melanogaster Dnmt2 was found to methylate tRNA Val and tRNA Gly in vivo in addition to tRNA Asp. However, in all enzymatic studies, tRNA Asp was the most preferred substrate for Dnmt2. The molecular basis for the specific interaction of Dnmt2 with its tRNA substrates is not yet known. Previously, we have mapped the binding of tRNA Asp to human DNMT2 by mutating several conserved lysine and arginine residues in human DNMT2 and concluded that the anticodon stem/loop of tRNA Asp is a main region of contact for human DNMT2 for the methyl transfer reaction by human DNMT2. Supporting this notion, Muller et al. proposed a role of the C32, A37 and C40 nucleotides in tRNA recognition. A recent phylogenetic analysis revealed that the Dnmt2 gene family was most likely derived from a prokaryotic DNA--methyltransferase. As mentioned above, the enzyme is highly conserved in all eukaryotic phyla. Strikingly, there are only a few putative Dnmt2 homologs in bacteria, one of which is found in Geobacter species, another putative representative is present in Holophaga foetida. These enzymes are clearly defined by the presence of a CFT amino acid motif, which is characteristic for Dnmt2 enzymes and involved in the tRNA interaction. A bioinformatics analysis indicated that the Geobacter Dnmt2 enzyme is likely the outcome of a horizontal gene transfer from eukaryotes to Geobacter, which is known for its ability of lateral gene transfer. This conclusion is supported by the additional identification of a putative Dnmt2 homolog in Holophaga, because these bacteria are not closely related to Geobacter. As part of a larger initiative aiming to investigate the function of Dnmt2 in many species including humans, mice, flies and unicellular eukaryotes and to define its biological role, we set out to investigate the biochemical properties and substrate recognition of Geobacter sulfurreducens Dnmt2. Since it has been shown that eukaryotic Dnmt2 enzymes are specific for tRNA Asp C38 methylation, our work was started in this direction. However, we surprisingly found that GsDnmt2 specifically methylates Geobacter tRNA Glu in vitro and in vivo and not Geobacter tRNA Asp. This represents the first example of a Dnmt2 enzyme with a completely switched substrate specificity. Based on this finding, we further identify the variable loop as a sequence determinant in tRNA recognition of Geobacter Dnmt2 and the human enzyme. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cloning and site-directed mutagenesis The gene for G. sulfurreducens, GsDnmt2, was amplified from genomic DNA of G. sulfurreducens obtained from DSMZ using a primer set flanking the gene. The amplified gene was cloned into pET28a using NdeI and EcoRI sites and successful cloning validated by DNA sequencing. The catalytic site variant C74A of GsDnmt2 was created by the megaprimer site-directed mutagenesis method as described previously. This residue corresponds to C79 in human DNMT2, which is a key catalytic residue, mutation of which has been shown to inactivate the enzyme. The primer used for the site-directed mutagenesis was 5′-GTA AGG CTG CGC AGG AGG CGA C-3′. The presence of the desired mutation was confirmed by sequencing. Constructs for other Dnmt2s are as described: human DNMT2, S. pombe Pmt1 and D. discoideum DnmA. The gene for D. melanogaster Dnmt2 was amplified from complementary DNA using the following primer pair: 5′-GCG GTG GTG CTC GAG TTA TTT TAT CGT CAG-3′ and 5′-GCG GCA GCC ATA TGG TAT TTC GGG TCT TAG AA-3′, and cloned into pET28a+ using XhoI and NdeI sites. The cDNA was prepared using RNA isolated from 0–6-h-old embryos of D. melanogaster BerlinWild strain. The cloned sequence was found to contain an insertion present in the Isoform A of the D. melanogaster Dnmt2 gene, which was subsequently excised by polymerase chain reaction mutagenesis performed with the following primers: 5′-ATG CCC AAT TGG ATG GAC AAA TAG TTG CCG CCT TGG-3′ and 5′-ACT AAA TAG TTC TAA GAC CCG AAA TAC CAT-3′. Protein expression and purification The wild-type and mutant C74A GsDnmt2 were expressed as His 6 -tagged proteins in Escherichia coli Rosetta 2 cells. Protein expression and purification was performed as described previously. Briefly, transformed Rosetta 2 cells were grown to OD 600 = 0.6. Protein expression was induced with 1-mM IPTG and cells were further incubated at 37°C for 3 h. The cells were sonicated in lysis buffer, 10-mM imidazole and 10% glycerol). Recombinant proteins were purified on Ni-NTA beads and eluted with 200-mM imidazole in lysis buffer. The protein was then dialyzed against dialysis buffer I and 0.1-mM DTT) and dialysis buffer II. A similar procedure was followed for human DNMT2 purification. For D. melanogaster Dnmt2, the protein expression was conducted at 28°C. For the DnmA recombinant protein, expression was carried out at 22°C. The amounts of all recombinant proteins were determined by their specific absorbance and the concentrations and purities were verified by Coomassie-stained sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gels. In vitro transcription of tRNA substrates The tRNA sequences were derived from the Genomic tRNA data base. The tRNA substrates for methylation reactions were prepared by in vitro transcription basically as described. The DNA templates for the in vitro transcription were purchased from MWG. The template DNA and primer sequences are given in Supplemental Table S2. The templates were amplified by PCR with T7 and tRNA-specific primers and the yield and purity of the PCR was inspected on a native 8% acrylamide-TPE gels. In vitro transcriptions were performed in a total volume of 200 μl containing 50 μl of 4x transcription buffer, 20-mM NTPs mix, 1 U/μl of RNasin plus, 1 U/μl of T7 RNA polymerase and 35 μl of PCR-amplified template DNA. The reaction was incubated at 37°C for at least 3 h, followed by addition of 15 U DNase I and incubation for another 30 min at 37°C. Then tRNAs were separated on a 12% acylamide/7-M urea gel and the tRNA bands were excised from the gel. 1B ). The tRNA was eluted with elution buffer overnight at room temperature followed by ethanol precipitation. Figure 1. G. sulfurreducens Dnmt2 methylates C38 of tRNA Asp. Methylation of D. melanogaster tRNA Asp and murine-tRNA Asp with the GsDnmt2 enzyme. Control reactions using the catalytically inactive GsDnmt2 mutant C74A and Dm-tRNA Asp C38U mutant show no methylation.... In vitro methylation kinetics The in vitro methylation reactions of tRNAs were carried out as described before with few modifications. Before the methylation reactions, the substrate tRNAs were refolded by heating to 65°C and slowly cooled to ambient temperature in the presence of 2-mM MgCl 2 and 2 U/µl of RNasin plus. The subsequent methylation reaction was performed with 0.5 μM of the tRNA substrates and 1 μM of the Dnmt2 enzyme in methylation buffer, 20-mM NH 4 OAc, 2-mM MgCl 2, 2-mM DTT and 0.02-mM EDTA). The reactions were started by addition of 0.76-μM -AdoMet and carried out at 22°C with DnmA, 30°C with Drosophila Dnmt2 and 37°C with all other enzymes. The reactions were stopped at different time points by removing 5-μl aliquots and pipetting them into 500 μl of 5% trichloroacetic acid. The samples were then spotted onto a DE81 anion exchange filter paper disc and the unbound radioactive AdoMet was washed away with 5% TCA and absolute ethanol. The discs were then air dried and the bound radioactivity was measured with a Hidex 300 SL liquid scintillation counter using Rotiszint eco plus. The reaction progress curves of the single turnover kinetics were fitted using Equation, which is derived from a single exponential model, with k 1 being the single turnover rate constant of RNA methylation and f being the saturation level of complete methylation. To obtain the initial rate of RNA methylation in CMP/min, Equation was differentiated at t = 0, which results in Equation : In many reactions with less active enzyme/substrates combinations a clear linear initial phase was observed. Then, the initial rate constant of RNA methylation was derived directly by linear regression of the reaction progress curve. tRNA binding analysis The tRNA-binding analysis was performed using 3′-end-pCp-labeled tRNAs. For labeling, 1 μg of the in vitro transcribed Gs-tRNA Asp and Gs-tRNA Glu was incubated with 5 µl Cytidine 3′,5′-bisphosphate and T4 RNA ligase in 50 µl ligation buffer and 10% DMSO overnight at 4°C. The labeled tRNAs were purified from unincorporated nucleotides by using Micro-Bio-Spin 6 columns. The purified tRNAs were refolded and incubated with increasing Dnmt2 concentrations in methylation buffer. After 30 min the reactions were spotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane and washed three times with the reaction buffer. The membranes were exposed to X-ray films and the intensity of the spots was measured using ImageJ software. Data were fitted using the Excel solver module to an equation describing a bimolecular binding equilibrium. Total RNA isolation from G. sulfurreducens G. sulfurreducens was grown anaerobically at 30°C in NBAF medium with acetate as the electron donor and fumarate as the electron acceptor as previously described. Total RNA isolation from G. sulfurreducens was carried out with the MasterPure RNA purification kit following the manufacturer's instructions. The isolated total RNA was treated with DNase I to remove contaminant genomic DNA. RNA concentrations were determined by ultraviolet spectroscopy. tRNA bisulfite sequencing The tRNA bisulfite sequencing was performed as described previously. For this study, tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu, tRNA Glu-2 and tRNA Val were selected because they contain cytosine at position 38 in their sequence. Briefly, 3 μg of total RNA was treated with bisulfite following the instructions of the manufacturer. The bisulfite-treated RNA was later used to generate a cDNA by reverse transcription using a stem loop primer for tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu and tRNA Val, respectively. The reverse transcriptase-PCR product was further amplified by PCR using a universal stem loop primer 5′-CAC GAC ACC AGT TGA-3′ and deaminated tRNA-specific primers with the following sequence: 5′-TAG TTA AGT TGG TTAT-3′, 5′- GTT TAG TGG TTA GGA-3′ and 5′-TTA GTT TAG TGG GAGA-3′ for tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu and tRNA Val, respectively. The PCR products were cloned by TOPO-TA cloning. Colony PCR was performed to confirm the presence of desired inserts. To determine the RNA methylation, 60 clones were sequenced for each tRNA. RESULTS GsDnmt2 is an active enzyme capable of methylating C38 in tRNA Asp After successfully cloning the GsDnmt2 gene into the pET28a+ vector, expressing and purifying the protein, its activity was tested using in vitro transcribed tRNAs. It was known from many previous reports that Dnmt2 from all the eukaryotic organisms methylate tRNA Asp. To test whether the bacterial Dnmt2 also methylates tRNA Asp, in vitro transcribed tRNA Asp of D. melanogaster was used as the initial substrate. Since the tRNA methylation rate of human DNMT2 is in the range of few turnovers per hour and the Dnmt2 enzymes from other species studied here showed similar or lower activity, it was not possible to conduct steady-state methylation experiments. Therefore, we followed the initial time course of tRNA methylation reactions under single turnover conditions using excess of enzyme. As shown in Figure ​ Figure1A 1A and C, wild-type GsDnmt2 methylated tRNA Asp while no activity was detected with the active site mutant in which the catalytic cysteine 74 residue, which is located in a highly conserved PCQ motif in Dnmts, was altered to alanine. The corresponding exchange in human DNMT2 has been shown to inactivate the enzyme as well. The observation that the C74A variant lost the methylation activity indicates that GsDnmt2 is an active tRNA methyltransferase and capable of methylating in vitro transcribed D. melanogaster tRNA Asp. The next aim was to confirm that the site of methylation by GsDnmt2 is the same as by other members of the Dnmt2 family. For this, a C38U mutant of the D. melanogaster tRNA Asp was prepared and methylation reactions were performed with the wild-type GsDnmt2 enzyme. A complete loss of methylation was observed with this mutant tRNA, indicating that cytosine 38 is the methylation target site for GsDnmt2. Finally, methylation of murine tRNA Asp by GsDnmt2 was demonstrated as well. In summary, these data indicate that GsDnmt2 methylates tRNA Asp from D. melanogaster and M. musculus at C38. GsDnmt2 is weakly active on Geobacter -encoded tRNA Asp After confirmation of the activity of GsDnmt2 on tRNA Asp derived from flies and mice, the catalytic activity of this enzyme on Geobacter -encoded tRNA Asp was investigated, which shares large similarity with eukaryotic tRNA Asp. For this, G. sulfurreducens tRNA Asp was prepared by in vitro transcription and an in vitro methylation was performed using the recombinantly expressed wild-type GsDnmt2. However, as shown in Figure ​ Figure1B 1B and C, GsDnmt2 was only weakly active on its cognate tRNA Asp. No activity was observed with the C74A mutant protein, confirming that the radioactive signal observed was due to tRNA methylation by wild-type GsDnmt2. In addition, the site of methylation was also confirmed to be cytosine 38 in Gs-tRNA Asp by C38U mutation. The weak methylation of Gs-tRNA Asp was not related to the preparation of the tRNA, because the same tRNA preparation was efficiently methylated by Dnmt2 enzymes from other species. 4 ). In summary, when comparing methylation of tRNA Asp from flies, mice and Geobacter, GsDnmt2 unexpectedly showed the weakest methylation activity with its own Geobacter -encoded tRNA Asp. Figure 4. Dnmt2 enzymes from various species prefer methylation of G. sulfurreducens tRNA Asp. Examples of methylation kinetics are shown for wild-type Dnmt2 enzymes from S. pombe, D. discoideum, D. melanogaster and H. sapiens using in vitro transcribed... GsDnmt2 shows unusual preference for tRNA Glu over tRNA Asp After the initial observation that G. sulfurreducens Dnmt2 showed lower methylation of its Geobacter -encoded tRNA Asp than of tRNA Asp from Drosophila or M. musculus, the question arose whether any other Geobacter tRNA might be more preferred as a substrate. To this end, Geobacter tRNAs were inspected for the presence of a cytosine at position 38 of the tRNA sequence. Using the UCSC Genomic tRNA Data Base we identified tRNA His as well as two isodecoders of each tRNA Ala, tRNA Glu and tRNA Val as Dnmt2 candidate substrates in Geobacter, in addition to tRNA Asp. Among them, both isodecoders of tRNA Glu were selected for methylation analysis, because they show high similarity to tRNA Asp, as well as tRNA His and one of the tRNA Val and tRNA Ala sequences. All of these tRNAs were synthesized by in vitro transcription and assayed for methylation by GsDnmt2. Our results showed that tRNA Asp was weakly methylated as stated above, 2 ), but the initial reaction rate for methylation of tRNA Glu was 10-fold higher than methylation of tRNA Asp. The methylation of the second isodecoder of tRNA Glu-2 was intermediate between tRNA Asp and the other tRNA Glu and methylation of other tRNAs was not detectable. These results motivated us to continue our study using the tRNA Glu isodecoder. A mutant tRNA Glu carrying a C38U mutation was prepared and we observed that the mutation caused a complete loss of methylation, indicating that the methylation in tRNA Glu happens only at position C38. 2 ). In addition, the C74A mutation in GsDnmt2 led to loss of methylation on tRNA Glu. 2 ). The preferential methylation of Gs-tRNA Glu was also confirmed using a gel-based methylation assay in which the methylated tRNA is directly observed. Figure 2. GsDnmt2 prefers methylation of G. sulfurreducens tRNA Glu over tRNA Asp. Examples of in vitro methylation of Geobacter tRNA Asp and tRNA Glu by GsDnmt2. Average methylation rates and SEM based on three repeats of the experiments. Panel also includes... To test if the substrate preferences of human and Geobacter Dnmt2 were based on preferential binding of one type of tRNA, we determined their equilibrium constants of binding to Gs-tRNA Glu and Gs-tRNA Asp. Our data show that the human enzyme binds tRNA about four to five times stronger than the Geobacter enzyme, which is in agreement with its general higher enzymatic activity. 4B ). However, the binding of the two different substrates was similar in both cases, indicating that ground-state tRNA binding does not contribute to specificity of tRNA methylation by Dnmt2. A similar observation has been made previously in a study aiming to identify amino acid residues involved in tRNA binding and recognition of human DNMT2. We conclude that GsDnmt2 shows a striking change in substrate specificity when compared with other Dnmt2 enzymes, which is not based on tRNA-binding preferences. Cellular methylation of tRNAs in G. sulfurreducens As described above, we have found that GsDnmt2 has a different specificity than other Dnmt2 enzymes in vitro. Therefore, the cellular methylation patterns of tRNAs in G. sulfurreducens were investigated. For this analysis, total RNA was isolated from wild-type G. sulfurreducens and the cytosine methylation investigated by bisulfite conversion, reverse transcription and cloning of the converted tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu and tRNA Val followed by sequencing of individual clones. As shown in Figure ​ Figure3, 3, the methylation at the C38 position of tRNA Glu in wild-type G. sulfurreducens was 22%. The tRNA Glu-2 isodecoder was methylated by 36% at the same site. In contrast, signals for tRNA Asp and tRNA Val C38 methylation were at background levels of about 3%. Hence, both tRNA Glu isodecoders were efficiently methylated in vitro and they are also methylated in cells, while tRNA Asp, which showed the weakest in vitro methylation among all substrates tested, was not methylated in cells. We conclude that cellular tRNA methylation at C38 mirrors the in vitro specificity GsDnmt2. The same observation has been made with human DNMT2. In human cells tRNA Asp but not tRNA Glu is methylated at C38, which is in agreement with the in vitro specificity of the human DNMT2 enzyme. The incomplete methylation of the tRNA Glu in Geobacter is similar to what has been observed for tRNA Asp in other species by RNA bisulfite. It is possible that the reverse transcription step of the RNA bisulfite method is more efficient with unmodified, immature tRNAs, which may influence the results. Figure 3. tRNA Glu but not tRNA Asp is methylated at C38 in G. sulfurreducens. The figure shows results of RNA bisulfite sequencing of tRNA Asp, tRNA Glu, tRNA Glu-2 and tRNA Val from total RNA isolated from G. sulfurreducens. The cytosine residues present in the corresponding... Comparison of methylation specificities of Dnmt2 homologs from various species We concluded in the last paragraphs that GsDnmt2 strongly prefers to methylate Gs-tRNA Glu not Gs-tRNA Asp both in vitro and in vivo. However, as shown above, tRNA Asp from other species like D. melanogaster and M. musculus were good GsDnmt2 substrates. This observation suggested that there may be changes in the Geobacter tRNAs that increase methylation of Gs-tRNA Glu but reduce the reaction with Gs-tRNA Asp. Hence, the specificities of Dnmt2 enzymes from other species were investigated for the methylation of Geobacter tRNA Asp and tRNA Glu also using the C38U mutant tRNA versions as controls. 4 ). Dnmt2 enzymes from different species that represent key eukaryotic phyla were expressed and purified and their methylation activities were analyzed. The assays were done in parallel for a specific enzyme with all tRNA substrates. The results showed that human DNMT2, S. pombe Pmt1 and D. discoideum DnmA, all preferred the Gs-tRNA Asp substrate. 4 ). D. melanogaster Dnmt2 also showed some activity on Gs-tRNA Glu, but it still had a clear preference for Gs-tRNA Asp. 4 ). The C38U mutations completely abrogated the methylation activity for all the enzymes, confirming that methylation occurred at position C38. Although the results with the other Dnmt2 enzymes cannot be directly translated to their biological role, because the methylation was tested on G. sulfurreducens tRNAs, our data clearly demonstrate that the change in the biological target observed with GsDnmt2 is specific for this enzyme among all Dnmt2 enzymes tested here. 5 ). These results show that the swap in specificity of GsDnmt2 from Gs - tRNA Asp to Gs-tRNA Glu must be due to changes within the GsDnmt2 protein and the Gs - tRNAs which affect the interaction of GsDnmt2 with Geobacter -encoded tRNAs. However, these alterations are only efficient when combined, because GsDnmt2 still methylates tRNA Asp from other species and Dnmt2 enzymes from other species prefer methylating tRNA Asp from Geobacter. Figure 5. Comparison of the specificities of Dnmt2 homologs from different species for methylation of Geobacter tRNA Asp and tRNA Glu. Data are replotted from Figures ​ Figures2B 2B and ​ and4B 4B and the relative activities of the Asp/Glu pairs were always... The variable loop functions as a sequence determinant in the tRNA recognition of Dnmt2 To investigate the molecular reason for the inversion of the substrate preference of the GsDnmt2 enzyme with its matching Geobacter tRNAs, we compared the secondary structures of tRNA Asp and tRNA Glu from several species and noticed that Gs-tRNA Asp has a longer variable loop with an extra guanine. 6 ). Furthermore, the variable loops of all preferred Dnmt2 substrates have at least one A at position 45 or 46 of the variable loop, while all the inactive counterparts contain a GG dinucleotide. Based on this, we speculated that the variable loop may be a specificity determinant of GsDnmt2. To test this hypothesis, the variable loop of murine tRNA Asp was swapped with that of murine tRNA Glu by an exchange of two nucleotides which introduced the GG dinucleotide sequence into tRNA Asp. The mutant tRNA Asp was synthesized by in vitro transcription. Equal amounts of the wild-type and mutant tRNAs were used in methylation reactions with GsDnmt2. Strikingly, the alteration of these two bases in the variable loop of murine tRNA Asp led to a strong decrease in the methylation rate. 7A ). This result supports the hypothesis of an involvement of the variable loop in the enzyme-substrate recognition of GsDnmt2. To further extend this finding, methylation reactions were performed with the same substrates using the human DNMT2 enzyme. Here, also, a similar reduction of activity was observed with the mutant tRNA Asp compared to the wild type tRNA, 7A ), indicating that the variable loop is also important for tRNA Asp recognition by human DNMT2. Next, we investigated if the variable loop of Gs-tRNA Glu also has a role in recognition. As shown in Figure ​ Figure7B, 7B, replacement of the original Gs-tRNA Glu variable loop by either Gs-tRNA Asp or murine tRNA Glu resulted in a strong reduction of its methylation by GsDnmt2. These data indicate that the GG dinucleotide in the variable loop functions as a universal anti-determinant for methylation by Dnmt2. However, replacing the variable loop of murine tRNA Glu with the corresponding loop from murine tRNA Asp did not result in a significant increase of its methylation by human DNMT2, indicating that the variable loop is not the only recognition determinant of Dnmt2. Figure 6. Clover leaf structure of the tRNA Asp and tRNA Glu from different species. The target C38 is printed in bold and highlighted by a gray circle for the preferred substrate tRNA and by a white circle for the non-preferred one. Bases in the variable loop are... Figure 7. Methylation of tRNA variable loop mutants by GsDnmt2 and human DNMT2. Methylation of murine-tRNA Asp with its original variable loop or with the variable loop of murine-tRNA Glu by Geobacter Dnmt2 or human DNMT2.... DISCUSSION Dnmt2 enzymes are conserved in most eukaryotic species and methylate tRNA Asp with high activity. Here, the activity of one of the few known bacterial putative Dnmt2 enzymes was studied, which is found in Geobacter strains including G. sulfurreducens. We show that GsDnmt2 actively methylates tRNA Asp from M. musculus and Drosophila that were used as model substrates in previous work. This result confirms that GsDnmt2 is a member of the Dnmt2 family as expected on the basis of the amino acid alignment. However, the endogenous Geobacter tRNA Asp was methylated only very inefficiently. Instead, GsDnmt2 methylates Geobacter tRNA Glu at the corresponding site, indicating a complete swap in its specificity —a 5 )—a surprising and unexpected result that was confirmed in a methylation analysis of tRNA isolated from G. sulfurreducens. There are two isodecoders of tRNA Glu in Geobacter, which both were methylated in vitro and in vivo, although the relative methylation levels of the two isodecoders varied in the two data sets. In vitro, tRNA Glu was methylated three times faster while in cells the methylation level of tRNA Glu-2 was 1.6 times higher. There could be several explanations for this difference: tRNA Glu-2 methylation could be less efficient under in vitro conditions, additional modifications could modulate the tRNA Glu or tRNA Glu-2 methylation in vivo or additional modifications could affect the recovery of methylated tRNA Glu and tRNA Glu-2 differently after bisulfite conversion. However, in all data sets both isodecoders of Gs-tRNA Glu were more methylated than Gs-tRNA Asp. We have shown here that Geobacter Dnmt2 has an ∼100-fold swapped specificity for Geobacter tRNAs, because it prefers tRNA Glu roughly 10-fold over tRNA Asp, while all other Dnmt2 enzymes showed an at least 10-fold preference for tRNA Asp over tRNA Glu. 5 ). What could be the molecular basis of the unexpected loss of Geobacter tRNA Asp methylation by GsDnmt2 and the corresponding gain of methylation of tRNA Glu ? So far, various amino acids involved in tRNA recognition of the human enzyme could be mapped, but the sequence elements needed on the tRNA side were largely unknown. Initially, the G34 base at the wobble position of the anticodon, which is modified to mannosylqueuosine in eukaryotic cells, was associated with Dnmt2 activity. However, the results with G. sulfurreducens are not in favor of that model, because Gs-tRNA Asp contains the G34, but it is a very weak substrate, while Gs-tRNA Glu, which is the preferred substrate, does not have a G34. By comparing substrate and non-substrate tRNAs of GsDnmt2, it became apparent that all non-substrates contain a GG dinucleotide in the variable loop as a characteristic feature. Indeed, introduction of this sequence into murine tRNA Asp and Geobacter tRNA Glu drastically reduced their methylation by GsDnmt2. We cannot rule out the possibility that the two point exchanges in the variable loop might disrupt tRNA folding. However, the initial discovery that the GG dinucleotide is inhibiting GsDnmt2 was made with natural tRNAs, which are all fully functional in protein biosynthesis, which rules out loss of structure in these cases. Therefore, when taken together, our results strongly suggest that the variable loop functions as an important specificity determinant in GsDnmt2. Interestingly, the exchange in the murine tRNA Asp also reduced its methylation by the human DNMT2, indicating that the variable loop is a critical specificity determinant for the tRNA recognition of human DNMT2 as well. However, introduction of the favorable variable loop into murine tRNA Glu did not increase its methylation. Hence, our data indicate that Dnmt2 enzymes use further tRNA-specific sequence determinants in addition to the variable loop. These contacts mediate the preference of the human DNMT2 enzyme for Gs - tRNA Asp, despite the presence of the unfavorable variable loop. Furthermore, they prevent methylation of murine tRNA Glu, even after introducing a favorable variable loop. The contribution of additional specificity determinants to tRNA recognition by Dnmt2 enzymes is also supported by the observation that Dnmt2 enzymes from other species still strongly prefer Gs - tRNA Asp over Gs-tRNA Glu. The role of the variable loop as a specificity determinant in tRNA recognition by Dnmt2 is not without precedence. Examples for tRNA-interacting enzymes, which use the variable loop for tRNA recognition, include a bacterial tRNA methyltransferase and a prokaryotic tRNA-dependent amidotransferase, and the same strategy is also used by several aminoacyl-tRNA-synthetases. Recognition of nucleic acids by proteins, in general, is based on direct and indirect readout, i.e. direct contacts of amino acids to nucleobases, which detect the nature of the base, and contacts to the nucleic acid backbone, which detect the structure of the nucleic acid. The GG dinucleotide in the variable loop of the tRNA could interfere with either of these processes. However, the observation that the variable loop of preferred tRNA substrates is only characterized by the absence of the GG dinucleotide but it does not contain a specific nucleotide sequence might argue against direct base contacts. This suggests that an indirect readout mechanism is operational in which the presence of the GG dinucleotide induces a structural change in the tRNA which then prevents its methylation. The finding that GsDnmt2 methylates tRNA Asp from other species but not from Geobacter provides strong support for the hypothesis that the Gs - Dnmt2 was acquired by horizontal gene transfer, because there is no reason for this enzyme to methylate tRNA Asp, which is not a substrate in Geobacter itself. In the horizontal gene transfer view, the activity toward tRNA Asp can be interpreted as an evolutionary relict. Based on our data, one may speculate that initially a Dnmt2 gene with tRNA Asp preference, but also the ability to methylate tRNA Glu, was acquired by Geobacter. Precedence for such side activity can be seen in many species including D. melanogaster, S. pombe and D. discoideum. Methylation of the Gs-tRNA Glu was favorable, which led to the stable integration of the Dnmt2, whereas methylation of the endogenous tRNA Asp was lost in a co-evolution of GsDnmt2 and the Gs - tRNA Asp. At present, one can only speculate about the role of Dnmt2 in Geobacter. In previous studies, tRNA methylation by Dnmt2 was found to improve the stability of the tRNA or affect tRNA charging, and prevent tRNA fragmentation. Which of these roles, if any, is important for Geobacter tRNA Glu cannot be said at present. The generation of a Dnmt2 knock-out strain was unsuccessful, which may indicate that Dnmt2 is an important gene in G. sulfurreducens, which is in line with the evolutionary arguments. This would be an interesting finding, since Dnmt2 enzymes are non-essential in other model organisms under normal growth conditions. CONCLUSIONS The first enzymatic characterization of the specificity of a bacterial Dnmt2 homolog, the enzyme from G. sulfurreducens, revealed that it is the only known Dnmt2 enzyme that does not prefer methylation of tRNA Asp. Instead, an unexpected swap of specificity of this enzyme was observed toward methylation of Geobacter tRNA Glu, which was confirmed in vitro and in vivo. However, GsDnmt2 still methylates tRNA Asp from other species, and Dnmt2 enzymes from other species still methylate Geobacter tRNA Asp. We provide an evolutionary scenario that can explain this interesting finding. We noticed that the Geobacter tRNA Asp has a modified variable loop, which serves as a specificity determinant and causes the loss of methylation activity. Furthermore, we show that this mechanism could be extended to the human enzyme as well, indicating that work with a bacterial Dnmt2 homolog, finally, has led to important insight into the mechanism of the corresponding human enzyme. SUPPLEMENTARY DATA Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online. FUNDING Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Research Group FOR1082 and Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst. Funding for open access charge: DFG and University Stuttgart. Conflict of interest statement. None declared. Supplementary Material SUPPLEMENTARY DATA: Click here to view. Article information Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jun 1; 42: 6487–6496. Published online 2014 Apr 7. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku256 PMCID: PMC4041430 PMID: 24711368 Raghuvaran Shanmugam, 1 Muktak Aklujkar, 2 Matthias Schäfer, 3 Richard Reinhardt, 4 Olaf Nickel, 5 Gunter Reuter, 5 Derek R. Lovley, 2 Ann Ehrenhofer-Murray, 6 Wolfgang Nellen, 7 Serge Ankri, 8 Mark Helm, 9 Tomasz P. Jurkowski, 1 and Albert Jeltsch 1, * Raghuvaran Shanmugam 1 Institute of Biochemistry, Stuttgart University, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany Find articles by Raghuvaran Shanmugam Muktak Aklujkar 2 Department of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003-9298, USA Find articles by Muktak Aklujkar Matthias Schäfer 3 Division of Epigenetics, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, German Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany Find articles by Matthias Schäfer Richard Reinhardt 4 Max-Planck-Genomzentrum, 50829 Köln, Germany Find articles by Richard Reinhardt Olaf Nickel 5 Institute of Biology, Developmental Genetics, Martin Luther University Halle, 06120 Halle, Germany Find articles by Olaf Nickel Gunter Reuter 5 Institute of Biology, Developmental Genetics, Martin Luther University Halle, 06120 Halle, Germany Find articles by Gunter Reuter Derek R. Lovley 2 Department of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003-9298, USA Find articles by Derek R. Lovley Ann Ehrenhofer-Murray 6 Institute of Biology, Humboldt University, 10115 Berlin, Germany Find articles by Ann Ehrenhofer-Murray Wolfgang Nellen 7 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, 34132 Kassel, Germany Find articles by Wolfgang Nellen Serge Ankri 8 Department of Molecular Microbiology, The Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa 31096, Israel Find articles by Serge Ankri Mark Helm 9 Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, 55128 Mainz, Germany Find articles by Mark Helm Tomasz P. Jurkowski 1 Institute of Biochemistry, Stuttgart University, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany Find articles by Tomasz P. Jurkowski Albert Jeltsch 1 Institute of Biochemistry, Stuttgart University, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany Find articles by Albert Jeltsch 1 Institute of Biochemistry, Stuttgart University, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany 2 Department of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003-9298, USA 3 Division of Epigenetics, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, German Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany 4 Max-Planck-Genomzentrum, 50829 Köln, Germany 5 Institute of Biology, Developmental Genetics, Martin Luther University Halle, 06120 Halle, Germany 6 Institute of Biology, Humboldt University, 10115 Berlin, Germany 7 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, 34132 Kassel, Germany 8 Department of Molecular Microbiology, The Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa 31096, Israel 9 Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, 55128 Mainz, Germany * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +49 711 685 64390 +49 711 685 64390; Fax: +49 711 685 64392; Email: ed.tragttuts-inu.cbi@hcstlej.trebla Received 2013 Nov 26; Revised 2014 Mar 14; Accepted 2014 Mar 17. Copyright © The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Articles from Nucleic Acids Research are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press 