Wash interacts with lamin and affects global nuclear organization You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Wash interacts with lamin and affects global nuclear organization Curr Biol. 2015 Mar 16; 25: 804–810. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Current biology : CB Author Manuscript HHS Public Access Wash interacts with lamin and affects global nuclear organization Jeffrey M. Verboon, Hector Rincon-Arano,, and Susan M. Parkhurst Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials 1. NIHMS658832-supplement-1.docx GUID: 140595C0-5E59-450A-8DF3-9C7B924A6049 2. NIHMS658832-supplement-2.mov GUID: E0AD6E5D-FED6-4122-8E5E-002713E917D5 3. NIHMS658832-supplement-3.pdf GUID: 4D38B983-ED6A-48F5-81D1-2E093F729F3A 4. NIHMS658832-supplement-4.tif GUID: 2CB311AA-AD8F-409D-B37E-EAB5DFC288A2 Summary The cytoplasmic functions of Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome family proteins are well established and include roles in cytoskeleton reorganization and membrane-cytoskeletal interactions important for membrane/vesicle trafficking, morphogenesis, immune response and signal transduction. Mis-regulation of these proteins is associated with immune deficiency and metastasis. Cytoplasmic WAS proteins act as effectors of Rho family GTPases and polymerize branched actin through the Arp2/3 complex. Previously, we identified Drosophila washout as a new member of the WAS family with essential cytoplasmic roles in early development. Studies in mammalian cells and Dictyostelium suggest that WASH functions primarily in a multiprotein complex that regulates endosome shape and trafficking in an Arp2/3-dependent manner. However, roles for classically cytoplasmic proteins in the nucleus are beginning to emerge, in particular as participants in the regulation of gene expression. Here we show that Drosophila Wash is present in the nucleus where it plays a key role in global nuclear organization. wash mutant and knockdown nuclei disrupt sub-nuclear structures/organelles and exhibit the abnormal wrinkled morphology reminiscent of those observed in diverse laminopathies. We find that nuclear Wash interacts with B-type Lamin, and like Lamin, Wash associates with constitutive heterochromatin. Wash knockdown increases chromatin accessibility of repressive compartments and results in a global redistribution of repressive histone modifications. Thus, our results reveal a novel role for Wash in modulating nucleus morphology and in the organization of both chromatin and non-chromatin nuclear sub-structures. Keywords: Wash, Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome, nuclear organization, Lamin, genome organization, chromatin accessibility, Drosophila Results and Discussion While examining cytoplasmic functions of Wash, we found that Wash is present in fly cell nuclear extracts. In addition to localizing in the cytoplasm, Wash is present in the nucleus in Drosophila S2R+ cells and many embryo/larval tissues. Nuclear Wash is distributed in a punctuate pattern. This nuclear Wash staining is not observed in Wash knockdowns cells, wash mutant tissues, or when digitonin is used to permeabilize only the plasma membrane. Although Wash lacks a DNA binding domain, polytene chromosome staining shows that Wash associates with ~500 chromatin regions. Figure 1 Wash is in the nucleus and disrupts nuclear morphology. Wash is expressed in both the nucleus and cytoplasm as shown by western blot analysis of nuclear and cytoplasmic Drosophila Kc167 cell extracts. Extract specificity shown by western blot analysis... To determine if nuclear Wash is biologically significant, we examined nuclear morphology in Wash RNAi-treated S2R+ cells. The effectiveness of Wash knockdown was established by western blot and confirmed by the disorganization of the cytoplasm of knockdown cells. Importantly, Wash depletion caused irregularly shaped nuclei in S2R+ cells without affecting expression of the nuclear lamina protein Lamin. This altered nuclear morphology phenotype is not due to cell culture manipulation or an indirect effect of cytoplasmic Wash knockdown, as salivary gland nuclei from wash Δ185 mutants stained for Lamin also show dramatic morphological alterations in nuclear shape while retaining overall cell and gland shape. Thus, Wash plays a key role in modulating nuclear shape in Drosophila. We next explored if lack of Wash affects nuclear organization. wash mutants exhibit reduced nuclear volume and lower DNA content. DAPI staining of wildtype and wash polytene chromosome spreads showed that chromosomes in wash mutants are less organized, appear more twisted, and tend to easily break and/or fragment upon physical stress. We performed FISH on salivary glands using chromosome paints for the three larger chromosomes. While wildtype chromosomes occupy well-defined spaces, chromosomes of wash mutants are positioned closer to the nuclear periphery, with chromosome 3 in particular tending to be more dispersed. We also examined the organization of diverse non-chromatin nuclear sub-structures, as well as different chromatin modifications. Strikingly, HP1, which accumulates at and marks the chromocenter, is present in the nucleus but accumulates only weakly at the chromocenter in wash mutants. Similarly, Coilin and Fibrillarin and the nuclear envelope component Mtor exhibit non-specific nuclear localization in the absence of Wash. Importantly, these mis-localizations are specific, as lack of Wash does not affect localization of the dosage compensation complex. The alterations of HP1, Coilin, Fibrillarin, and Mtor are likely due to their nuclear disorganization rather than protein loss, as protein levels remain roughly the same in wash mutants or knockdown cells. We also examined histone modifications associated with repressive or active chromatin. Consistent with our previous results, H3K9me3, a histone modification recognized by HP1, is reduced in wash mutants. The repressive mark H4K20me2 and the active mark H3K4me3 are also lower in wash mutant nuclei. Figure 2 Wash disrupts nuclear and genome organization. Confocal projections of wildtype and wash Δ185 mutant salivary gland polytene chromosomes; wash Δ185 chromosomes show aberrant alignment and banding and are extremely fragile.... To further examine the requirement for Wash in the nucleus, we expressed a GFP-Wash fusion protein with and without its conserved nuclear localization sequence mutated under the control of its own endogenous Wash promoter in a wash Δ185 mutant background. The wildtype version of these transgenics is expressed in both the nucleus and cytoplasm, rescues the wash Δ185 mutant to viability, and does not exhibit nuclear phenotypes. In transgenics with the version lacking the nuclear localization signal, the GFP-Wash +NESΔNLS fusion protein is expressed in the cytoplasm while largely excluded from the nucleus. These transgenics exhibit similar nuclear phenotypes as wash Δ185 mutants, including disruption of nuclear morphology and disorganization of sub-nuclear structures/organelles. Thus, Wash’s nuclear activity is required during development, where it plays a key role in global nuclear organization. We identified a strong interaction between Wash and the Drosophila B-type lamin, Lamin Dm0, in a yeast two-hybrid screen. Lamins are intermediate filament proteins that form a mesh lining the inner nuclear membrane and function in diverse roles including nuclear shape, aging, genome organization, and gene expression. Lamin Dm0 is present throughout development in all cells. Using GST pulldowns with in vitro translated and/or bacterially purified proteins, we show that Wash interacts directly with Lamin. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments using nuclear enriched extracts of 0-12h Drosophila embryos show that this nuclear Wash-Lamin interaction occurs in vivo. To confirm this interaction in vivo, we performed a Duolink in situ Proximity Ligation Assay for Wash and GFP in salivary glands expressing a GFP-Lamin fusion protein. Fluorescent signal was observed and localized exclusively around the DNA confirming the interaction between Wash and GFP-Lamin. Thus, nuclear Wash interacts physically with Lamin. Figure 3 Wash interacts with lamin and associates with LADs. Wash interacts with Lamin directly by GST-pulldown assays using IVT or bacterially expressed proteins. Wash and Lamin interact in vivo. Western blot of immunoprecipitations from embryo... While Lamin does not exhibit a banding pattern on polytene chromosomes, genome-wide studies have shown that Lamin associates with specific genomic regions termed Lamin-associated domains. These regions exhibit low gene density and are usually associated with repressive chromatin. As Wash associates with discrete regions on polytene chromosomes, we asked whether these regions correspond to LADs. Using DamID chromatin profiling in Kc cells, we identified 593 large continuous Wash-associated domains spread along the Drosophila genome with an average size of 40 Kb. Wash domains mainly localize with non-transcribed regions during early embryogenesis. We performed similar DamID profiling for Lamin and identified 616 LADs. These domains show ~93% overlap with LADs previously described in Kc167 cells using a different microarray platform. Importantly, Wash-associated regions indeed coincide with LADs. Meta-analysis of the Wash DamID signal to LADs boundaries confirms the genomic co-localization between Wash and Lamin. To establish whether Wash domains correspond to functional domains defined by factor binding and epigenetic marks, we performed a meta-analysis of Wash binding to the boundaries of the 5-chromatin types classification established previously in Kc cells. Wash association with chromatin is mainly enriched in B lack chromatin, which is the predominant type of repressive chromatin containing silent or low-expressing genes and co-localizing with Lamin-enriched nuclear envelope. Wash DamID signal is depleted from other chromatin types and coding regions ), suggesting that Wash targets transcriptionally silent chromatin regions in a similar fashion to Lamin. Interestingly, Wash also targets expressed developmental-regulated domains, suggesting that Wash binding does not necessarily repress transcription. The alteration of histone modifications and sub-nuclear structures in wash mutants strongly suggests that Wash directly impacts chromatin organization. As chromatin accessibility is the main organizing feature that explains chromatin organization, we evaluated the effect of Wash knockdown in S2R+ cells on chromatin accessibility using an M.SssI-based approach. Meta-analysis of M.SssI-methylated accessible chromatin of the 9 modENCODE consortium-defined chromatin states revealed higher accessibility in promoters and enhancers than in heterochromatic regions. Nevertheless, and consistent with its association to BLACK chromatin, Wash knockdown increased chromatin accessibility at the borders of constitutive heterochromatin, but not promoter or heterochromatin-like euchromatin. MeDIP-qPCR experiments confirmed these structural alterations on constitutive heterochromatin upon Wash knockdown, but not in promoter regions. Notably, although no effect was observed on promoter, open chromatin, male X-linked genes, or heterochromatin-like euchromatic regions upon Wash knockdown, we observed increased accessibility on enhancers and reduced accessibility on Polycomb, elongating, enhancer, and basal interchromatin regions, suggesting that absence of Wash indirectly impacts particular functional domains of the genome. Figure 4 Wash and Lamin affect chromatin accessibility at heterochromatic regions and Position Effect Variegation. Distribution of M.SssI-based chromatin accessibility around active promoter, constitutive heterochromatin and heterochromatin-like euchromatin... Similar to Wash, knockdown of Lamin alters nuclear architecture and correlates with alterations on heterochromatin organization of repressive histone modifications. Despite exhibiting a higher global background, adjusted chromatin accessibility reveals that, similar to Wash, Lamin depletion causes an increase in accessibility of heterochromatic regions. Nevertheless, unlike Wash, Lamin knockdown also increased the accessibility of promoter regions, suggesting that Lamin has more widespread roles in chromatin organization whereas Wash is particularly relevant for heterochromatin architecture, which is consistent with recent reports suggesting that loss of LMNB1 results in decondensation of chromosome territories. Since Wash modifies genome organization by impairing chromatin accessibility of silent regions, we hypothesized that the wash mutant should behave as a suppressor of position effect variegation. Several Drosophila PEV models have been used as in vivo reporters of a particular protein’s ability to modulate chromatin in different contexts. Using the brown -based PEV model, we found that lack of wash suppresses both bw VDE2 and bw D variegation, which is consistent with our genomic data. Importantly, similar results were obtained using the lamin sz18 mutant, however, this lamin-dependent effect is sex-specific in the case of bw D. Strikingly, when the wash Δ185 and lamin sz18 alleles were tested in the presence of white -based centromeric, heterochromatic, and telomeric PEV, we found that both mutants behave as enhancers of centromeric and heterochromatic PEV, while showing no affect on telomeric PEV. This is consistent with a previous report for lamin effects on centromeric PEV. It is worth noting that both brown and white are found in LADs, but while brown is located in a gene-rich region flanked by LADs, the white gene is embedded in a gene poor region that is part of a LAD. To our knowledge this is the first time that the two PEV models have yielded different results when assaying a given mutation, suggesting that these PEV models differentially affect heterochromatic domains. Classically cytoplasmic proteins are emerging as significant players in the nucleus. Two WAS family members, WASp and WAVE1, have been identified as positive regulators of gene expression. Indeed, before Wash was recognized as a cytoplasmic cytoskeletal factor, it was identified as part of the nuclear TRF2 complex and, more recently, a required regulator of the NURF complex on the c-Myc locus in hematopoesis. Despite this potential role in regulating gene expression, our findings link the nuclear presence of Wash with global nuclear organization, suggesting that Wash is required for the formation, maintenance, and/or movements of specific nuclear domains, organelles, and/or machineries. We also identify Wash as a Lamin-interacting protein and a key component of “BLACK” chromatin. Lamins and lamina-interacting proteins mainly compose the nuclear envelope, which plays key roles in nuclear structure, chromosome organization, DNA repair, transcriptional control, and like its plasma membrane counterpart, is the site for signal sensing, molecule trafficking, and inter/intra-nuclear attachments. Consistent with this, mutations in Lamins and lamina-interacting proteins such as emerin lead to phenotypically diverse diseases including muscular dystrophies, cardiomyopathies, and premature aging syndromes. Interestingly, the abnormal wrinkled morphology in both wash mutant and knockdown nuclei resembles that observed in diverse laminopathies, including the Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. It is possible that Wash dynamically modifies specific compartments of the nuclear envelope to adapt it to different types of stimuli. It is known that tissue-specific differential expression of lamin isoforms reinforce the nucleus against physical stress by stabilizing the nuclear envelope and chromatin. We have previously shown that, like other WAS family members, Wash requires Arp2/3 for actin nucleation. Recently, both actin and the WAS family-interacting protein Arp2/3 were implicated in nuclear envelope fragmentation in starfish oocytes. Although it is not yet clear whether the Wash-Lamin functional link requires Arp2/3, Wash could potentially be the connection point for coordinating the remodeling of the Lamin-based meshwork along with the cytoplasmic cytoskeleton in response to physical stress. Alternatively, in vitro data suggest that Lamin monomers tend to self-assemble into filamentous fibers under particular salt conditions, Wash could modulate Lamin self-assembly in vivo based on its molecular functions with other structural proteins. Additionally, Wash is involved in endocytosis by modulating vesicle formation and trafficking, these regulatory activities could be useful at the nuclear envelope for the dynamic remodeling of the lamin meshwork in response to nuclear shape changes required for cells to squeeze through small spaces or when undergoing metastasis. An alternate possibility relies on the fact that actin and actin-binding proteins have been found in several chromatin remodeling factors : Wash could modulate actin functions and/or its mobility during its association with these chromatin remodelers to maintain a dynamic chromatin structure. Our data highlights Wash as a key regulator of cytoplasmic and nuclear processes by maintaining microfilament, intermediate filament, and microtubule homeostasis, and whose mutations lead to alterations in both cellular compartments. In the future, it will be exciting to further explore Wash’s nuclear roles, and to determine if and how closely these roles parallel those in the cytoplasm. Experimental Procedures Please refer to the Supplemental Information for detailed experimental procedures. The raw and normalized datasets and DamID domains can be found in the following GEO dataset: } GSE59854. Supplementary Material 1 Click here to view. 2 Click here to view. 3 Click here to view. 4 Click here to view. Acknowledgements We thank Steve Henikoff, Amir Orian, and members of the Parkhurst and Groudine labs for their interest and comments on the manuscript. We thank K. Barry, E. Rodriguez-Mesa, and T. Ragoczy for help at various stages of the project and J. Henikoff, R. Basom and J. Young for bioinformatics help. We also thank A. Akhtar, J. Gall, S. Henikoff, G. Karpen, A. Minoda, L. Pagie, P. Talbert, B. van Steensel, T. Tsukiyama, L. Wallrath, L. Wayner, the M.J. Murdoch Charitable Trust, the Bloomington Stock Center, and the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank for antibodies, flies, software, microscope, and other reagents used in this study. This work was supported by NIH grants T32CA009657, DK44746 and HL65440, and GM097083. Footnotes Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. Article information Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 Mar 16. Published in final edited form as: Curr Biol. 2015 Mar 16; 25: 804–810. Published online 2015 Mar 5. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.01.052 PMCID: PMC4366290 NIHMSID: NIHMS658832 PMID: 25754639 Jeffrey M. Verboon, 1, 5 Hector Rincon-Arano, 1, 5 Timothy R. Werwie, 1 Jeffrey J. Delrow, 2 David Scalzo, 1 Vivek Nandakumar, 3 Mark Groudine, 1, 4 and Susan M. Parkhurst 1, * Jeffrey M. Verboon 1 Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA 98109 Find articles by Jeffrey M. Verboon Hector Rincon-Arano 1 Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA 98109 Find articles by Hector Rincon-Arano Timothy R. Werwie 1 Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA 98109 Find articles by Timothy R. Werwie Jeffrey J. Delrow 2 Genomics Resource, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA 98109 Find articles by Jeffrey J. Delrow David Scalzo 1 Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA 98109 Find articles by David Scalzo Vivek Nandakumar 3 Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA 98109 Find articles by Vivek Nandakumar Mark Groudine 1 Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA 98109 4 Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Washington School of Medicine Seattle, WA, USA 98195 Find articles by Mark Groudine Susan M. Parkhurst 1 Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA 98109 Find articles by Susan M. Parkhurst 1 Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA 98109 2 Genomics Resource, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA 98109 3 Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA 98109 4 Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Washington School of Medicine Seattle, WA, USA 98195 5 Co-first author. * Corresponding author: Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview Ave N., A1-187, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. Phone: 667-6466; gro.crchf@pnasus Author Contributions JMV, HR-A, and SMP designed the study. JMV, HR-A, SMP, TRW, DS and VN performed experiments and analyzed data. VN, JVM, and DS performed the morphometric analyses. HR-A and JJD performed the bioinformatics analyses. HR-A, JMV, MG, and SMP wrote the manuscript. All authors participated in discussion of the results and commented on the manuscript. PMC Copyright notice Publisher's Disclaimer The publisher's final edited version of this article is available free at Curr Biol See commentary " Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome proteins in the nucleus: aWASH with possibilities " in Nucleus, volume 6 on page 349. 