 Dictyostelium harbors multiple expansin-like genes with generally unknown functions. Thus, we analyzed the expansin-like 3 gene and found that its expression was reduced in a null mutant for a STATa gene encoding a transcription factor. The expression of expL3 was developmentally regulated and its transcript was spliced only in the multicellular stages. The expL3 promoter was activated in the anterior prestalk region of the parental strain and downregulated in the STATa null slug, although the expL3 promoter was still expressed in the prestalk region. The expL3 overexpressing strain exhibited delayed development and occasionally formed an aberrant structure, i.e., a fruiting body-like structure with a short stalk. The ExpL3-myc protein bound cellulose. Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Keywords: Cell wall, Cellulose-binding, Dictyostelium, Expansin, Morphogenesis, STAT transcription factor Background Expansins are cell wall proteins in plants that loosen the cell wall, thereby regulating cell wall enlargement in growing cells. Expansins may act by breaking the noncovalent bonds among wall polysaccharides. Expansin activity is also associated with morphogenesis and other developmental events, such as leaf primordium formation, fruit ripening, xylem formation, pollination, seed germination, and abscission. Plant expansins comprise a large gene superfamily of four divergent families: α-expansin, β-expansin, expansin-like A, and expansin-like B. The existence of expansin-like proteins is also known in bacteria and fungi, such as EXLX1 in Bacillus subtilis, which is structurally and functionally similar to plant expansins. The cellular slime mold Dictyostelium is a lower eukaryote, which produces a cellulose-based cell wall. It is a rare species that harbors multiple expansin-like genes in its genome, i.e., at least nine genes, although expL4 appears to be a putative pseudogene. It is of evolutionary importance to understand the role of expansin-like molecules in Dictyostelium, which is significantly divergent from plants. In a previous study, we demonstrated the role of an expansin-like gene, expL7, which regulates morphogenesis during Dictyostelium development. The expression of expL7 is under the control of CudA, a putative transcription factor. STATa is a transcription factor that activates the expression of cudA in the anterior prestalk tip region, thus STATa indirectly controls expL7 gene expression. Slugs of both STATa and cudA null mutants tend to migrate for longer and they fail to culminate, eventually forming an aberrant structure. The anterior prestalk region serves as an organizer during multicellular development in Dictyostelium, and the region where STATa is activated to express cudA is designated as the “tip-organizer.” In this study, we analyzed the function of another expansin-like gene, expL3, which was positively regulated by STATa. Materials and methods Cells and growth conditions Dictyostelium discoideum Ax2 cells were axenically cultured in HL5 medium at 22°C. Cells of the STATa null strain were grown in HL5 supplemented with 10 μg/ml blasticidin S. The expL3 null strain was grown in HL5 supplemented with 36 μg/ml hygromycin B. Transformants with the Neo R cassette construct were selected using HL5 supplemented with 20 μg/ml G418. Analysis of gene expression using semi-quantitative and quantitative RT-PCR Ax2 and STATa null cells were allowed to develop at 22°C on Omnipore filters, which were placed on non-nutrient agar plates. Total RNA was extracted from Ax2 and STATa null strains every 3–4 h. cDNA synthesis and RT-PCR were conducted as described previously using a pair of primers: expL3-RT-1 and expL3-RT-2 or expL3-G7-i and expL3-G8-i. The quantitative RT-PCR analysis was performed as previously described. The primers used for RT-PCR are listed in Additional file 1 : Table S1. lacZ fusion construct and β-galactosidase staining The promoter fragment of the expL3 gene was amplified by PCR to add an Xba I site at the 5’ end and a Bgl II site at the 3’ end. After digestion with Xba I and Bgl II, the fragment was gel-purified and subcloned into Xba I/ Bgl II-cut pDdgal-17 to yield pDdNeo R. To detect the promoter activity, cells transformed with pDdNeo R were grown and developed on Omnipore filters. Fixation and staining were performed as previously described. expL3 expression vectors The fragment corresponding to the entire open reading frame of the expL3 gene was amplified by PCR using a plasmid DNA containing the expL3 gene to add a Sal I site at the 5’ end and a Bam HI site at the 3’ end, before subcloning into pTOPO-Blunt II to produce pTOPO. After digestion with Sal I and Bam HI, the ORF fragment was gel-purified and subcloned into Sal I and Bam HI-digested pLD1ΔBX-myc to yield pLD1ΔBX. Plasmid DNA that contained the promoter region of the ecmF gene was purified by gel electrophoresis after digesting pLD1ΔBX with Sal I and Not I. The expL3- myc fragment was purified by gel electrophoresis after digesting pLD1ΔBX with Sal I and Not I. Both of the purified DNA fragments were ligated to yield pLD1ΔBX. It should be noted that each of the ExpL3 expression constructs used in this study contained an intron. Western blot analysis of ExpL3-myc protein Cells transformed with pLD1ΔBX or pLD1ΔBX were allowed to develop until the slug stage, before the slugs were solubilized and analyzed on 7.5% SDS-polyacrylamide gels, followed by blotting onto Hybond-C extra filters. The filters were blocked and detected using the Promega Proto Blot II AP System with Stabilized Substrate, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Anti-c-Myc monoclonal antibody 9E10 was used as a primary antibody and alkaline phosphatase -conjugated anti-mouse IgG was used as a secondary antibody. Cellulose-binding assay The cellulose-binding ability of the ExpL3-myc fusion protein was tested according to a previously described procedure with some modifications. First, 2 × 10 7 cells that overexpressed the ExpL3-myc protein were allowed to develop until the slug stage on the Omnipore filter, before the slugs were harvested and ground with a plastic pestle in the presence of 250 μl of 1 × phosphate-buffered saline containing cOmplete, Mini, EDTA-free as protease inhibitors. Furthermore, 250 μl of 2 × lysis buffer was added to lyse the slug. Microcrystalline cellulose beads were suspended in binding buffer at a final concentration of 5%. Subsequently, 500 μl of the Avicel slurry was added to the cell lysate, which was allowed to bind with rotation at 4°C for 1 h. The Avicel was pelleted by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 2 min and washed three times each with 1 M NaCl/50 mM phosphate buffer and with 50 mM phosphate buffer. The bound protein was eluted by heating at 105°C for 8 min in 1 × SDS sample buffer. The unbound and input fractions were concentrated by ultrafiltration, mixed with 1/2 volume of 3 × SDS sample buffer, and heated as described above. The fusion protein in each fraction was detected by Western blot analysis, as described above. Results STATa-dependent expression of the expL3 gene Previously, we showed that a Dictyostelium expansin-like gene, expL7, has crucial roles in morphogenesis during development. Its expression is regulated by CudA, where the expression of this gene in the tip-organizer cells is regulated by STATa. Therefore, we examined the STATa-dependency of gene expression for other expansin-like family members. The majority of the genes examined in the family exhibited STATa-independent expression, whereas expL3 exhibited STATa-dependent expression because according to quantitative RT-PCR, its transcript level was significantly reduced in the STATa null strain compared with that in the parental Ax2 strain at the corresponding stages. Figure 1 Comparison of expL3 transcript levels in Ax2 and STATa null strains. Ax2 and STATa null cells were allowed to develop until the desired developmental stages. Total RNA was extracted from Ax2 cells at the first finger/early slug. To further characterize the expL3 gene, we investigated the expression profiles of expL3 both temporally and spatially, where we examined the relative expL3 transcript level using semi-quantitative RT-PCR. The expL3 gene has a single intron in the coding region; thus, PCR primers were designed for both sides of the intron. The results showed that expL3 expression is developmentally regulated, with a peak at approximately 18 h, which is the late slug to Mexican hat stage. Figure 2 Temporal expression profiles of the expL3 gene. A : Developmental time course of expL3 splicing detected by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Total RNA was extracted from Ax2 cells every 3 h and used as a template for the amplification of a specific expL3... The expL3 transcript was efficiently spliced only during the developmental stages between 12 h and 21 h because a smaller band that corresponded to the fragment without the intron was strongly amplified. During the earlier stages until 9 h, only a larger band that corresponded to the fragment with the intron was detected. Both bands were detectable at 24 h. These results indicate the posttranscriptional regulation of expL3 in addition to transcriptional regulation, which is specific to the multicellular developmental stages. Expression of the expL3 is prestalk-specific To clarify the spatial expression pattern, we produced an expL3/lacZ reporter construct and the promoter activity was assayed in terms of its β-galactosidase activity. A scattered signal was detected at the mound stage. Furthermore, the signal was sorted to the prestalk region during tip formation. During the first finger, slug, and Mexican hat stages, a strong signal was detected in the pstA region, whereas a weak scattered signal was detected in the pstO region. Later, a signal was detectable in the stalk of the culminant. Figure 3 Spatial expression pattern of expL3 promoter activity detected with a lacZ reporter construct. The lacZ reporter construct expL3/lacZ contained a 948-bp upstream promoter region fused to the β-galactosidase gene. Ax2 cells and... When the STATa null cells were transformed with the same construct, weaker staining of the pstA cells was visible during any of the multicellular stages, but almost no pstO or scattered staining was visible. This indicates that STATa is necessary for adequate expression of the expL3 gene, but it does not confer pstA-specificity. Overexpression of the expL3 gene caused morphological aberrations To examine the functions of the expL3 gene, a mutant strain that lacked this gene was created via homologous recombination. Three independent targeted clones were isolated, where the cells of these clones developed normally on non-nutrient agar plates and in other conditions. They formed normal looking fruiting body with calcofluor stained stalk and mature spores with normal shape and size. Furthermore, we created strains that overexpressed the ExpL3-myc fusion protein using two different constructs. The first contained the actin15 promoter to drive expL3-myc fusion gene, which was transformed into the Ax2 strain to yield Ax2/: expL3 : myc. When act15:expL3 myc OE cells were allowed to develop on non-nutrient water agar plates, the development of the slug stage was delayed by 1–2 h, and they tended to migrate longer than Ax2 slugs. The actin15 promoter is not constitutive, and it peaks at 2–6 h before its transcription level gradually reduces as development proceeds ; therefore, the effect of its overexpression may not be retained during the later stages of development. To resolve this issue, we attempted to place the fusion gene under the control of its own expL3 promoter. However, this construct was unstable and we could not create it successfully. Therefore, we attempted to use the ecmF promoter to replace the actin15 promoter, and to create a new overexpression construct because the ecmF promoter activity is similar to that observed for expL3 both temporally and spatially, i.e., late stages and pstA-specific. 3 A). Overexpression of the fusion protein was confirmed in the resultant transformant of Ax2/: expL3 : myc by Western blot analysis. Figure 4 Overexpression of the ExpL3-myc protein driven by the pstA-specific ecmF promoter. A : Physical map of the overexpression construct of the ExpL3-myc fusion protein, pLD1ΔBX. The late stage and pstA-specific promoter ecmF. However, the development of the expL3 oe started to delay at slug stage, the time when the ExpL3-myc protein became detectable. The slugs tended to migrate for longer, where the majority remained as slugs even after 24 h of development. A limited number of Mexican hat-like structures were observed at 21 h and culminant-like structures were present among the slugs at 24 h. After 3 days of development, most of them became culminants; however, they exhibited aberrant terminal structures, where a short but thick stalk-like structure supported the spore mass. They formed cellulose, mature spore but they did not form an unequivocal basal disc. This indicates that the expL3 gene causes morphological aberrations when it is overexpressed in the anterior pstA cells. Figure 5 Delayed development and aberrant structure of the culminant caused by overexpression of ExpL3-myc protein. Cells of the parental Ax2 strain and ExpL3-myc overexpressing strain, where expression was driven by the ecmF promoter, Ax2/: expL3 : myc. We tested this hypothesis using Dictyostelium ExpL3, where we examined the binding activity of the myc-tagged ExpL3 using the act15:expL3 myc OE strain. The cells were ground and allowed to bind to crystalline cellulose beads. The ExpL3-myc protein was detected in the bound fraction, which indicates that ExpL3 is capable of binding to cellulose. Figure 6 Binding of the ExpL3-myc fusion protein to microcrystalline cellulose. The left panel shows the results of the Western blot analysis probed with the anti-c-Myc antibody 9E10. The right panel shows Coomassie brilliant blue R-250 staining... Discussion It has been reported that the expL6 transcript is the only developmentally regulated member of this family of genes, but we showed that the expression of the expL3 gene is late stage-specific in the present study. The reason for this discrepancy is unknown; however, the RT-PCR profile obtained in this study almost matched with the dictyExpress RNA-sequencing database. The RNA-seq database indicates that most of the expansin-like family genes in Dictyostelium are expressed in a stage-dependent manner. Based on the current results and our previous study of expL7, we conclude that the expression levels of all expansin-like genes are developmentally regulated in Dictyostelium. The expL3 gene is expressed only in prestalk cells, i.e., strongly in pstA and weakly in pstO cells. Again, there was a discrepancy in the tissue specificity according to previous in situ hybridization results and the β-galactosidase staining results obtained in the present study. This may have been caused by cross-hybridization of the probe used for in situ hybridization, although we cannot exclude the possibility that the promoter region upstream of the 5’ end point of the expL3/lacZ construct confers expression in prespore cells. The RNA-seq database indicates prestalk or prespore enrichment for expansin-like family member transcripts, i.e., expL1, expL3, expL7, and expL9 transcripts are pst-enriched; expL2 and expL8 are psp-enriched; and expL4, expL5, and expL6 exhibit no obvious tissue enrichment. Thus, we conclude that the expression of the expL3 gene is prestalk-specific. The results of expL3/lacZ β-galactosidase staining in the STATa null mutant indicated that STATa may be involved in the strength of expL3 expression but it does not contribute to pstA specificity, although STATa is activated in pstA cells. Alternatively, the STATa null mutant lacks most of the pstA cells, and thus only the weaker expression in pstO cells was detectable. STATa-dependent expression was investigated among the family of genes, except expL9, but no apparent STATa-dependency was observed other than that in expL3 and expL7. These results suggest that the roles of these two expansin-like genes, i.e., expL3 and expL7, are of particular importance during development. The lack of the phenotype in the expL3 null mutant might be an effect of the functional redundancy of the closely related genes, i.e., expL1 – 9, in the Dictyostelium genome. In contrast to the single null mutation, the overexpression of expansin or expansin-like genes in transgenic plants and Dictyostelium obtained the morphogenetic phenotype. In agreement with these observations, overexpression of the ExpL3-myc protein via the pstA-specific ecmF promoter led to a developmental delay after slug formation and a morphological aberration during culmination. We do not know how the Dictyostelium ExpL3 protein exerts its effect on the morphology. However, it is possible that ExpL3 exerts its effect on cellulose in the stalk tube and that it regulates stalk elongation because we found that ExpL3 binds cellulose. We did not test whether the ExpL3 protein has a cell wall-loosening activity. If it possesses this activity, overexpression of the ExpL3 protein in stalk cells might weaken the stalk strength against gravity to yield the short, broad stalk. Actually, expL3 and expL7 do not share many some features except STATa-dependency. The expL7 is reported CudA-dependent, but we have preliminary result expL3 is different. Cell type-specificity is also different; pstA-specific for expL3 and tip-organizer cell-specific for cudA. Therefore, we think these two genes may behave independently. Indeed, double overexpressor strain of expL3 and expL7 genes displayed the phenotype as if it was like that seen in the expL3 OE until culmination, after that it was like that seen in the expL7 OE. Whatever the case, the phenotype of expL3 oe implies the involvement of ExpL3 in morphogenesis during slug migration and culmination in Dictyostelium. 