 Miro GTPase, a member of the Ras superfamily, consists of two GTPase domains flanking a pair of EF hand motifs and a C-terminal transmembrane domain that anchors the protein to the mitochondrial outer membrane. Since the identification of Miro in humans, a series of studies in metazoans, including mammals and fruit flies, have shown that Miro plays a role in the calcium-dependent regulation of mitochondrial transport along microtubules. However, in non-metazoans, including yeasts, slime molds, and plants, Miro is primarily involved in the maintenance of mitochondrial morphology and homeostasis. Given the high level of conservation of Miro in eukaryotes and the variation in the molecular mechanisms of mitochondrial transport between eukaryotic lineages, Miro may have a common ancestral function in mitochondria, and its roles in the regulation of mitochondrial transport may have been acquired specifically by metazoans after the evolutionary divergence of eukaryotes. Keywords: mitochondria, Miro, Ras GTPase, metazoan, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Dictyostelium discoideum, Arabidopsis thaliana INTRODUCTION Mitochondria are essential organelles for aerobic energy production and metabolism in eukaryotic cells. They frequently undergo changes in morphology and intracellular distribution through fusion, fission, and cytoskeleton-dependent transport, presumably to sustain their functional homeostasis. Severely damaged mitochondria can be the target of an autophagic degradation mechanism termed mitophagy. The functions and dynamics of mitochondria are linked to evolutionarily conserved proteins localized to the mitochondrial outer membrane. For example, voltage-gated anion channels regulate the flow of metabolites, including ATP and ADP, across the outer membrane. The translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane complex is the main pathway for mitochondrial protein transport, while the topogenesis of mitochondrial outer membrane β-barrel /sorting and assembly machinery complex plays an important role in the assembly of outer membrane proteins. Dynamin-related GTPases are recruited to the outer membrane and form a ring-like oligomer that constricts mitochondria, leading to fission. The Miro protein is a mitochondrial outer membrane-localized GTPase that is highly conserved throughout eukaryotes. In metazoans, Miro is a component of the protein complex that regulates mitochondrial transport. However, accumulating evidence from studies of non-metazoans, including plants, suggests that Miro is involved in the maintenance of mitochondrial morphology and homeostasis. Here, we review the studies investigating Miro GTPases in diverse eukaryotes and reconsider the molecular functions and physiological roles of Miro in the light of eukaryotic evolution. MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF Miro GTPases Miro GTPase is anchored to the mitochondrial outer membrane by its C-terminal transmembrane domain, leaving its N-terminus exposed to the cytoplasm. Its cytoplasmic region contains two structurally distinct GTPase domains that are separated by a pair of EF hand motifs. Miro was originally classified as an atypical Rho GTPase based on sequence similarity of the N-terminal GTPase domain to Rho family proteins. However, later studies found that both GTP domains lack the conserved G-3 DxxG motif and the Rho-specific insert region, suggesting that they represent two independent subfamilies of the Ras GTPase superfamily. A recent study of Miro in fruit flies showed that its C-terminal GTPase domain is most structurally similar to Rheb, a Ras subfamily member. Correspondingly, the catalytic rates of the two GTPase domains of the budding yeast Miro homolog Gem1p are comparable to those of the Ras family and are significantly slower than those of the dynamin family. The two conserved EF hands of Miro have been shown to bind Ca 2+ and the flanking regions of the EF hands are highly conserved among eukaryotes. Klosowiak et al. showed that these regions contain non-canonical “hidden” EF hands followed by single helices. The hEF hands have a typical helix–loop–helix structure and stabilize the adjacent EF hands by forming an anti-parallel EF hand β-scaffold. The structure of the Miro LM helices resembles extrinsic ligands bound to EF hand proteins, as reported for the protein complexes of Troponin I and Troponin C and molluscan myosin heavy chain and light chain. The EF–hEF hand pair combined with the LM helix can be found in various Ca 2+ -binding proteins including the pollen protein polcalcin, the retinal protein recoverin, and human guanylate cyclase-activating protein GCAP3. Miro is a monomeric protein that assumes a compact and linear conformation in solution and undergoes no significant conformational rearrangement into another stable form and/or oligomerization in response to ions or nucleotides. Conformational changes of Miro may require an interacting partner, similar to other EF hand proteins. FIGURE 1 Molecular structure of the Miro GTPase. Schematic representation of the molecular structure of Miro according to Klosowiak et al.. Domain names are described in the text. The bar indicates a length corresponding to 100 amino acid residues. Miro GTPases EMERGED BEFORE THE DIVERGENCE OF EUKARYOTES An extensive phylogenetic analysis by Vlahou et al. showed that at least one Miro homolog is present in almost all eukaryotic genomes. The phylogeny of Miro homologs shows a clear correlation with that of eukaryotic species and no obvious homolog can be found in prokaryotes. This suggests that Miro appeared at an early stage of eukaryotic evolution, perhaps before the divergence of extant eukaryotic species ; however, the exceptions are found in several species. First, Miro is absent from eukaryotic species that possess mitosomes and hydrogenosomes instead of canonical aerobic mitochondria, including the phylum Microsporidia and the genus Entamoeba. Second, the genomes of several species possessing aerobic mitochondria, such as the phylum Apicomplexa and the order Mamiellales, lack Miro. Third, Miro homologs in the order Trypanosomatid have a non-functional version of EF hand 2 and lack the N-terminal GTPase domain, possessing instead a novel domain without similarity to any other defined sequences. Fourth, in the class Oligohymenophorea, the C-terminal Miro GTPase domains are replaced by sequences that are not conserved, even within the class. Fifth, Miro homologs from Amoebozoa and Stramenopiles have a non-functional C-terminal GTPase domain that lacks the conserved residues. These variations are found separately in different eukaryotic lineages, suggesting that the molecular structure of Miro was modified independently to meet the functional demands of the protein in each lineage after the divergence of eukaryotes. METAZOAN Miro GTPases Miro IS A Ca 2+ -DEPENDENT REGULATOR OF MITOCHONDRIAL TRANSPORT IN METAZOANS Mitochondrial transport is essential for neuronal energy supply to the axons and for the transmission of signals from the cell body to the synaptic junctions. Disruption of mitochondrial distribution in neurons is deleterious and is associated with neurodegenerative diseases, including dominant optic atrophy, Charcot-Marie-Tooth, Alzheimer’s, Huntington’s, and Parkinson’s diseases. In axons, mitochondria are transported along microtubules by the action of kinesins and dyneins as anterograde and retrograde motors, respectively. A screening of genetically mosaic mutant fruit flies identified allelic lethal mutations of Miro that cause abnormal larval locomotion and premature lethality. In the mutant neurons, mitochondria are abnormally clustered in the cell body and are often absent from the synaptic terminals, suggesting a requirement for Miro in anterograde mitochondrial transport along axons. Subsequent studies showed that Miro forms a protein complex with the kinesin-associated protein Milton, which recruits kinesins to mitochondria for anterograde transport. Two mammalian Milton homologs, GRIF-1 and OIP106, associate with Miro, suggesting that Miro is a component of a conserved protein complex involved in mitochondrial transport. Mitochondrial transport is dependent on cytosolic Ca 2+, and a role for Miro in its regulation has been demonstrated. However, several different models for the underlying mechanism have been proposed. Wang and Schwarz proposed that Miro interacts with kinesin via Milton independently of Ca 2+. In this model, increased cytosolic Ca 2+ causes the N-terminal kinesin motor domain to dissociate from microtubules and interact with Miro, resulting in the arrest of mitochondrial transport. MacAskill et al. proposed an alternative model by which Miro directly associates with kinesin without the aid of Milton. In this model, an increase in cytosolic Ca 2+ inhibits the association and allows Miro to be released from kinesin. Accumulating evidence suggests that Miro is also involved in the regulation of retrograde mitochondrial transport. Several neuron-specific proteins that modify the function of Miro in mitochondrial transport were identified recently. Syntaphilin associates with the kinesin that is released from Ca 2+ -binding Miro, leading to stationary mitochondrial docking through interaction with microtubules in axons. The hypoxia-inducible protein HUMMR interacts with Miro and the mammalian Milton homologs, and biases axonal transport of mitochondria in the anterograde direction, presumably for the maintenance of neuronal functions and survival during hypoxia. Alex3, another protein associated with Miro-mediated mitochondrial transport machinery in neurons, is unique to Eutherian mammals. Alex3 originated through a Eutherian-specific gene duplication and may be linked to the increase in brain complexity in Eutherians. Miro IS A TARGET OF PARKIN-MEDIATED DEGRADATION IN MAMMALIAN CELLS Recent evidence suggests that Miro-mediated mitochondrial transport is associated with Parkinson’s disease, a common neurodegenerative disorder characterized by motor disturbances. A form of autosomal recessive juvenile PD is caused by mutations in the mitochondria-targeted Ser/Thr kinase PINK1 and the E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin. PINK1 and Parkin operate together in a common pathway involved in the regulation of multiple aspects of mitochondrial quality control, including mitochondrial biogenesis, fusion and fission, transport, and mitophagy. PINK1 and Parkin are recruited to the damaged mitochondrial outer membrane, where they phosphorylate and ubiquitinate various proteins including VDACs and the mitochondrial fusion proteins mitofusins. Recent studies showed that Miro is also a target of the PINK1-Parkin pathway, although its ubiquitination pattern remains unclear. The Parkin-mediated proteasomal degradation of Miro leads to the dissociation of kinesin from mitochondria and the subsequent arrest of mitochondrial transport. These events may quarantine the damaged mitochondria to facilitate mitophagic clearance. Miro IS INVOLVED IN MITOCHONDRIAL MORPHOLOGY AND Ca 2+ HOMEOSTASIS IN METAZOANS Several studies suggest that metazoan Miro plays different roles in mitochondrial dynamics and function other than mitochondrial transport. Overexpression of Miro and its mutant proteins influences mitochondrial morphology. Overexpression experiments showed that Miro and Drp1, a dynamin GTPase associated with mitochondrial fission, function in an antagonistic manner in mitochondrial morphology, suggesting that Miro may play a role in the maintenance of mitochondrial morphology by suppressing Drp1-mediated mitochondrial fission. Miro is also likely to be involved in mitochondrial Ca 2+ homeostasis. Chang et al. showed that mitochondrial Ca 2+ content is negatively correlated with the velocity of mitochondrial transport. Overexpression of a non-functional EF hand mutant version of Miro decreased Ca 2+ entry into mitochondria, suggesting that Miro is primarily involved in the regulation of mitochondrial Ca 2+ influx and homeostasis, which, in turn, influences mitochondrial transport. NON-METAZOAN Miro GTPases Miro IS INVOLVED IN THE MAINTENANCE OF MITOCHONDRIAL MORPHOLOGY AND INHERITANCE IN Saccharomyces cerevisiae In the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the single-copy Miro homolog Gem1p plays a role in mitochondrial morphology and inheritance. The mitochondrial compartment in wild-type yeast is characterized by a branched network of tubular structures at the cell cortex. In the gem1 knockout mutant, mitochondria show a globular, collapsed tubular, or grape-like morphology without an obvious impact on the mitochondrial membrane structures, suggesting that Gem1p is required for the maintenance of mitochondrial morphology. Amino acid substitution experiments suggest that the function of Gem1p in the regulation of mitochondrial morphology requires both the GTPase domains and the EF hands. The gem1 knockout mutant also shows impaired cell growth on synthetic glycerol media, implying that Gem1p is required for proper mitochondrial respiration. Genetic analysis showed that the GEM1 pathway is independent from the known mitochondrial morphology pathways, including those related to mitochondrial fusion and fission. Further analyses suggested that Gem1p is involved in a pathway that influences mitochondrial inheritance and is independent of other pathways mediated by the myosin-interacting proteins Mmr1p and Ypt11p. Miro PLAYS A ROLE IN MITOCHONDRIA–ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM INTERACTION Accumulating evidence suggests that mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum physically interact with one another and play roles in various cellular processes, including phospholipid biosynthesis and mitochondrial fission. Kornmann et al. showed that loss of MDM12, a subunit of the ER–mitochondria encounter structure complex that is essential for various mitochondrial functions, can be rescued by an artificial tethering of mitochondria and the ER. ERMES localizes to mitochondria–ER contact sites and is visualized as punctate structures, suggesting its critical role in mitochondria–ER interactions. Gem1p interacts with ERMES; however, this interaction is not required for the assembly of the ERMES complex. Imaging analysis suggests that Gem1p negatively regulates ER-associated mitochondrial fission. Studies suggest that the mitochondria–ER interaction mediates the exchange of phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylethanolamine between the two organelles, allowing phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis. Disruption of ERMES impairs the conversion of PS to PC, and knockout of gem1 has deleterious effects in mutants defective in PS synthesis, suggesting that Gem1p plays a role in lipid exchange through the activity of ERMES. However, several discrepancies remain to be clarified. Miro IS INVOLVED IN MITOCHONDRIAL HOMEOSTASIS IN Dictyostelium discoideum The slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum has a single copy of the gemA gene, which encodes a Miro homolog. The gemA knockout mutants show impaired cell growth on nutrient media without any obvious defects in cell division, implying that GemA is involved in mitochondrial function. In D. discoideum, mitochondrial transport is primarily mediated by microtubules. The gemA mutants show no obvious phenotype with respect to mitochondrial size, morphology, or intracellular distribution. Co-immunoprecipitation assays suggest that GemA does not associate with the Dictyostelium kinesin Kif5. These findings indicate that Miro does not play a role in microtubule-dependent mitochondrial transport in D. discoideum. However, the absence of gemA compromises multiple aspects of mitochondrial function including total mitochondrial mass, ATP accumulation, and oxygen consumption, but does not influence glucose consumption, reactive oxygen species generation, or mitochondrial membrane potential. This suggests that the primary role of Miro in D. discoideum is the regulation of mitochondrial homeostasis rather than mitochondrial transport. Miro INFLUENCES MITOCHONDRIAL MORPHOLOGY IN Arabidopsis thaliana Plant mitochondria are uniformly spherical and undergo frequent fusion and fission and actin-dependent transport. The Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains three Miro homologs, namely, MIRO1, MIRO2, and MIRO3. MIRO1 and MIRO2 are expressed throughout the plant, whereas MIRO3 is expressed specifically in the endosperm. Insertional mutation of the MIRO1 gene has multiple effects on plant growth and development including impairment of pollen tube growth and embryonic lethality at an early stage. Mutation of the MIRO2 gene enhances the miro1 mutant phenotype and includes defects in female gametogenesis associated with delayed polar nuclear fusion. Imaging analyses showed abnormally enlarged mitochondria in the miro1 mutant, although their inner membrane structures were likely to be normal. The miro1 mutation also influences mitochondrial inheritance during cell division at an early stage of embryogenesis ; however, the mutant mitochondria undergo continuous cytoplasmic streaming in an actin-dependent manner. In addition, an obvious Milton homolog is absent from the Arabidopsis genome. These findings suggest that the primary role of Arabidopsis Miro is in the maintenance of mitochondrial morphology rather than actin-dependent mitochondrial transport. CONCLUDING REMARKS Multiple lines of evidence suggest that, in metazoans, Miro is primarily involved in the Ca 2+ -dependent regulation of mitochondrial transport; however, in non-metazoans, Miro plays a primary role in the maintenance of mitochondrial morphology and homeostasis. The molecular mechanisms of mitochondrial transport differ between eukaryotic lineages. In metazoans, microtubule-dependent mitochondrial transport is well defined, whereas in budding yeast, mitochondrial transport and inheritance are mediated by multiple myosin-dependent and -independent pathways. Plants use actin filaments and myosins for mitochondrial transport, although the molecular interactions linking mitochondria and myosins remain elusive. These differences suggest that each of the eukaryotic lineages independently developed their own mitochondrial transport machinery after divergence from the ancestral eukaryotic cell. In contrast, Miro is present in almost all eukaryotes, and the phylogeny of Miro homologs and eukaryotic lineages correspond well, suggesting that Miro emerged before the divergence of eukaryotes. Therefore, it is possible that Miro has a common ancestral function in every eukaryote that is related to the maintenance of mitochondrial morphology and homeostasis, while it acquired a role in the regulation of mitochondrial transport specifically in metazoans. The presence of cell-type-specific and lineage-specific Miro-interacting partners implies that the molecular nature of Miro promotes its physical interaction with multiple types of proteins. Identification of Mito-interacting partners in non-metazoans will provide further insights into the functions of Miro and the evolution of mitochondrial functions and dynamics. Table 1 Molecular function and interacting proteins of Miro GTPase from various eukaryotes. Conflict of Interest Statement The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. 