 Resistance to phagocyte killing is an important virulence factor in mycobacteria. Dictyostelium has been used to study the interaction between phagocytes and bacteria, given its similarity to the mammalian macrophage. Here, we investigated the genes responsible for virulence to Dictyostelium by screening 1728 transposon mutants of the Mycobacterium marinum NTUH-M6094 strain. A total of 30 mutants that permissive for Dictyostelium growth were identified. These mutants revealed interruptions in 20 distinct loci. Of the 20 loci, six genes were located in the lipooligosaccharide synthesis cluster. LOS are antigenic glycolipids and the core LOS structure from LOS-I to LOS-IV have been reported to exist in M. marinum. Two-dimensional thin-layer chromatography glycolipid profiles revealed that deletion of mmar_2318 or mmar_2319 resulted in the accumulation of LOS-III and deficiency of LOS-IV. Deletion and complementation of mmar_2318 or mmar_2319 confirmed that these genes both contributed to virulence toward Dictyostelium but not entry and replication inside Dictyostelium. Co-incubation with a murine macrophage cell line J774a.1 or PMA-induced human monocytic cell line THP-1 demonstrated that mmar_2318 or mmar_2319 deletion mutant could grow in macrophages, and their initial entry rate was not affected in J774a.1 but significantly increased in THP-1. In conclusion, although mmar_2319 has been reported to involve LOS biosynthesis in a previous study, we identified a new gene, mmar_2318 that is also involved in the biosynthesis of LOS. Deletion of mmar_2318 or mmar_2319 both exhibits reduction of virulence toward Dictyostelium and increased entry into THP-1 cells. Keywords: M. marinum, lipooligosaccharide, virulence, macrophage, Dictyostelium Introduction Mycobacterium marinum can cause a systemic tuberculosis-like infection in fish and other ectotherms, a process that involves persistent growth within macrophages. In humans, this pathogen typically causes only a localized granulomatous infection on cooler surfaces with rare dissemination. Macrophages are a first line of defense against bacteria and play a key role in the host’s innate immune response to bacterial infection. In addition, bacteria that have developed resistance to phagocytosis or intracellular killing should be more virulent and more likely to succeed at establishing infection. Mycobacteria that successfully infect macrophages survive and replicate in the phagosome by arresting phagosome maturation and acidification and damaging the phagosomal membrane to cause macrophage necrosis. The mycobacterial possess a unique lipid-rich cell wall that is important in directing host-pathogen interactions and confers resistance to many therapeutic agents. During the infection process, free cell wall lipids/glycolipids are contributing to modulation of the host immune system and condition the outcome of the infection. Lipooligosaccharides are cell surface glycolipids, and have been reported to exist in more than 10 mycobacterial species, including the M. canettii, M. marinum, M. kansasii, and M. gastri. All LOS are antigenic compounds containing a α, α’-trehalose unit, the length and composition of LOS are highly variable between different species by different species-specific glycan sequence manner. In M. marinum, produces under laboratory conditions, four major LOS structures of increasing size, named LOS-I to LOS-IV, has been previously identified. Loss of LOS results in a rough bacterial colony morphology, hyper-virulence in zebrafish, reduced biofilm formation, sliding motility, and affect entry rate into macrophages, inhibition of tumor necrosis factor alpha secretion in macrophages ; and decreased release of proline-glutamic acid_polymorphic guanine-cytosine-rich sequence proteins from the cell surface. A well-established model system using Dictyostelium discoideum was introduced for studying the interactions between phagocytes and bacteria. Dictyostelium, a free-living amoeba, serves as a macrophage-like system for studying bacteria-host interactions. Dictyostelium has also been used to analyze the virulence of different bacterial species, including extracellular or intracellular bacteria, such as Pseudomonas, Yersinia, Vibrio, Legionella, Klebsiella, and Mycobacteria. Upon infection of Dictyostelium, M. marinum can survive and replicate within intracellular vacuoles, exhibiting a pattern of growth similar to that observed in cultured mammalian macrophages. Notably, a previous study demonstrated by using a Dictyostelium screening model can identify the virulence determinants in M. marinum. As we report here, we constructed a M. marinum mutant library by transposon mutagenesis and used a Dictyostelium screening model to identify genetic loci involved in M. marinum virulence. We identified a new gene, mmar_2318, which participates in LOS synthesis and virulence toward Dictyostelium. Materials and Methods Bacterial Strains, Cells, and Growth Conditions Mycobacterium smegmatis mc 2 155 and M. marinum NTUH-M6094 strains were grown at 37°C and 32°C, respectively, in 7H9 medium supplemented with 10% oleic acid/albumin/dextrose/catalase enrichment and 0.05% Tween-80. M. marinum is a biosafety level-2 microorganism. The experiments handling the bacteria should follow all appropriate guidelines and regulations. Escherichia coli and Klebsiella aerogenes were grown in Luria broth. Antibiotics were added at the following concentrations when required: kanamycin at 10 mg/L for M. marinum and 50 mg/L for E. coli ; hygromycin at 50 mg/L for M. marinum and 100 mg/L for E. coli ; and ampicillin at 100 mg/L for E. coli. D. discoideum AX-2 cells were grown at 20°C in HL5 medium. Dictyostelium Growth in a Mycobacteria-Phagocytosis Plaque Assay The Dictyostelium phagocytosis plaque assay was performed as previously described with some modifications. A 1-mL volume of mid-log phase M. marinum culture was centrifuged and then resuspended with 800 μL of overnight-cultured K. aerogenes diluted 10 5 -fold in normal saline. The bacterial suspension was plated in six-well or 24-well plates containing SM agar and then air-dried in a biosafety cabinet for 2 h. D. discoideum was then spotted on top of the bacterial lawn. Phagocytosis plaques generated during D. discoideum growth became visible after 6–8 days of incubation at 20°C. FIGURE 1 Identification of Mycobacterium marinum genes for virulence using Dictyostelium. Screening method of M. marinum NTUH-M6094 mutant library by Dictyostelium phagocytosis plaque assay. In six-well tissue culture plates containing SM agar, mid-log phase... Generation of M. marinum Transposon Mutant Library The TM4-derived conditionally replicating phage phAE94 carrying the kanamycin-resistance transposon Tn5367 was propagated in M. smegmatis mc 2 155 and used to infect M. marinum as described previously. Identification of Transposon Mutants by Semi-Random Polymerase Chain Reaction The insertion site of Tn5367 was determined by semi-random PCR and DNA sequencing as previously described ; the primers are listed in Table ​ Table1 1. Table 1 Primers and plasmids used in this work. Construction of Deletion Mutant The gene-deleted fragments were generated by using the primer pairs listed in Table ​ Table1 1 and then cloned into a pGEM ® -T easy plasmid. The Hyg r - lacZ - sacB cassette of the pGOAL19 plasmid was digested with PacI and cloned into the PacI site of the resulted plasmid. The vector for gene deletion was transformed into the M. marinum NTUH-M6094 strain according to the established procedures, and the M. marinum deletion mutant was selected after two rounds of homologous recombination, as previously described. Construction of Complementation Strain Mycobacterium marinum mmar_2318 and its predicted promoter region were PCR-amplified from genomic DNA using the primer pair 2318-promoter-F/2318-R; mmar_2319 and the M. bovis BCG hsp60 promoter region were PCR-amplified from genomic DNA and pMN402 using the primer pairs 2319-F-hsp60/2319-R and hsp60-F/hsp60-R-2319, respectively. The primer pair hsp60-F and 2319-R was then used to PCR amplify the mmar_2319 gene with the hsp60 promoter region. Those two PCR products were cloned into a blunted HindIII-site of pMN437 to create pMm 2318 ::pMN437 and pMm 2319 ::pMN437. The complementation strain was created by transforming the pMm 2318 ::pMN437 or pMm 2319 ::pMN437 plasmid into the Δ 2318 or Δ 2319 strain. Mycobacterium marinum Lipid Extraction and Analysis Mycobacterium marinum polar and apolar lipids were extracted from fresh-cultured M. marinum grown on 7H9 agar plates according to established procedures. The lipid extract was examined by two-dimensional thin layer chromatography. Lipids were visualized by spraying the plates with ceric ammonium molybdate 6 Mo 7 O 24 ⋅4H 2 O, 0.5 g ammonium cerium nitrate, 500 mL H 2 O, 28 mL H 2 SO 4 ) followed by gentle charring of the plates. Infection of Dictyostelium by M. marinum Infection of Dictyostelium was performed as described previously. Infection of J774a.1 or THP-1 Cell Line by M. marinum Infection of murine J774a.1 macrophage-like cells as well as human THP-1 monocytic cell line and enumeration of intracellular M. marinum CFU was performed as described previously. Briefly, a single-cell suspension of fresh cultured M. marinum was yield by passage through a 5-μm syringe filter. The day before experiment, cell were seeding into 24 well. The cells were infected with bacteria at a multiplicity of infection of 1 for growth assays or MOI of 10 for entry rate assays. A previous study indicated that the difference of entry rate between wild type and mutant will be more prominent under MOI of 10. The infection was allowed to proceed for 3 h at 32°C in 5% CO 2. The extracellular bacteria were removed by washing once with culture medium and incubation in fresh culture medium containing gentamicin for 2 h at 32°C. The cells were washed once and incubated with fresh culture medium containing 20 mg/L gentamicin at 32°C in 5% CO 2. On different time point, the infected macrophage monolayers were washed once with culture medium and lysed with 1 mL of 0.1% Triton X-100 for 5 min to release the intracellular mycobacteria. The intracellular bacteria were enumerated by plating serial dilutions on 7H11 agar plates. Statistical Analysis Data are presented as means ± standard error of the mean form three independent experiments. Statistical significance was assessed by a two-tailed Student’s t -test using Prism 5 software. P -values of <0.05 were considered significant. Results Screening Mutants Permissive for Dictyostelium Growth We constructed a transposon mutant library of the M. marinum strain NTUH-M6094. A total of 1728 mutants were collected. A Dictyostelium phagocytosis plaque assay was used to investigate virulence genes in the M6094 mutant library. As shown in Figure ​ Figure1B 1B, wild-type M6094 did not allow Dictyostelium to form a phagocytotic plaque on a bacterial lawn. In contrast, a plaque was observed on a lawn containing M. smegmatis mc 2 155. Screening of the entire M6094 mutant library resulted in the identification of 30 transposon mutants that were permissive for Dictyostelium growth; examples of the sensitive isolates are presented in Figure ​ Figure1B 1B. This phenotype implied that the genes disrupted by the transposon are potentially involved in virulence. The genes interrupted by transposons were determined by semi-random PCR and DNA sequencing. The results indicated that 20 genes were disrupted by the transposon, and the locations of the transposon insertion in the 30 mutants were unique. Table 2 Transposon mutants permissive for Dictyostelium growth. Defective LOS Biosynthesis in the Deletion Mutant Among the 30 attenuated mutants, the transposons of three mutants were inserted into different sites of losA, four mutants into mmar_2318, three mutants into mmar_2319, two mutants into wecE, one mutant into mmar_2323 and one mutant into mmar_2353. As presented in Table ​ Table2 2 and Figure ​ Figure2 2, these six genes are located within a putative LOS biosynthetic gene cluster. Previous studies reported that losA, mmar_2319, wecE and mmar_2353 are involved in LOS biosynthesis. Here, two genes, mmar_2318 and mmar_2319, which were identified in several attenuated mutants in this study were chosen for further studies. Deletion mutants and episomal complementation strains were generated accordingly. The surface polar lipid profiles of wild-type, deletion mutants, and complementation strains were examined by 2D-TLC. We referred to several previous studies to predict the pattern of lipid migration on TLC plate. The 2D-TLC spots of losA ::Tn and wecE ::Tn mutants which have been reported to have defective LOS biosynthesis were also served as controls. The result indicates that Δ 2318 and Δ 2319 mutants exhibited accumulation of LOS-III and deficiency of LOS-IV. The 2D-TLC profile of the complementation strains were restored to that of wild type. Although LOS-IV deficiency of a mmar_2319 transposon mutant has been demonstrated in previous studies, the role of this gene in LOS synthesis was confirmed by deletion and complementation in this study. These data suggested that these two genes were responsible for LOS synthesis. FIGURE 2 The transposon insertion sites of mutants within lipooligosaccharide synthesis locus. The six genes with gray color within LOS synthesis locus had transposon insertions in different sites.... FIGURE 3 The 2D-TLC profile of the polar lipid of M. marinum wild-type, deletion mutants and complementation strains. The gene alignment of mmar_2318 and mmar_2319 deletion mutants and complementation strains. The Δ 2318 and Δ 2319 deletion mutants... Phenotypic Confirmation Using Deletion and Complementation Strains First, deletion of mmar_2318 or mmar_2319 did not significantly affect the growth rate at 32°C and 20°C, indicating that the attenuation of these two mutants were not due to in vitro growth defect. The mmar_2318 and mmar_2319 deletion and complementation strains exhibited the expected attenuation and virulence phenotypes in the Dictyostelium phagocytotic plaque assay, confirming the results observed with the transposon mutants. Meanwhile, a tesA transposon mutant with attenuation phenotype which has been reported previously was generated and served as a control. Furthermore, we also used different cell numbers of Dictyostelium to quantify the virulence of the wild-type, deletion mutant, and complementation strains. In presence of wild-type M. marinum, phagocytic plaque formation exhibited a dose-dependent response to the Dictyostelium cell number, with plaque formation detected in the presence of >400 amoeba. Deletion of mmar_2318 or mmar_2319 attenuated the virulence to Dictyostelium, whereas two complementation strains restored the virulence to Dictyostelium to a level similar to that observed in wild type. FIGURE 4 Phenotypic confirmation and quantitative analysis of deletion mutants and complementation strains. The Dictyostelium phagocytosis plaques on bacterial lawn with the wild-type, deletion, and complementation strains. A total of 400, 200, or 100 Dictyostelium... The loss of LOS results in rough bacterial colony morphology. The Δ 2318 and Δ 2319 mutants showed a rough phenotype and bigger colonies size than wild type. Colonies morphology and size of complementation strains were restored as those of wild type. Deletion of mmar_2318 or mmar_2319 did not Affect the Entry and Replication Inside Dictyostelium Deletion and complementation confirmed mmar_2318 and mmar_2319 were contributed to virulence toward Dictyostelium. We further examined the ability of the Δ 2318 and Δ 2319 strains to enter and replicate inside cells of Dictyostelium. The results showed that the number of CFU recovered from Dictyostelium was not significantly different between wild type and mutants. The growth rate of Δ 2318 or Δ 2319 mutants inside Dictyostelium was subsequently monitored, as shown in Figure ​ Figure5B 5B, the growth rate of wild type and mutants were not significantly different, either. These results indicated that deletion of mmar_2318 or mmar_2319 did not affect the entry and replication inside Dictyostelium. FIGURE 5 Entry and growth of M. marinum inside Dictyostelium. The entry of M. marinum wild-type, Δ 2318 and Δ 2319 into Dictyostelium. The bacteria numbers inside Dictyostelium cells on 2 h post infection at MOI = 10 were determined. Entry was... Increased Entry to THP-1 Macrophage Cells in the Deletion Mutants Besides observations in Dictyostelium, the ability of the Δ 2318 and Δ 2319 strains to enter and replicate inside cells of macrophage cell line, J774a.1 and THP-1, were examined. After incubation of bacteria and macrophage cell lines for 3 h at 32°C, the cultures were then treated with gentamicin to remove extracellular bacteria, and intracellular bacteria were quantified by lysing the infected cultures and plating onto 7H11 agar plates. The results indicated that the entry abilities of Δ 2318 and Δ 2319 mutants were not affected in J774a.1, but the number of CFU recovered from THP-1 cell line infected with the Δ 2318 or Δ 2319 mutants was significantly higher than that infected with the wild-type strain. We also examined the subsequent growth of Δ 2318 and Δ 2319 mutants inside these two macrophage cell lines. The results demonstrated that the deletion mutants both exhibited growth rates similar to wild type and could replicate inside macrophages during the course of infection. These data suggest that deletion of mmar_2318 or mmar_2319 did not affect the ability of the bacteria to replicate within macrophages. FIGURE 6 Entry and growth of M. marinum inside macrophages. The entry of M. marinum wild-type, Δ 2318, Δ 2319, Δ 2318 :: 2318, and Δ 2319 :: 2319 strains into macrophages. The bacteria numbers inside macrophage cells on day 0. Our mutant library includes a collection of 1728 transposon insertions. The insertion sites of 30 Dictyostelium -permissive mutants, as well as those of another 17 randomly selected mutants, were unique, and the transposons of these 47 mutants were collectively located in 36 different loci. These results indicate that the library has good diversity. However, real coverage is difficult to estimate given that insertions close to an operon can cause phenotypic changes due to polar effects on gene expression. Additionally, essential genes, although less likely to be specific virulence genes, would not be identified by transposon mutagenesis. Therefore, we expect that our mutant library is not saturated with respect to candidate loci, and our screen and library are expected to have missed multiple loci. Table 3 Seventeen randomly selected transposon mutants for diversity check. Alibaud et al. first used Dictyostelium as a screening model to identify virulent genes within M. marinum in 2011. These researchers screened only 275 transposon mutants of the M. marinum M strain. Our work adopted the same screening strategy, but we screened a larger number of mutants and used a distinct strain of M. marinum. In this study, we used a clinical isolate, the M. marinum NTUH-M6094 strain, to construct the mutant library. When assessing the library diversity, we also found that 5/36 of the transposon interrupted loci were not obvious homologs of sequences from the sequenced M. marinum M strain. This result suggests that genetic heterogeneity exists in M. marinum isolates from different regions and/or sources. In this study, we used a Dictyostelium phagocytotic plaque model system to screen a M. marinum transposon mutant library, identifying 20 genes with roles in virulence. Among these 20 genes, some loci were previously reported to be associated with virulence, macrophage resistance, biofilm formation, or LOS synthesis in Mycobacterium spp.. The results of our screen were therefore consistent with data from other studies. We also found several genes that were not previously identified as virulence genes in the literature, including 12 loci with homologs in M. tuberculosis. Our results implicate these loci in M. tuberculosis pathogenesis. However, the actual role of these genes in M. marinum and M. tuberculosis will require confirmation; characterization of these loci will be reported elsewhere. In our study, six genes located within the predicted LOS synthesis locus were identified. The effects on the polar lipid 2D-TLC profile after transposon knockout of losA, mmar_2319, wecE, and mmar_2353 were previously reported and confirmed by this study. In this study, we focused on the role of mmar_2318 and mmar_2319 on LOS synthesis and virulence in Dictyostelium and macrophages. Although deletion of mmar_2318 or mmar_2319 both revealed deficiency of LOS-IV, prominent phagocytosis plaques and bigger colonies were observed in Δ2319 mutant compared with Δ2318 mutant. This may be due to different degrees of LOS-III accumulation or unknown effects other than impairment of LOS after deletion of mmar_2318 or mmar_2319. Our result confirmed Δ 2318 and Δ 2319 mutants also reduced virulence toward Dictyostelium. To dissect the virulence toward amoebae contributed by mmar_2318 and mmar_2319, we also examined the ability of the Δ 2318 and Δ 2319 mutants to enter and replicate inside cells of Dictyostelium. As shown in Figure ​ Figure5 5, no matter entry or replication inside Dictyostelium, there were no significant difference between wild-type and two deletion mutants. These results indicated that the reduced virulence toward Dictyostelium after deletion of mmar_2318 or mmar_2319 was not resulted from affecting the initial entry and survival inside cells. These two genes might be through other mechanisms to inhibit Dictyostelium growth. In 2012, van der Woude et al. found that a M. marinum wecE transposon mutant was hyper-virulent to zebrafish, but our study demonstrated that a wecE ::Tn mutant was permissive for Dictyostelium growth. This difference is potentially attributed to the facts that zebrafish and Dictyostelium are different species and zebrafish is a more complex model. These results suggested that the attenuation of mutants identified by using Dictyostelium screening should be confirmed in a more complex host. A recent study published by Alibaud et al. examined the phagocytosis of a mmar_2319 transposon mutant by murine macrophage J774a.1 cells. This study is consistent with our observation that the phagocytosis rate of the mmar_2319 deletion mutant was similar to that of the wild-type strain in J774a.1. But in this study, we observed the entry ability of deletion mutants was significantly higher than that of wild type into another macrophage cell line, THP-1. This may be due to different host origins that these two cell lines were isolated from. The increased entry into THP-1 cell after deletion of mmar_2318 and mmar_2319 might explain the hyper-virulence to zebrafish of wecE mutant which also revealed accumulation of LOS-III and deficiency of LOS-IV. However, the virulence of Δ 2318 and Δ 2319 mutants to zebrafish or mammalian hosts requires more investigations. Conclusion We identified a new gene, mmar_2318, involved the LOS biosynthesis. M. marinum mmar_2318 and mmar_2319 were both responsible for virulence toward Dictyostelium ; deletion of mmar_2318 and mmar_2319 increased entry ability into THP-1 cell but not affected the replication inside Dictyostelium and macrophages. Conflict of Interest Statement The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. 