 SBDS protein and the GTPase EFL1 activate nascent 60S ribosomal subunits for translation by catalyzing eviction of the antiassociation factor eIF6 from nascent 60S ribosomal subunits. However, the mechanism is completely unknown. Here, we present cryo-EM structures of human SBDS and SBDS–EFL1 bound to Dictyostelium discoideum 60S ribosomal subunits with and without endogenous eIF6. SBDS assesses the integrity of the peptidyl site, bridging uL16 with uL11 at the P-stalk base and the sarcin-ricin loop. Upon EFL1 binding, SBDS is repositioned around helix 69, thus facilitating a conformational switch in EFL1 that displaces eIF6 by competing for an overlapping binding site on the 60S ribosomal subunit. Our data reveal the conserved mechanism of eIF6 release, which is corrupted in both inherited and sporadic leukemias. The nascent large ribosomal subunit undergoes an ordered series of final maturation steps in the cytoplasm before it becomes competent to enter translation 1. In particular, the Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome protein, which is deficient in the inherited leukemia-predisposition disorder Shwachman-Diamond syndrome 2, cooperates with the GTPase elongation factor–like 1 in catalyzing eviction of the ribosome antiassociation factor eukaryotic initiation factor 6 3 – 6. The eIF6 protein sterically blocks formation of the B6 intersubunit bridge 7, 8 by binding to the sarcin-ricin loop, uL14 and eL24 on the 60S intersubunit face and must therefore be removed to allow the assembly of actively translating 80S ribosomes 10. Upon release, eIF6 shuttles back to the nucleus, where it plays an essential part in the biogenesis and nuclear export of the 60S ribosomal subunit 11. SDS is characterized by poor growth, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, skeletal abnormalities and bone-marrow failure, with a 30–40% risk of progression to myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia 12. Interestingly, a subset of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias are associated with recurrent uL16 mutations 13 that impair the release of Tif6 when expressed in yeast. Together, these data support the hypothesis that defective late maturation of the 60S ribosomal subunit may drive leukemic transformation. However, the mechanistic link between SBDS, uL16 and eIF6 remains unclear. Like eIF6, the SBDS protein is shared by eukaryotes and archaea. X-ray crystallography and solution NMR spectroscopy have revealed the conserved tripartite architecture of the SBDS protein 5, 14 – 16. Human SBDS comprises domains I, II and III. EFL1 is homologous to the ribosomal translocase EF-G in prokaryotes and to elongation factor 2 in eukaryotes 3. Like EF-2, EFL1 has an overall five-domain architecture, including domain I, which contains the G1–G5 motifs that bind and hydrolyze GTP. Intriguingly, the ferredoxin-like fold of SBDS domain III is most closely related to domain V of EF-2, which is also found in EFL1. The presence of an insertion of variable length within domain II distinguishes EFL1 from other ribosomal translocases. To elucidate the mechanism eIF6 release from nascent 60S ribosomal subunits, we used single-particle cryo-EM to determine the structures of native D. discoideum pre-60S ribosomal subunits with and without endogenous eIF6 bound to human SBDS and SBDS–EFL1. We show that dynamic rotation of the SBDS protein in the ribosomal P site is coupled to a conformational switch in EFL1 that promotes eIF6 displacement through competition for an overlapping binding site on the 60S ribosomal subunit. Together, our data reveal the mechanism underlying a key conserved quality-control step during 60S-subunit maturation; this step is corrupted in human leukemia-associated ribosomopathies. Results SBDS contacts uL16 in the ribosomal P site To determine the mechanism of eIF6 release, we capitalized on the observation that human SBDS and EFL1 can evict eIF6 from purified native Dictyostelium pre-60S subunits 6. Using single-particle cryo-EM and in silico sorting, we determined the structures of three complexes from a single heterogeneous mixture containing the non-hydrolyzable GTP analog β,γ-methyleneguanosine 5′-triphosphate, human SBDS and EFL1 and native Dictyostelium 60S ribosomal subunits carrying endogenous eIF6. We were able to trap eIF6 on 85% of the native pre-60S subunits by using a Dictyostelium strain that overexpresses a dominant-negative SBDS-GFP fusion protein 6. A low concentration of glutaraldehyde was added to reduce preferential particle orientation on the cryo-EM grid. We generated a 3D cryo-EM map of the 60S–eIF6–SBDS complex at 3.3-Å resolution. Although the local resolution extended to 3 Å in some areas of the 60S–eIF6–SBDS complex, thus allowing unambiguous visualization of RNA bases or ribosomal protein side chains, the resolution decreased toward the periphery, particularly for the bound assembly factors. In the 60S–eIF6–SBDS complex, the resolution of the SBDS protein was in the range of 4–5 Å, thus allowing identification of α-helices and β-sheets. The maps allowed us to fit and refine homology models of Dictyostelium eIF6, ribosomal proteins, rRNA fragments and the solution NMR structure of human SBDS 5. Figure 1 SBDS shields the active sites of the 60S subunit. Crown view and transverse section of the cryo-EM map of the 60S–eIF6–SBDS complex, filtered to 4 Å. The 60S ribosomal subunit is shown in cyan, eIF6 in yellow and... The structure of the 60S subunit reflects that of the mature ribosome 17 – 19. The eIF6-binding site is conserved, and it involves the C terminus of uL14, which is in proximity to the SRL, the loop formed by residues 58–71 of uL3 and the N terminus of eL24. There is no direct contact between eIF6 and SBDS. In agreement with results from in vitro binding studies 21, SBDS domain I occupies the P site of the 60S ribosomal subunit, packing between the P loop, helix 69 and the conserved essential internal loop of uL16, a ribosomal protein that is targeted by recurrent mutations in T-ALL 13. On one face of the β-hairpin at the base of uL16, residue Q123 lies in proximity to SBDS domain I. According to the yeast 80S crystal structure 17, the side chain of the highly conserved uL16 residue R98 on the opposite face of the hairpin is likely to make an electrostatic interaction with helix 39. SBDS residues S2–V15 interact with components of the peptidyl transferase center, the six N-terminal residues extending into the ribosomal peptide-exit tunnel. SBDS domain III, like domain V of EF-G 22 and EF-2, contacts the SRL and the P-stalk base. Thus, SBDS shields the active sites of the 60S subunit including the P site, PTC, the entrance to the polypeptide-exit tunnel and the binding site at the P-stalk base for the translational GTPases. Furthermore, our data reveal a direct structural link on the ribosome between SBDS and uL16. EFL1 and eIF6 compete for an overlapping binding site Because of the lack of direct contact between SBDS and eIF6, we hypothesized that EFL1, like its homolog EF-2, might bind in the canonical translational GTPase center, where it might potentially interact with both SBDS and eIF6. To test this hypothesis, we obtained cryo-EM maps of complexes containing 60S–eIF6–SBDS–EFL1 and 60S–SBDS–EFL1 at overall resolutions of 4.1 Å and 4.2 Å, respectively. The local resolution for EFL1 was in the range of 8–9 Å, thus limiting interpretation to protein domains. In the absence of a high-resolution EFL1 crystal structure, we built a homology model for human EFL1 and docked this together with SBDS and eIF6 unambiguously into the cryo-EM maps. Figure 2 EFL1 and eIF6 compete for an overlapping binding site. Crown views of the cryo-EM maps of the 60S–eIF6–SBDS–EFL1 and 60S–SBDS–EFL1 complexes, filtered to 6 Å. EFL1 is in dark blue. CP, central... EFL1 adopts two distinct conformations. In the 60S–eIF6–SBDS–EFL1 complex, in agreement with results from competitive EF-2 binding assays 24, EFL1 binds a site on the intersubunit face of the large subunit that is common to other canonical translational GTPases 22, 25, 26. However, of the total EFL1 buried surface area, only 13.5% contacts rRNA, and the remainder binds SBDS, eIF6, uL11 and uL10. In transition to the 60S–SBDS–EFL1 complex, EFL1 undergoes a large-scale arc-like interdomain movement with domains I and II and IV pivoting around the relatively fixed axis formed by domains III and V. EFL1 undergoes an overall ‘accommodation’ on the 60S subunit that results in more extensive interactions with the rRNA, ribosomal proteins and SBDS. By competing with eIF6 for an overlapping binding site on the 60S ribosomal subunit, the accommodated EFL1 conformation is incompatible with simultaneous binding of eIF6. Specifically, in the accommodated state, EFL1 domain I comes into close contact with the tip of the SRL and with uL14. Although the EFL1 domain II insertion also contacts eIF6, genetic complementation experiments in S. cerevisiae revealed that it was dispensable for EFL1 function in vivo. Furthermore, in contrast with results from previous reports 27, 28, Tif6 residues S174 and S175 were dispensable for Tif6 recycling in vivo. We conclude that in the accommodated conformation, EFL1 domain I has a critical role in competing with eIF6 for the overlapping binding site on the SRL. Dynamic rotation of SBDS In agreement with the global domain motions observed by solution NMR spectroscopic analysis 5, SBDS domain II undergoes a 60° rotation on EFL1 binding, with a pivot point through the N terminus of helix α5. SBDS domain III rotates 180° away from the P-stalk base toward helix 69 while SBDS domain I remains anchored in the P site. Displacement of SBDS domain III from its binding site at the P-stalk base by EFL1 domain V explains the intriguing structural homology between these two protein domains of diverse amino acid sequence 14 : SBDS and EFL1 both share a common binding site on the 60S subunit but cannot bind simultaneously to the P-stalk base. Figure 3 Rotational displacement of SBDS upon EFL1 binding. Top views of 60S–eIF6–SBDS, 60S–eIF6–SBDS–EFL1 and 60S–SBDS–EFL1 complexes. SBDS is shown in magenta, the 60S subunit... Interpreting disease-related SBDS variants Owing to the conservation of rRNA and ribosomal protein sequences between human and Dictyostelium, our structure allows us to interpret the consequences of SDS-associated disease mutations in a ribosomal context. We set out to functionally validate the importance of the potential contacts between SBDS and the ribosome observed in our cryo-EM structure by genetic complementation of SDO1 -deleted yeast cells and by analyzing 60S-subunit binding in an sdo1 Δ suppressor strain that allows expression of Sdo1 variants as the sole source of Sdo1. All three domains were required for Sdo1 function in vivo, and domain I was necessary but not sufficient for 60S binding. Several disease-related alleles were defective in both the genetic complementation and binding assays. The F57L missense mutation perturbs the fold of SBDS domain I 5. The local resolution of the SBDS protein in the maps does not allow visualization of individual amino acid side chains. Nevertheless, the structure suggests that the disease-associated residue K67 in SBDS domain I potentially makes an electrostatic interaction with the P loop. In agreement with this hypothesis, substitution of the sdo1-N67E allele with sdo1 - N67G or sdo1 - N67K restored both sdo1 Δ cell growth and Sdo1 binding to the ribosome. Thus, a specific interaction between Sdo1 domain I and the 60S subunit is required for yeast cell fitness. Upon EFL1 binding, the highly conserved residues K151 and R218 potentially make electrostatic interactions with the tip of helix 69. Together with the genetic and biochemical analyses, our data support a key role for K151 and R218 in stabilizing the open conformation of the SBDS protein. Indeed, because the density for H69 is clear in our maps, it is reasonable to propose that SBDS stabilizes the conformation of H69, a structural element that is usually not well ordered in isolated 60S subunits. The 60° rotation of SBDS domain II relative to domain I in the presence of EFL1 involves a flexible linker that potentially interacts with the rRNA between helices 69 and 71. The functional importance of the linker is supported by the fitness defects of disease-related alleles that alter the linker length and sdo1-R100E, which alters the charge of a highly conserved residue at the N terminus of helix α5. Flexibility in this region is probably important in facilitating the rotational dynamics of SBDS on the ribosome. We conclude that disease-related SBDS variants target rRNA contacts that are critical for 60S binding and the stabilization of functionally important conformational states. These data provide important in vivo validation of the cryo-EM structures. Figure 4 Disease-related SBDS variants disrupt critical interactions with the 60S rRNA. Complementation of sdo1 Δ cells by disease-related SDO1 variant alleles. Ten-fold serial dilutions of the indicated strains are shown. 5-FOA,... Interpreting T-ALL–associated uL16 variants Mutations in uL16 are recurrently associated with T-ALL and perturb Tif6 release in yeast 13. Residue R98 of uL16 makes an electrostatic interaction with helix 39 in the crystal structure of the yeast ribosome 17. In view of the close interaction in our structure between uL16 and SBDS in the P site, we hypothesized that, like uL16-S104D 21, 29, the T-ALL–associated uL16-R98S allele might impair Tif6 release indirectly by destabilizing the interaction of uL16 with helix 39, thereby altering the conformation of the uL16 P-site loop and reducing Sdo1 binding in vivo. Supporting this hypothesis, the T-ALL alleles uL16-R98S, uL16-R98C and uL16-H123P all impaired yeast cell fitness and 60S binding by Sdo1 in vivo. However, unlike uL16-R98S and uL16-R98C, the uL16-H123P allele markedly reduced uL16 protein expression, causing a severe fitness defect, probably as a consequence of proline-induced unfolding of the uL16 β4-β5 hairpin. We conclude that T-ALL–associated uL16 mutations indirectly impair eIF6 release by reducing SBDS recruitment to nascent 60S subunits in vivo. Discussion Mechanism of eIF6 release Our cryo-EM, biochemical and genetic analyses allow us to propose a mechanism for eIF6 release, a key conserved step in the translational activation of ribosomes that is mediated by SBDS and the GTPase EFL1 in eukaryotes and probably by EF-2 in archaea. We propose a cofactor-dependent conformational-switching model 30 in which EFL1 initially binds to the GTPase center, in direct contact with SBDS and eIF6, in a low-affinity, inactive GTP-bound state. Competing with SBDS for an overlapping binding site, EFL1 domain V promotes a 180° rotational displacement of SBDS domain III away from the P-stalk base toward helix 69, causing the SBDS protein to adopt a conformation that is probably stabilized by interactions between SBDS residues K151 and R218 and helix 69. 4d ). We suggest that in the open state, SBDS drives the equilibrium of GTP-bound EFL1 toward an active high-affinity SRL-bound conformation that effectively competes with eIF6 for an overlapping binding site on the SRL and promotes eIF6 displacement from the 60S subunit. In the final step of the catalytic cycle, we propose that the interaction of EFL1 with the SRL promotes GTP hydrolysis, thereby shifting the EFL1 conformational equilibrium from a high- to a low-affinity ribosome binding state and promoting dissociation of both EFL1 and SBDS from the 60S subunit. However, further work is required to determine the precise timing and role of GTP hydrolysis in the mechanism of eIF6 release. It is conceivable that glutaraldehyde may have trapped the less-populated accommodated EFL1 state on 60S subunits lacking eIF6. Nevertheless, we propose that the SRL-bound accommodated EFL1 state defines a functionally relevant conformation because it clearly overlaps with the eIF6-binding site. In agreement with this hypothesis, clusters of mutations in yeast EFL1 that suppress the P-site-loop mutant uL16-S104D map to domain interfaces that are involved in the conformational change that EF-2 and EF-G undergo during translocation 29. We hypothesize that such mutations may drive the EFL1 conformational equilibrium toward the accommodated state. Figure 5 Mechanism of eIF6 release by SBDS and EFL1. SBDS is recruited to a late cytoplasmic eIF6-loaded pre-60S subunit after P-stalk base assembly and uL16 recruitment. EFL1–GTP binds directly to... SBDS has been proposed as a tRNA mimic 16 that is driven into the P site by EFL1 in a pseudotranslocation event 21, 29. However, in the absence of EFL1, SBDS binds to the 60S subunit in an extended orientation that differs completely from any orientations previously observed for tRNA. We suggest that the structural mechanism of eIF6 eviction is more reminiscent of bacterial ribosome recycling by RRF and EF-G 31 – 35. SBDS binds in the 60S-subunit interface cavity in an orientation that is remarkably similar to that of RRF on the bacterial 50S subunit, and SBDS and RRF undergo similar extensive interdomain rotations on the large ribosomal subunit in the presence of their respective cooperating GTPases. SBDS is a multitasking protein: domain I protects and potentially proofreads the peptide-exit tunnel and PTC; domain II promotes EFL1 conformational switching and, together with domain I, mediates 60S binding and dynamic interdomain motion; domain III first shields the translational GTPase-binding site at the P-stalk base and later, in the open conformation, promotes EFL1 conformational switching. Final quality-control assessment of the nascent 60S subunit As the substrate for our cryo-EM studies, we used late pre-60S particles purified from Dictyostelium cells overexpressing a dominant-negative SBDS mutant 6. The structure of these pre-60S particles reflects that of a mature 60S subunit, 17 – 19 enriched in bound eIF6 and with uL16 already integrated. Loading of uL16 is critical for Nmd3 eviction 36 and for Sdo1 binding to the 60S subunit in vivo. Together, these data support the hypothesis that SBDS is recruited to an eIF6-bound pre-60S particle after uL16 loading and Nmd3 removal and place release of eIF6 ) as the final step in 60S-subunit maturation. Because eIF6 sterically blocks ribosomal-subunit joining 8, its eviction licenses the entry of mature 60S subunits into the actively translating pool. We propose that by ‘proofreading’ the peptide-exit tunnel, the P site and the GTPase center, SBDS and EFL1 both have key roles in coupling eIF6 release to a final quality-control assessment of the integrity of the active sites of the 60S subunit. Similarly, the maturing 40S subunit is subject to a final proofreading step 37, 38. Together with the structures of 60S–eIF6, 60S–Nmd3 and 60S–Arx1 complexes, our data strengthen the hypothesis that cytoplasmic pre-60S assembly factors have critical roles in structural proofreading and preventing premature translation by masking the active sites of the ribosome. The intriguing presence of a rod-shaped density in the polypeptide-exit tunnel in the 60S–Arx1–Rei1 complex suggests that the tunnel itself is subjected to proofreading 40. The presence of six N-terminal residues of the SBDS protein in the proximal part of the polypeptide-exit tunnel reinforces this concept and raises the possibility that the entire length of the tunnel may undergo proofreading during assembly. Finally, the competition between EFL1 and eIF6 for an overlapping binding site on the SRL provides an elegant mechanism to couple a quality-control assessment of the functional integrity of the SRL to the last step in the EFL1 catalytic cycle. The oncogenic ribosome Our data reveal an allosteric cascade in which large-scale dynamic movements in SBDS and EFL1 link the conserved P-site loop of uL16 with eIF6. Our study links the pathogenesis of inherited and sporadic forms of leukemia in a common pathway involved in 60S-subunit maturation and the translational activation of ribosomes. Interestingly, SBDS deficiency appears to promote acquired interstitial deletions of chromosome 20, which encompass the EIF6 gene, in bone-marrow cells of individuals with SDS 42, thus providing a potential mechanism to suppress the defect in ribosome biogenesis by reducing the copy number of the EIF6 gene. However, precisely how defective late-60S ribosomal-subunit maturation promotes the multistep progression to myelodysplastic syndrome and leukemia and the effects of compensatory suppressor mutations in this process remain key unanswered questions. In conclusion, our study illustrates the power of cryo-EM and in silico sorting of a single heterogeneous population to illuminate the mechanism underlying a dynamic and fundamental late step in 60S-subunit maturation that is corrupted in the human ribosomopathies SDS and T-ALL. Online Methods Yeast strains and plasmids S. cerevisiae strains used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table 3, and the plasmids and primers are listed in Supplementary Tables 4 and 5, respectively. Mutations were generated by QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis. For 60S binding assays, a 3×FLAG cassette was inserted at the 3′ end of the SDO1 coding sequence. Genetic complementation assays For random sporulation assays, double-mutant tif6 Δ∷ KanMX4 sdo1 Δ∷ NatMX4 cells were transformed with empty vector as a control or plasmids expressing wild-type TIF6 or TIF6 mutants. Similarly, double-mutant efl1 Δ∷ KanMX4 sdo1 Δ∷ NatMX4 cells were transformed with empty vector or plasmid pAJW2. Diploid cells were sporulated and cultured on solid –Ura medium, which selects for the germination of MAT a meiotic progeny carrying the indicated plasmids and contained 200 mg/mL G418 to select for tif6 Δ∷ KanMX4 or efl1 Δ∷ KanMX4 cells. Plates were incubated for 4 d at 30 °C. Viable single colonies were spotted in ten-fold serial dilutions onto solid –Ura medium for 3 d at 30 °C. Conditional haploid cells were transformed with plasmids expressing wild-type or variant SDO1-3×FLAG and plated onto solid medium containing 5-fluoroorotic acid counterselection for 3–5 d at 30 °C. For 60S binding assays, FLAG-tagged Sdo1 variants were expressed as the sole source of Sdo1 in sdo1 Δ cells containing a gain-of-function TIF6 suppressor allele to maintain fitness. FLAG-tagged Sdo1 variants were visualized by immunoblotting with anti-FLAG antiserum. Mutant uL16 proteins were visualized by immunoblotting of extracts from strains SP103, SP106 and SP107 after repression of endogenous uL16 by the addition of glucose for 16 h. For 60S binding studies, cells were transformed with plasmids expressing wild-type SDO1 - 3×FLAG. Anti-uL14 antibody was obtained from Abcam. Anti-uL16 rabbit polyclonal antiserum was a kind gift from B. Trumpower 4. Original images of blots used in this study can be found in Supplementary Data Set 1. Preparation of yeast extracts Log-phase yeast cell pellets stored at −80 °C were thawed slowly in 1 mL of ice-cold polysome lysis buffer with protease inhibitors added according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were ribolyzed at 3 × 3,500 m/s for 45 s, and samples were cleared twice in a chilled microcentrifuge at 13,000 r.p.m. for 10 min. The clarified supernatant was divided into aliquots and stored at −80 °C. Sucrose cushions 50 μL yeast extracts was layered onto a 50-μL 1.1 M sucrose cushion. Samples were centrifuged at 100,000 r.p.m. for 90 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was placed in a fresh tube, and 25 μL 4× protein loading dye was added. The pellet was resuspended in 125 μL 1× loading dye. After heating for 5 min at 90 °C, 15 μL of sample was electrophoresed in a 4–12% Novex gel in MES buffer for 50 min at 200 V and immunoblotted. SDO1 suppressor mutations PCR was used to amplify the coding sequence for wild-type SDO1 plus 500 bp 5′ and 3′ of the open reading frame from yeast genomic DNA. The PCR product was cloned into the vector pRS314. An identical restriction site was introduced immediately 5′ and 3′ of the SDO1 open reading frame. The SDO1 plasmid was liberated and the plasmid religated. Error-prone PCR was used to mutagenize SDO1 with primers with 50 bp of complementary sequence 5′ and 3′ of the SDO1 open reading frame. The PCR product and the linearized acceptor plasmid were transformed into the appropriate yeast strain, and suppressors were selected by plating onto selective media. Purification of Dictyostelium 60S ribosomal subunits carrying eIF6 Dictyostelium cells ) were grown axenically in HL5 medium plus glucose in shaking suspension at 22 °C to ~1.4 × 10 6 cells/mL and treated with cycloheximide for 5 min before harvesting by centrifugation. Cells were washed once in KK2 buffer with 0.1 mg/mL cycloheximide, and cell pellets were flash cooled in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. To maintain the native eIF6 complex, mild salt conditions and 10 mM Mg 2 ) were used in all the steps. Cells were resuspended in lysis buffer, 10 mM Mg 2, 6 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 10% glycerol, EDTA-free protease inhibitors, 1 mM AEBSF and 0.1 mg/mL cycloheximide) at ~5 × 10 8 cells/mL and lysed by passing once through a 5-μm Isopore membrane filter. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 16,100 g for 15 min at 4 °C, and ~300 μL was loaded onto a 3.75-mL 10–50% sucrose gradient in buffer A, 10 mM Mg 2 and 6 mM β-mercaptoethanol) in Polyallomer 11 × 60 mm centrifuge tubes. After centrifugation at 485,050 g for 60 min at 4 °C, gradients were fractionated with a Brandel gradient fractionator with continuous UV monitoring at A 254nm, and 60S ribosomal subunit fractions were collected. 500 μL of the 60S ribosomal subunit fraction was loaded onto a 500-μL 35% sucrose cushion in buffer A in Thickwall Polycarbonate 11 × 34 mm tubes and centrifuged at 627,379 g for 15 min at 4 °C. 60S-subunit pellets were resuspended in buffer A to ~0.4 μM, stored on ice and used immediately. Preparation of ribosomal complexes for cryo-electron microscopy analysis Recombinant human SBDS and EFL1 were expressed in E. coli and S. cerevisiae, respectively and purified as previously described 5. Complexes were obtained by mixture of 120 nM purified Dictyostelium 60S ribosomal subunits with 1.2 μM human SBDS and 1.2 μM human EFL1 in the presence of 0.2 mM GMPPCP for 15 min at room temperature, before addition of 0.5% glutaraldehyde and incubation for 10 min at 4 °C. Complexes were used immediately for cryo-EM grid preparation. Preliminary cryo-EM studies performed in the absence of glutaraldehyde revealed dramatic preferential orientation of the ribosomal particles on the cryo-EM grid. The resulting 3D reconstruction was distorted and showed artifacts, thus preventing further interpretation. Electron microscopy 3-μL aliquots of the complexes were applied on glow-discharged holey carbon grids. Grids were blotted and flash frozen in liquid ethane with a Vitrobot automat. Data acquisition was performed under low-dose conditions on a Titan KRIOS microscope operated at 300 kV. The data set was recorded on a back-thinned Falcon II detector at a calibrated magnification of ×105,263 with a defocus range of 2–3 μm. An in house–built system was used to intercept the videos from the detector at a speed of 16 frames for the 1-s exposures 45. Data were acquired automatically with the EPU software over two 24-h sessions with two cryo-EM grids generated from the same preparation of ribosomal complexes. Image processing Electron micrographs showing signs of drift or astigmatism were discarded, thus resulting in a data set of 3,844 images. 170,581 particles were selected semiautomatically with e2boxer from EMAN2. Contrast transfer–function parameters were determined with CTFFIND3. All 2D and 3D classifications and refinements were performed with RELION 48, 49. Reference-free 2D classification was used to discard 80S ribosomes and defective particles, thus resulting in a data set of 121,751 particles selected for further analysis. An initial refinement procedure with a 60-Å low-pass-filtered empty Dictyostelium 60S ribosomal subunit resulted in an initial cryo-EM reconstruction with an overall resolution of 3.8 Å, revealing a complete 60S ribosomal subunit with additional densities on the intersubunit face, especially in the P site and around the GTPase center. However, the map suggested heterogeneity in the stoichiometry and/or conformation of the bound factors. Because the refinement was dominated by the 60S subunit, we sorted the images into subsets by a succession of 3D classifications with three masks delimiting areas of interest on the ribosome 50, 51. The masks were spheres or combinations of spheres with a voxel value of one inside and zero outside, and a soft drop-off of two pixels. Because EFL1 is an EF-2 homolog, the initial mask was applied around the EF-2–binding site on the 60S subunit, and the particles were sorted into six classes. Classes A5 and A6 showed clear density for EFL1 in two distinct conformations and were processed separately. After 3D refinement, class A6 contained densities corresponding to a 60S–eIF6–SBDS–EFL1 complex. Because class A5 showed heterogeneity around the eIF6-binding site, a second mask was applied to the area encompassing eIF6 and part of EFL1 domain II, and particles were sorted into four classes. 3D refinement of the main class yielded a map of the 60S–SBDS–EFL1 complex. The maps obtained from classes lacking EFL1 showed clear density for eIF6 and additional partial densities in the ribosomal P site and P-stalk base. In agreement with results from a preliminary study in which purified recombinant SBDS protein alone was incubated with 60S ribosomal subunits, the latter densities were ascribed to SBDS. A third mask was applied in this area, and particles were sorted into six classes. 3D refinement of the main class yielded a map of the 60S–eIF6–SBDS complex. To further increase the resolution of the three classes, statistical movie processing was performed as previously described 45. Reported overall resolutions were calculated with the gold-standard FSC = 0.143 criterion 52 and were corrected for the effects of a soft mask on the FSC curve with high-resolution noise substitution 53. The final density maps were corrected for the modulation transfer function of the detector and sharpened by applying a negative B factor that was estimated with automated procedures 54. Modeling of ribosomal RNA fragments Dictyostelium 26S rRNA was aligned against the sequences of Tetrahymena thermophila and S. cerevisiae 26S rRNAs with ClustalW2. According to the sequence alignment, we chose the crystal structure of the T. thermophila 60S ribosomal subunit in complex with initiation factor 6 8 as a template, except for the L1 stalk region, for which the S. cerevisiae ribosome structure 17 was used. The homology model of the rRNA fragments surrounding the SBDS-binding site was constructed with both Assemble2 and Coot 57. Protein modeling The human SBDS atomic coordinates were taken from PDB 2L9N 5. The sequence of Dictyostelium ribosomal proteins uL3, uL6, uL10, uL11, uL14, uL16, eL24, and eL40 were retrieved from the Ribosomal Protein Gene Database, and Dictyostelium eIF6 and the human EFL1 sequences were retrieved from the NCBI Protein database. All the proteins were modeled by homology with the I-TASSER server 58, 59. In each case, the model with the best C score was selected to build the final structure. The lower score obtained for the EFL1 model can be explained by the size of the protein and the presence of both a large insertion domain and numerous loop regions that were modeled ab initio by the I-TASSER server. Model building To build the initial model of the 60S–eIF6–SBDS complex, we used UCSF Chimera 60 to rigid-body dock the T. thermophila 60S ribosomal subunit in complex with initiation factor 6 8 into the 60S–eIF6–SBDS complex cryo-EM density map. Taking advantage of the high sequence similarity between the two organisms, we used this structure as our reference to align the Dictyostelium ribosomal RNA fragments and the uL3, uL6, uL10, uL11, uL14, uL16, eL24, eL40 and eIF6 proteins with Chimera’s MatchMaker tool. In a final step, the human SBDS structure was rigid-body fitted into the cryo-EM density map. We used a similar approach to build the 60S–eIF6–SBDS–EFL1 model with the refined 60S–eIF6–SBDS atomic model as the starting conformation and rigid-body fitting the human EFL1 homology model into the cryo-EM density maps.The 60S–SBDS–EFL1 was built in a similar fashion, with the refined 60S–eIF6–SBDS–EFL1 atomic model as the starting conformation. Model fitting and refinement Because of the intermediate resolution of the bound factors, we first used molecular dynamic flexible fitting to fit the NMR structure of human SBDS 5 or homology models for EFL1, eIF6 and the ribosome. For optimal fitting of the models into the EM density map, we used REFMAC v5.8 adapted for EM refinement 61. The initial system was prepared with VMD 62. To preserve the secondary structure of the proteins, the Ψ and φ dihedral angles of the amino acid residues in α-helices or β-sheets were harmonically restrained with a force constant of 200 kcal mol −1 rad −2. The hydrogen bonds involving backbone atoms from the same residues were maintained through the MDFF procedure 63. For this, we used a force constant of 50 kcal mol −1 Å −2 to restrain the distance between the acceptor and the hydrogen atom, and a force constant of 50 kcal mol −1 rad −2 to maintain the angle formed by the donor, the hydrogen, and its acceptor. We also restrained the cis peptides in their current configurations with a force constant of 200 kcal mol −1 rad −2 and the chiral centers to their current handedness with a force constant of 50 kcal mol −1 rad −2. In the same way, the helical parts of the rRNA were preserved with two 200 kcal mol −1 Å −2 restraints to maintain the distance between paired bases and a set of 200 kcal mol −1 rad −2 restraints to maintain the dihedral angles. The model was optimized by MDFF in vacuo with NAMD 64, the CHARMM22 CMAP-corrected parameters 65 for the protein, the CHARMM27 parameters for the nucleic acids 66, and a 0.3 kcal/mol scaling factor to adjust the influence of the cryo-EM map on the model. A multiple time-step integration scheme was used to calculate bonded interactions every femtosecond and nonbonded interactions every two femtoseconds. A cutoff distance of 10 Å was used for the nonbonded interactions. A dielectric constant of 80 was applied to adjust electrostatic interactions, and the temperature was maintained with a Langevin thermostat with a damping coefficient of 5 ps −1. To optimize fitting of the less well-defined elements of our model, the MDFF procedure was performed with a multistep protocol. First, we performed 10,000 steps of minimization followed by a slow heating to 300 K over the course of 20,000 simulation steps and then performed 1 ns of molecular dynamic simulation, all while holding the ribosomal RNA fragments and proteins fixed. This allowed the SBDS fitting to improve while maintaining the position of the other components of our model that were already well placed in the cryo-EM density map. We repeated this procedure twice, freeing first the ribosomal proteins and then the whole system. To improve the overall quality of the 60S–eIF6–SBDS atomic model, we finished by performing 1,000 steps of minimization. A similar protocol was used for the 60S–eIF6–SBDS–EFL1 and 60S–SBDS–EFL1 models. However, because the optimization protocol was performed in a cascade, only three steps were necessary because the ribosomal RNA fragments and proteins were for the most part already well fitted in the electron density map. We performed 10,000 steps of minimization, a slow heating to 300 K over the course of 20,000 simulation steps, and 1 ns of MD simulation to optimize the fitting of EFL1, all while holding the rest of the system fixed. We repeated this procedure, this time allowing the entire system to adjust into the cryo-EM density map. We used 1,000 steps of minimization to improve the quality of the atomic models. Masked areas of the cryo-EM density maps into which the models had been built were used for refinement in REFMAC v5.8. FSC average was monitored during refinement to follow the fit to density, and the final models were validated with MolProbity 67. For cross-validation against overfitting, the atoms of our final models were randomly displaced, and a refinement procedure was performed against the maps that were reconstructed from only one of the two independent halves of the data used in our gold-standard FSC procedure. FSC curves were calculated between the resulting models and the half maps against which they had been refined as well as the FSC curve between those models and the other half maps. The absence of overfitting of the models is demonstrated by the observation that the FSC work and FSC test curves nearly overlap.Contact analysis was performed with VMD 62 and the Protein, Interfaces, Surfaces and Assemblies service at the European Bioinformatics Institute 68. UCSF Chimera was used for visual analysis and creating figures and movies 60. Supplementary Material Any Supplementary Information and Source Data files are available in the online version of the paper. Supp Info Click here to view. Supp Movie 1: EFL1 conformational switch Click here to view. Supp Movie 2: SBDS conformational switch Click here to view. Supp Movie 3: Proposed mechanism of eIF6 release Click here to view. 