 A module is a group of closely related proteins that act in concert to perform specific biological functions through protein–protein interactions that occur in time and space. However, the underlying module organization and variance remain unclear. In this study, we collected module templates to infer respective module families, including 58,041 homologous modules in 1,678 species, and PPI families using searches of complete genomic database. We then derived PPI evolution scores and interface evolution scores to describe the module elements, including core and ring components. Functions of core components were highly correlated with those of essential genes. In comparison with ring components, core proteins/PPIs were conserved across multiple species. Subsequently, protein/module variance of PPI networks confirmed that core components form dynamic network hubs and play key roles in various biological functions. Based on the analyses of gene essentiality, module variance, and gene co-expression, we summarize the observations of module organization and variance as follows: 1) a module consists of core and ring components; 2) core components perform major biological functions and collaborate with ring components to execute certain functions in some cases; 3) core components are more conserved and essential during organizational changes in different biological states or conditions. The assembly of protein complexes in time and space is essential for performing biological processes, such as cell cycle control and transcription 1. The protein assembly can be regarded as a module, which often governs specific processes and is autonomous in relation to other parts of the organism 2, 3. Many works have been proposed to study the biological properties and modularity of the module. These works employed experimental methods 1, 4, network topology 5, 6, gene expression-based methods 2, 7, and evolutionary-based methods 8. In addition, the modules can be approximately divided into functional module 3, variational module 3, and evolutionary module 9, 10. A functional module is a group of proteins that semi-autonomously assemble together to perform discrete physiological functions. Moreover, the proteins and protein-protein interactions in a module often change over seconds to assemble and disassemble for performing biological functions, as well as evolve over millions of years as proteins and PPIs are gained and lost 11. Investigations of underlying module organization and variance are urgently required for understanding the cellular processes and module evolution. As complete genomes become increasingly available, systems biology approaches based on homologous PPIs and modules across multiple species provide an opportunity to explore organization, evolution, and variance of modules. For investigating the modularity of the yeast cell machinery, an experimental genome-wide screen approach, based on the isoforms of complexes, was proposed and 491 complexes were identified 1. These complexes differentially combined with attachment proteins to execute time–space potential functions in yeast. In addition, functionally interacting proteins have been shown to be gained or lost together during genome evolution 12. However, functional modules showed limited conservation during evolution 9. The causes of restricted evolutionary modularity need to be clarified. Previously, we inferred the module family, which consists of a group of homologous modules, from complete genomic database through PPI families 13, 14. Based on the module families and PPI families, we have reconstructed module-module interaction networks in vertebrates. However, the understanding of module organization and variance in PPI networks is incomplete. To address these issues, we propose PPI evolution score and interface evolution score as the basis to study the module organization and variance in PPI networks using module families and PPI families across multiple species. We utilized PPIES and IES to identify core and ring components of a module. Furthermore, we define protein functional variance and module organizational variance of PPI networks to measure the functional diversities of proteins and modules, respectively. For a module, the core proteins and PPIs are often conserved and consistently play the essential role for performing biological functions. Conversely, ring proteins and PPIs are not often conserved in module families. Compared with ring proteins, core proteins are essential for survival and preferentially constitute hubs of a PPI network. Moreover, core PPIs were co-expressed significantly more than ring PPIs in 7,208 Homo sapiens gene expression sets from Gene Expression Omnibus 16. Finally, we applied genome-wide investigations to describe the link from PFV and MOV values to module variance and biological functions in time and space. We believe that our results are useful for understanding the module organization and variance in PPI networks. Results and Discussion Overview Figure 1 shows the details of our method for identifying core and ring components of modules, and for elucidating module organization through template-based homologous modules using the following steps : First, a module template database comprising 1,519 protein complexes was selected from the Comprehensive Resource of Mammalian protein complexes database 4. Internal PPIs of module templates were then added to templates that lacked PPIs using template-based homologous PPIs, including experimental PPIs from IntAct 17, BioGRID 18, DIP 19, MIPS 20, and MINT 21, and predicted homologous PPIs 14, 22. For each PPI of a module, we inferred its PPI family with joint E -values of ≤10 −40 14 by searching a complete genomic database using previously identified homologous PPIs 14, 22. Subsequently, we utilized MoNetFamily 15 to identify homologous modules of module templates according to topological similarities across multiple species. Module profiles were then constructed for module families, and protein and PPI components were computed. Next, we then derived PPIES and IES scores to extrapolate core and ring components of a module. Finally, we constructed PPI networks and genome-wide investigations for organization of a module, including network topology, gene essentiality, gene expression profiles, and module variance. Figure 1 Overview of core and ring components of modules using the human CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1–GADD45B module as a template. Core and ring components of a module Homologous modules provide the clues to understand the evolution and conserved functions of proteins and PPIs in a module. Thus, we proposed PPIES and IES to identify core and ring components of a module by utilizing homologous PPIs and proteins 15. To derive homologous modules across multiple species, we collected 1,519 high-quality module templates, which are manually annotated protein complexes from the MIPS CORUM database 4. These 1,519 modules are selected from H. sapiens, M. musculus, R. norvegicus, and B. Taurus, respectively. Based on these module templates and the thresholds of functional and topology similarities 15, we inferred 58,041 homologous modules in 1,678 species from 461,077 sequence-based PPI families and 86,252 structure-based PPI families 13, 14. Furthermore, we reconstructed the human PPI network by these 1,515 human modules, including 1,094 human CORUM modules and 421 human homologous modules derived from the other species. To identify core/ring proteins and PPIs of a module, we used the PPIES and IES scores to measure the protein and PPI conservations, respectively, based on 1,678 species and six taxonomic divisions. These six divisions include mammals, vertebrates, invertebrates, plants, bacteria, and archaea according to the National Center for Biotechnology Information taxonomy database 24. In a module family, a PPI with high PPIES indicates that its homologous PPIs are highly conserved across species and taxonomic divisions. In addition, IES of the protein i was set to the maximum PPIES of these PPIs, which reflected interactions between the protein i and its partners. Based on analyses of network topology, gene essentiality, and gene co-expression, we considered proteins with IES ≥ 7 and PPIs with PPIES ≥ 7 as core components of a module, and other proteins and PPIs are the ring components. We used the CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1–GADD45B module family as an example to illustrate core and ring components and their biological properties. The core components of the CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1–GADD45B module included three proteins, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, and G2/mitotic-specific cyclin-B1 ), with IESs of 8.0, and three PPIs. Ring components consist of the growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible protein with an IES of 4.0 and three PPIs with PPIESs of 4.0. During the G2/M cell cycle phase, GADD45B specifically interacts with the CDK1–CCNB1 complex, but not with other CDK–Cyclin complexes, to regulate activation of G2/M cell cycle checkpoint 25. According to six PPI profiles of CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1–GADD45B module family across several organisms that are commonly used in molecular research projects, we found that PPI families of three core PPIs were highly conserved. For example, the interaction between CDK1 and CCNB1 is conserved across 67 species as observed from the homologous PPIs of the human CDK1–CCNB1 PPI. During the G2 cell cycle phase, the active CDK1–CCNB1 interaction can enhance chromosome condensation and nuclear envelope breakdown to separate the centrosomes 26. During the response to DNA damage, PCNA recruits at the replication fork to coordinate DNA replication, and activates DNA repair and damage tolerance pathways. However, no homologs of GADD45B were found in chloroplasts or bacteria. GADD45B is involved in G2/M cell cycle arrest, acting as an inhibitor of the CDK1–CCNB1 complex in some cases 25. A module is a fundamental unit formed with highly connected proteins and often possesses specific biological functions. To assess the connectivity and shared biological functions of two types of module components and three module types, we computed connectivity and average relative specificity similarity scores of Gene Ontology terms. Among 1,519 module templates, the average C t value of core components was significantly higher than those of the others, including the ring components, whole module templates, and extended modules. Similarly, the core components of homologous modules have significantly higher average C t value than those of ring components, whole homologous modules, and extended modules. These results indicate that the core components of the modules have high connectivity. In addition, our results also indicate that the core components often regulate similar biological processes and are localized to the same cellular compartment. Network topology of core and ring components To analyze core and ring components in PPI networks, we derived a human PPI network from 1,515 homologous modules. This PPI network comprised 2,391 proteins and 11,181 PPIs, and was evaluated based on the characteristic of scale-free networks that can be described as P ~ k −r, in which the probability of a node with k links decreases as the node degree increases on a log–log plot. The degree exponent γ was 1.60 in this PPI network, which was consistent with the architecture of previously described cellular networks 27, 28. Figure 2C shows the distribution of node degrees for core proteins, ring proteins, and all proteins in this human PPI network. For 1,069 core proteins, 1,322 ring proteins, and 2,391 proteins of this PPI network, the distribution of node degrees of core proteins was significantly higher than that of ring proteins. Figure 2 Topologies of core and ring proteins in the human protein–protein interaction network comprising 2,391 proteins and 11,181 PPIs. On the basis of a previous study 29, we considered proteins within the top 25% of the highest degree as hubs of the network. The IES distribution of these core proteins was consistent with the hub distribution of this PPI network, particularly at the center of the network. Moreover, 43% of core proteins with degrees of ≥10 were hubs, and only 12% of ring proteins were hubs. Interestingly, node degrees of ring proteins in modules were lower than those of all proteins in this network, indicating that core proteins but not ring proteins play major roles in high connectivity of module sub-networks. Our results suggest that core proteins are preferential constituents of network hubs, as reflected by protein IES values. This observation is consistent with a previous study showing that highly conserved enzymes in a metabolic network were frequently highly connected at the center of the network and were involved in multiple pathways 30. In the CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1–GADD45B module, the core proteins CDK1, CCNB1, and PCNA had higher degrees than the ring protein GADD45B in the human PPI network. Essentiality and composition of core/ring components Essential genes are considered to be required to support cellular life and likely to be common to all cells 31. To evaluate essentiality of core and ring proteins in module families, we collected 11,384 essential proteins over 25 species from the Database of Essential Genes 32, including 8 eukaryotes and 17 prokaryotes. Because homologs of essential proteins are likely to be essential, module proteins were considered essential when they were homologous to those recorded in DEG. For example, CCNB1 is a mapped essential protein and is homologous to essential proteins B M and B D from DEG. For the CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1–GADD45B module family, homologs of the core proteins CDK1, CCNB1, and PCNA were essential proteins according to DEG 32. In contrast, all homologs of the ring protein GADD45B were non-essential. According to the DEG data set, 7,950 proteins from 1,519 module templates were clustered into two groups, including 3,628 mapped essential proteins and 4,322 unannotated proteins without homologous protein in DEG. Among these mapped essential proteins, IES values of 60% are more than 7 and their IES values are significantly higher than those of unannotated proteins. In addition, percentages of mapped essential proteins were correlated with IES and these increased rapidly with IES ≥ 7. Figure 3 Characteristics of module organization. Based on these 11,384 essential proteins, we derived 160 essential GO molecular function terms and analyzed functional annotations of core and ring components using hypergeometric distributions. The distribution of occurrence ratios of these 160 terms between the core component set and the essential protein set is similar, and Pearson's r is 0.49 between the ring component and the essential protein set. Specifically, both core and essential protein sets have some significant MF terms, such as “structural constituent of ribosome,” “ATPase activity,” “nucleoside-triphosphatase activity,” and “chromatin binding.” These terms commonly relate to processes that are critical for survival and are conserved in the modules. In addition, we analyzed 1,212 unannotated core proteins using orthologs from the PORC database 23 and these 160 essential GO MF terms. Among these, 462 were orthologous to essential proteins or were annotated with at least one of the 160 essential GO MF terms. Furthermore, 303 unannotated core proteins possessed child annotations of the 160 essential GO MF terms; therefore, were considered essential. Moreover, 76% and 100% of the unannotated core proteins with IES ≥ 9 or 11, respectively, were annotated with orthologs of essential proteins, were one of 160 essential GO MF terms, or were child annotations of the 160 essential GO MF terms. These results show that protein IES provides biological insights, and that core components are often essential for survival, as indicated in DEG and GO. Table 1 Summary of interface evolution, orthology, and essential molecular functions Figure 3C shows the relationship between module sizes and core/ring compositions of modules. In a module, the number of core components is similar to the number of ring components when the module size ≥5. We next analyzed the distributions of three kinds of modules: including core-only module, ring-only module, and core-ring module. Interestingly, the percentages of core-only modules were often less than 18% and were much lower than those of ring-only modules. In the previous studies, functional modules showed limited conservation during evolution, with approximately 40% of 1,161 prokaryotic modules displaying evolutionary cohesion 9, 10. The present results suggest that these functional modules contain core and ring components, and only core proteins may contribute for the evolutionary cohesion of the module. In addition, the core proteins of a module play the key role for the conservation of functional modules during evolution. Gene co-expression of core and ring components Dynamic assembly and cooperation of proteins in time and space is essential for biological processes in a cell. In this study, we found that modules can be organized into core and ring components, which represent temporal and spatial conservation of dynamic PPIs and proteins. Genome-wide gene expression profiles are descriptive of molecular states that are associated with various responses to environmental perturbations and cellular phenotypes 33. Thus, to observe the variance of PPIs and proteins in a module, we collected 7,208 H. sapiens gene expression data sets from GEO 16. For each module among 1,519 templates, we initially selected gene expression sets that contain all proteins in this module, and evaluated co-expressions of intra-module PPIs to construct a correlation matrix. To confirm that modules in the data sets were associated with biological functions, we selected gene expression sets that give rise to comparatively high protein expression and contain at least one co-expression of intra-module PPIs with Pearson's r values of ≥ h. Figure 3D shows relationships between co-expression ratios with Pearson's r values of ≥0.3, 0.5, and 0.7 and percentages of core PPIs and ring PPIs for 1,515 human modules. When Pearson's r values were ≥0.3, the average CE of interacting core proteins was significantly higher than that of interacting ring proteins. Similarly, when Pearson's r values were ≥0.7, the CE of interacting core proteins remained significantly higher than the ratio of interacting ring proteins. For example, the core PPIs CDK1–PCNA, PCNA–CCNB1, and CDK1–CCNB1 in the CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1–GADD45B module had significantly higher CEs than those of the ring PPIs CDK1–GADD45B, CCNB1–GADD45B, and PCNA–GADD45B, according to 1,085 high expression profile sets for this module. These results indicate that core PPIs of modules are co-expressed more frequently than ring PPIs, suggesting that core components are often simultaneously active or inactive in time and space. Statistics of protein and module variance in supermodules Proteins often assemble dynamically and cooperate to form the modules that perform biological functions in time and space. Among 1,515 human modules, we found that 1,449 contain at least one protein that was involved in more than two modules. We iteratively clustered 1,515 human modules into 225 supermodules until J ≤ 0.5 for any pair of modules. Here, we define a supermodule that consists of several modules performing specific biological functions in different cell states and tissue/cell types. We used the functional diversities of a supermodule to understand the characteristics of module organization and variance in PPI networks. Then, we define the functional variance of the protein p in a supermodule as, where g is the number of the modules in which protein p involved and G is the total number of modules of this supermodule. Subsequently, the organizational variance of the module m in a PPI network is given as, where T is the number of proteins in this module m. High MOV implies that the module often plays an important role in a cell and highly involved in various functions and PPI networks in time and space. Figure 4 Protein functional variance and module organizational variance of supermodules. Figure 4C shows the correlation of MOV values with percentages of core proteins and mapped essential proteins in modules. For example, three of four proteins in the CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1–GADD45B module, which has a high MOV value in its supermodule, were both core proteins and mapped essential proteins. The module evolution scores increase as MOV values increase up to 0.6, but after that MES values remain ~6. Based on module variance and composition of core/ring components, we observed three factors for this trend: 1) the mean MES values of core-only modules and ring-only modules are 8.03 and 4.81, respectively; 2) the number of core components is often smaller than the number of ring components in a module ; 3) the percentages of core components in modules increase as MOV values increase up to 0.6, but after that percentages of core components remain ~41%. In the CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1 supermodule, MOV values of four modules were ≥0.69 and represented high MES. In addition, PFV values of core proteins were significantly higher than those of ring proteins. In the CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1 supermodule, core proteins were involved in multiple modules, whereas ring proteins were not. The chromosomal passenger complex supermodule comprises six experimental modules that were derived from various purification methods, including anti bait coimmunoprecipitation, anti tag coimmunoprecipitation, coimmunoprecipitation, pull down, and fluorescence microscopy. This supermodule is organized by six proteins, including aurora-B serine/threonine protein kinase, baculoviral IAP repeat-containing protein 5, inner centromere protein, borealin, ecotropic viral integration site 5 protein homolog, and exportin-1. During early mitosis, CPC is an important mitotic regulatory complex that promotes chromosome alignment by correcting misattachments between chromosomes and microtubules of the mitotic spindle 34. The CPC supermodule contained the three core proteins BIRC5, AURKB, and XPO1, and the three ring proteins INCENP, CDCA8, and EVI5. In this supermodule, chromosomal passenger complex had the highest MOV value, and comprised two core proteins and three essential proteins. Interestingly, the MOV value of the CRM1–Survivin–AuroraB mitotic module was 0.67, and its module evolution score was 8. The core proteins BIRC5 and AURKB were included in most CPC modules, whereas PFV of XPO1 was only 0.17. The functions of the CPC can attribute to the action of the enzymatic core, the AURKB 34, and the BIRC5 mediates the CPC to target to the centromere and midbody 34. Previous studies indicate that the BIRC5–XPO1 interaction is essential for CPC localization and activity 35, implying that XPO1 may play an important role. On the other hand, PFV values of the ring proteins INCENP, CDCA8, and EVI5, were 0.67, 0.5, and 0.17, respectively. In human cells, functional CPCs can be targeted, although less efficiently, to centromeres and central spindles in the absence of CDCA8, lack of orthologs in S. cerevisiae and S. pombe, when BIRC5 is linked covalently to INCENP 34. During the late stages of mitosis, EVI5 associates with CPC and plays a role in the completion of cytokinesis. Therefore, the present results suggest that the functional variance of core proteins are often significantly higher than those of ring proteins. Module variance in different time and space Here, we use the CPC supermodule to describe the link from PFV and MOV values to module variance and biological functions in time and space based on 7,208 gene expression data sets. 6 ). To explore the protein and module variance in different cell states, we first utilized CPC supermodule to describe the regulation of cell division. From 7,208 gene expression sets, we collected 87 sets, which include all 6 proteins and at least one co-expression of interacting protein pairs in CPC supermodule. According to these 87 sets, we derived four modules in CPC supermodule to describe the regulation of cell division in interphase state and mitotic state. The mitotic state is comprised of prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase and telophase, requiring the assembly and disassembly of specific modules within a supermodule. For example, for the module 1 in interphase, the gene co-expression values of three PPIs are more than 0.5 in eight sets. Conversely, Pearson's r values of the other 6 PPIs in CPC supermodule were less than 0.5. Figure 5 Module and protein variance of chromosomal passenger complex supermodule during cell division. Figure 6 Module variance of chromosomal passenger complex supermodule in different tissue and cell types. For the CPC supermodule, we found that the core proteins of the CPC supermodule play key roles in various biological functions in the regulation of cell division. AURKB, the enzymatic core of CPC, is activated through binding to BIRC5, and then interacts with CDCA8 to form the module in interphase 36, 37. Moreover, XPO1 interacts with BIRC5 of the module 1 to form module 2 for tethering the CPC to the centromere in prophase 35. In prometaphase and metaphase, the AURKB–BIRC5–CDCA8–XPO1 module incorporates INCENP to promote chromosome alignment 38. INCENP is a scaffold protein whose N-terminal region can interact with BIRC5 and CDCA8, and C-terminal region can bind to AURKB. Additionally, INCENP localizes the CPC to the central spindle and midbody during anaphase and cytokinesis, respectively 36. Interestingly, INCENP plays key role in biological functions of CPC, but INCENP is not often co-expressed with AURKB, BIRC5, and CDCA8. In anaphase, XPO1 may dissociate from the module. Finally, EVI5 associates with the CPC and is involved in the completion of cytokinesis 39. The core proteins are co-expressed more frequently than ring proteins. These results indicate that core and ring components assemble dynamically and cooperate to form the modules for executing specific functions on different time. To observe the module variance in different tissue and cell types, we collected six gene expression data sets, consisting of tumor and corresponding normal tissue samples in nine tumor types. According to gene profiles, these nine tumor types can be simply divided into three groups, including brain, lymphoma, and the other. We employed CPC supermodule on these nine tumor types to observe the module variance. We found that AURKB–BIRC5–CDCA8–XPO1 module is significantly up-regulated in glioblastoma multiforme, adrenocortical carcinoma, gastric carcinoma, and ductal carcinoma. The dysregulation of the CPC in proliferation has proposed to be associated with aggressive solid tumors 40. Based on well-known proliferation markers and cell cycle regulated genes 41, we found that the proliferation markers are indeed only up-regulated in glioblastoma multiforme, adrenocortical carcinoma, gastric carcinoma, and ductal carcinoma. In addition, the gene expression values of CPC supermodule are relatively low in three lymphoma types with respect to other cancer types and most genes are also non-significantly changed. These results show that CPC supermodule dynamically assembles its core and ring components to form modules performing specific biological functions during tumorigenesis in these nine tumor types. RAD17–RFC-9-1-1 checkpoint module In this study, we used the RAD17–RFC-9-1-1 checkpoint module of H. sapiens to describe module organization and variance in PPI networks. This module comprises 16 PPIs and 8 proteins, including the cell cycle checkpoint proteins RAD1/RAD9A/RAD17, the replication factor C subunits 2/3/4/5, and checkpoint protein HUS1. During the cell cycle, the RAD17–RFC-9-1-1 module is involved in the early steps of the DNA damage checkpoint response 42. Using the RAD17–RFC-9-1-1 module in H. sapiens as a module template, homologous modules across 127 species and 5 taxonomic divisions were all found to regulate DNA damage recognition. The ten PPI families and the six PPI families of this module were regarded as core components and ring components, respectively. Five core proteins RFC2, RFC3, RFC4, and RFC5 were determined as hubs in the human PPI network. Conversely, the degree of all ring proteins was 4. In addition, the core proteins, RFC2, RFC3, RFC4, RFC5, and RAD17, were homologous to essential proteins recorded in DEG and annotated with several essential GO MF terms, such as “DNA clamp loader activity” and “nucleoside-triphosphatase activity.” During DNA replication, RFC binds to primed templates and recruits PCNA to the site of replication 43. In addition, RAD17 associates with these four small RFC subunits and forms an RFC-like complex that acts as a DNA damage sensor 42. Therefore, the present results suggest that core proteins of RFC subunits and RAD17 are essential in the RAD17–RFC-9-1-1 module. Among collected 7,208 gene expression data sets of H. sapiens, 309 contained at least one co-expression of interacting protein pairs in the RAD17–RFC-9-1-1 module with Pearson's r values of ≥0.5. Among these 309 sets, CEs of 10 core PPIs were significantly higher than those of the three ring PPIs. For example, CE of the interaction proteins, RFC2 and RFC5, was 0.74, with Pearson's r values of ≥0.5 in 229 gene expression sets among 309 sets. The ring proteins RAD9A, RAD1, and HUS1 of the RAD17–RFC-9-1-1 module form a PCNA-like ring structure that may interact with RFC-like complexes to regulate DNA binding in ATP-dependent or ATP-independent manners 42. The RAD17–RFC-9-1-1 supermodule comprises the RFC2–5 module, the RAD17–RFC module, and the RAD17–RFC-9-1-1 module. The core proteins with PFV values of 1 were consistently involved in these three modules to perform various biological functions. Conversely, the PFV value of the three ring proteins was 0.33, and these are included in one module to perform one of functions of the RAD17-RFC-9-1-1 supermodule. Moreover, MOV values of RAD17–RFC-9-1-1, RAD17–RFC, and RFC2–5 modules were 0.71, 0.93, and 1.0, respectively, and were highly correlated with MES. Figure 7 shows the module variance of the RAD17–RFC-9-1-1 supermodule during DNA replication from 309 gene expression sets, which are recorded in the GEO database and include all 8 proteins of this supermodule. Based on these 309 gene expression sets, we inferred seven modules that were described in more than three gene expression sets. Among these seven inferred modules, the RFC2-5 module and the RAD17–RFC-9-1-1 module were recorded in the CORUM database and were derived from 17 and 5 gene expression sets, respectively. Inferred module 5, namely the RAF2–RAF4–RAF5 module, has been studied for DNA-dependent ATPase activity stimulated by PCNA and can unload PCNA from singly nicked circular DNA 44. In addition, we found that the RAD17–RFC module included the five proteins, and interacts with RAD1 to form module 3, with RAD9A to form module 4, with RAD1 and HUS1 to form module 2, and with RAD9A and RAD1 to form module 7 for the regulation of DNA damage checkpoint response 42. Interestingly, according to these 309 sets, the RAD17–RFC module did not interact with HUS1 to form a module, and this was in agreement with a previous study 42. During DNA replication, the RFC2-5 module and the RFC2–RFC4–RFC5 module possess DNA-dependent ATPase activity and are not responsive to the addition of PCNA 45. In the early steps of DNA damage recognition, the RAD17–RFC module activates the checkpoint response 46, and then binds to nicked circular, gapped, and primed DNA to recruit the RAD9A–RAD1–HUS1 module for ATP-dependent DNA damage sensor 42. These results indicate that RFC2, RFC3, RFC4, and RFC5 play major roles in DNA damage recognition and that the RAD9, RAD1, and HUS1 could regulate them to bind to DNA with or without ATP. Interestingly, the core protein RAD17 forms the bridge between core and ring components, and co-expressions of the three core PPIs are slightly lower than those of the other core PPIs. Figure 7 Module and protein variance of the RAD17–RFC-9-1-1 supermodule during DNA replication. Conclusions We have analyzed network topology, gene essentiality, protein/module variance, and gene co-expression to summarize the observations of module organization and variance in the following: 1) a module comprises core and ring components and the former is more conserved and essential during organizational changes in different biological states or conditions; 2) core components often perform the major biological functions of a module, whereas the ring components are indirectly involved in biological functions through collaborations with core components. Methods Homologous modules Here, we used the module template M with six interfaces A–B, A–C, A–D, B–C, B–D, and C–D as an example, and the homologous module of M was defined as follows: 1) A′, B′, C′, and D′ are homologous proteins of A, B, C, and D, respectively, with statistically significant sequence similarities 47, 48 ; 2) A′–B′, A′–C′, A′–D′, B′–C′, B′–D′, and C′–D′ are the best-matching homologous PPIs of A–B, A–C, A–D, B–C, B–D, and C–D, respectively, with statistically significant joint sequence similarities 14 ; 3) A′, B′, C′, and D′ are the homologous module of template M, as indicated by high topological similarity. Protein- and PPI-aligned ratios were defined as the number of proteins and PPIs in the homologous module divided by the number of proteins and PPIs in the module template, respectively. Protein-aligned ratios of ≥0.5 and PPI-aligned ratios of ≥0.3 indicated topological similarity according to statistical analyses of 37,197 structural modules in 1,442 species based on the KEGG MODULE database 49. PPI evolution score and protein interface evolution score We propose the PPI evolution score and protein interface evolution score to identify core and ring components of a module. To compute the PPIES of a PPI in a module family, we clustered NCBI taxonomy 24 into six taxonomic divisions: mammals, vertebrates, invertebrates, plants, bacteria, and archaea. For each PPI z of a module family, PPIES was defined as where DG is the number of taxonomic divisions that contain at least one species in homologous PPIs of the PPI z ; M, V, I, P, B, and A are the total numbers of species of homologous modules belonging to MAM, VRT, INV, PLN, BCT, and ARC, in the module family, and m, v, i, p, b, and a are the numbers of species belonging to their respective taxonomic divisions of homologous PPIs of the PPI z, respectively. For each protein k in a module family, IES was set to the maximum PPIES, and was defined as, where g is the number of proteins that interact with protein k. Here, we considered proteins with IES ≥ 7 and PPIs with PPIES ≥ 7 as core components of a module; and all other proteins and PPIs were considered ring components. To evaluate conservation of modules during evolution for each module d in a module family, module evolution score is set to the mean PPIES and is defined as, where N is the number of PPIs within module d. Supermodule In the present study, supermodules comprised several modules, often with specific biological functions, and their functional diversity was defined by numbers of modules. Initially, 1,515 human CORUM modules were clustered into supermodules using the Jaccard similarity coefficient J 50. The J is defined as, where A ∩ B is the number of common proteins in modules A and B, and A ∪ B is the number of the union protein set in modules A and B. Here, modules A and B are clustered into one group if J ≥ 0.5, and the ordering for adding modules is based on the module size. Based on this threshold, we iteratively clustered modules and groups into supermodules until J ≤ 0.5 for any pair of modules. Finally, we clustered 1,515 modules into 252 supermodules and 115 supermodules when the numbers of modules in a supermodule are more than 2 and 3 modules, respectively. Specifically, the CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1–GADD45B module was grouped with 3 other experimental modules to form the CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1 supermodule, which included RalBP1–CDK1–CCNB1, CDK1–CCNB1–PTCH1, and CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1–GADD45A modules. The functional diversity of the CDK1–PCNA–CCNB1 supermodule was 4. Protein-protein interactions in gene expression profiles Proteins and PPIs change over time to assemble and disassemble a module for executing biological processes. Here, we quantified the variance of proteins and PPIs in time and space by assessing correlations between expression profiles of interacting proteins in 7,208 gene expression data sets derived from GEO 16. To avoid the influence of genes with low expression and variance, we selected the gene j in a gene expression set based on the following criteria: average expression ≥ to the mean expression of all genes in a gene expression set; or the standard deviation of expression ≥ to the standard deviation of expression values for all genes in the gene expression set. For each module, we collected expression profiles contained expression values of all proteins in this module, and then calculated Pearson's r values for each PPI within the module to construct correlation matrix. Here, we assume that an active module performed biological functions in a cell if at least one PPI of the module had high Pearson's r ≥ h. For a PPI p in an active module, the co-expression ratio at the threshold h is defined as, where N is the total number of these 7,208 expression profiles with at least one high co-expression of any PPI of this module; and N p is the number of expression profiles containing high co-expression of proteins i and j with Pearson's r values of ≥ h. For example, the CE of CDK1–CCNB1 is 0.76, reflecting high co-expression in 825 of 1,085 gene expression sets when h = 0.5. Author Contributions C.Y.L., Y.S.L. and J.M.Y. conceived and designed the experiments. T.L.L., Y.W.L. and J.M.Y. implemented the program. C.Y.L., T.L.L., Y.W.L. and J.M.Y. performed the experiments and analyzed the data. C.Y.L., T.L.L., Y.Y.C., C.T.L. and J.M.Y. wrote the paper. Supplementary Material Supplementary Information: Supplementary information Click here to view. 