 DYRK1A is a constitutively active protein kinase that has a critical role in growth and development which functions by regulating cell proliferation, differentiation and survival. DCAF7 is a cellular binding partner of DYRK1A and also regulates signalling by the protein kinase HIPK2. DCAF7 is an evolutionarily conserved protein with a single WD40 repeat domain and has no catalytic activity. We have defined a DCAF7 binding motif of 12 amino acids in the N-terminal domain of class 1 DYRKs that is functionally conserved in DYRK1 orthologs from Xenopus, Danio rerio and the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. A similar sequence was essential for DCAF7 binding to HIPK2, whereas the closely related HIPK1 family member did not bind DCAF7. Immunoprecipitation and pulldown experiments identified DCAF7 as an adaptor for the association of the adenovirus E1A protein with DYRK1A and HIPK2. Furthermore, DCAF7 was required for the hyperphosphorylation of E1A in DYRK1A or HIPK2 overexpressing cells. Our results characterize DCAF7 as a substrate recruiting subunit of DYRK1A and HIPK2 and suggest that it is required for the negative effect of DYRK1A on E1A-induced oncogenic transformation. The specific and regulated phosphorylation of target proteins by protein kinases is critical for all cellular functions including proliferation and differentiation. Mechanisms that ensure the spatiotemporal control of kinase signalling include the association of kinases with regulatory or targeting subunits and the formation of complexes with scaffolding and adaptor proteins 1, 2. Such regulatory proteins can allosterically modulate catalytic activity, localize the kinase to distinct subcellular compartments, or function as organizing platforms that recruit the kinase and the substrate to the same complex. Dual-specificity tyrosine -phosphorylation regulated kinase 1A is a ubiquitously expressed protein kinase with pleiotropic functions in cellular regulation, including cell cycle control, cell survival, neural proliferation and differentiation 3, 4. Altered expression levels of DYRK1A, either due to heterozygous loss-of-function mutations or the presence of a third allele in Down syndrome, result in severe neurological alterations and impaired brain development in humans and mice 5, 6. DYRK1A belongs to a conserved family of protein kinases, which is comprised of 5 mammalian members that are further subdivided into either class 1 or class 2 DYRKs 4. DYRKs phosphorylate substrates on serine/threonine residues, but share the characteristic ability to autophosphorylate an activation loop tyrosine residue during translation 7, 8, 9. In contrast to the regulatory tyrosine phosphorylation of the mitogen-activated protein kinases, tyrosine phosphorylation in the DYRKs seems to be constitutive, and thus does not function as a control switch that regulates the activity of the mature kinase, e.g. in response to extracellular signals. The question arises as to how DYRK1A is controlled and what roles DYRK1A-interacting proteins may have in the regulation of its cellular function. DCAF7 is a WD40 domain protein that was discovered in a preparation of DYRK1A from rabbit skeletal muscle 10. WD40 domains are characterized by several WD40 repeats, which are sequences of 44–60 amino acids in length that often harbour a defining tryptophan-aspartate dipeptide. These repeats form a circularized β - propeller structure that provide multiple binding surfaces for diverse protein–protein interactions and are found in numerous scaffold proteins 11, 12. DCAF7 is the gene symbol assigned by the Human Gene Nomenclature Committee, meaning “DDB1 and CUL4 associated factor 7”. This name refers to the identification of the protein in DDB1 complexes and the deduced function as a substrate receptor in CLR4 E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes 13. However, this role of DCAF7 has not yet been experimentally verified. DCAF7 has been repeatedly identified as a protein that co-purifies with DYRK1A 14, 15, 16, 17 and was also shown to bind DYRK1B 10, 16. The interaction with DCAF7 was narrowed down to the N-terminal region of DYRK1A 16, which is partially conserved in class 1 DYRKs, but diverges in class 2 DYRKs. In accordance with this finding, DCAF7 does not bind to DYRK2, DYRK3 or DYRK4 16. DCAF7 was also identified as a binding partner of HIPK2 18, which is a neighbour of the DYRK family in the kinase dendrogram but shows no apparent sequence conservation with class 1 DYRKs except for the kinase domain. Studies in genetically tractable organisms have yielded functional evidence on the role of DCAF7 and the interaction with class 1 DYRKs. In the zebrafish Danio rerio, DCAF7 was identified as a gene essential for craniofacial development 19. Downregulation of dyrk1b induced similar defects in endoderm formation as reported for wdr68 mutant animals, supporting a functional interaction of these proteins in zebrafish development 20. The DCAF7 ortholog in Drosophila, CG14614, is essential for normal wing-vein patterning and development of the adult jump muscle 21. CG14614 associates with the Drosophila DYRK1 ortholog, MNB, and both genes were shown to control normal wing and leg growth by modulating the Salvador-Wart-Hippo pathway 22. These results from zebrafish and Drosophila provide evidence that the interaction of class 1 DYRKs with DCAF7 is functionally important in the modulation of pathways involved in differentiation and proliferation. Little is presently known about the function of DCAF7 in mammalian cells and the molecular mechanisms by which DCAF7 influences the function of DYRK1A. Interestingly, nuclear access of DCAF7 is required to maintain normal craniofacial development in zebrafish development 23. Nevertheless, DCAF7 does not alter the distribution of DYRK1A between the nucleus and the cytoplasm 16, 19. Mammalian DYRK1A and DCAF7 interact with human adenovirus type 5 early region 1A protein 15, 24. E1A has been extensively characterized as an oncogene that is capable of immortalizing primary rodent cells and transforming them in cooperation with E1B or other oncogenes such as ras 25. The interaction site with the DYRK1A/DCAF7 complex has been mapped to a conserved sequence in the C-terminal region of E1A 15, 26. Disruption of the DYRK1A/DCAF7-binding region increased the transforming activity of E1A in cooperation with ras, strongly suggesting that the interaction with DYRK1A attenuates the proliferative effect of E1A. E1A stimulates E2F-dependent transcription and S-phase entry by its interaction with the retinoblastoma protein, whereas DYRK1A is a negative regulator of S-phase entry 3, 27, 28. The role of DCAF7 in this process is unknown. In the present study we have characterized the role of DCAF7 as an adaptor protein of class 1 DYRKs and HIPK2. We have defined the DCAF7 binding region in the N-terminal domains of DYRK1A and HIPK2 and show that the binding interface is functionally conserved even in a DYRK kinase from slime mold. Furthermore, we show that DCAF7 binds to E1A and acts as an essential adaptor protein that mediates the interaction of DYRK1A and HIPK2 with E1A. Results DCAF7 binds to DYRK1A, DYRK1B and HIPK2 GFP-tagged constructs of DYRK1A/B and HIPK2 were co-expressed with DCAF7 in HeLa cells to directly compare the interaction of these kinases with DCAF7 in co-immunoprecipitation experiments. Figure 1a shows that DCAF7 bound to HIPK2 as well as to the class 1 DYRKs. Interestingly, HIPK1 did not associate with DCAF7, although HIPK1 and HIPK2 are closely related and share the same domain architecture 29. Immunoprecipitation of endogenous DYRK1A from HeLa cells confirmed that DCAF7 interacts with DYRK1A at physiological expression levels. Figure 1 DCAF7 interacts with class 1 DYRKs and HIPK2. Zebrafish DYRK1B has been reported to interact with the orthologous DCAF7 protein, suggesting that the binding interface between DCAF7 and class 1 DYRKs is conserved in evolution. To test this, we determined whether the DCAF7 and class 1 DYRK orthologs from various species where able to interact with each other. We found that human DCAF7 was co-immunoprecipitated with Xenopus DYRK1B. Furthermore, mouse DYRK1A, human DYRK1B and Xenopus DYRK1B bind to GFP-DCAF7 from zebrafish. These results show that the structural determinants required for the interaction of DYRK1 with DCAF7 are conserved in vertebrates. Identification of the DCAF7 binding site in DYRK1A The N-terminal domain of DYRK1A was shown to be essential for binding of DCAF7 16. To narrow down the critical region, we created a panel of DYRK1A deletion constructs and examined their capacity to bind DCAF7. These experiments identified a region of 27 amino acids located N-terminal to the nuclear localization signal that was essential for the formation of the DCAF7/DYRK1A complex. Within this region, a motif comprising residues 92–104 was conserved among all class 1 DYRKs that are known to interact with DCAF7. A deletion mutant of DYRK1A lacking amino acids 93–104 did not bind to DCAF7, confirming that this sequence was necessary for interaction. Regardless of the close vicinity of the nuclear localization signal, the deletion mutant did not differ from the wild type protein in its near exclusive nuclear localization. Further attempts to define the structural determinants of the DCAF7-binding interface in DYRK1A by alanine scanning revealed that no single residue in this region was essential for binding. Figure 2 Mapping of the DCAF7-interacting sequence in DYRK1A. The DCAF7 binding site is conserved in DYRK1 from slime mould Database searches revealed that a DYRK1 orthologous kinase in the slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum harbors a sequence motif very similar to the DCAF7-binding region of DYRK1A. To test whether this sequence motif was a functional DCAF7 binding site, we constructed a GFP fusion protein comprising the N-terminal region of Dd DYRK1A. In co-IP experiments, human DCAF7 bound as well to the Dictyostelium sequence as to the corresponding region from human DYRK1A. This result shows that the binding interface of the DYRK1/DCAF7 complex is extremely well conserved, supporting the hypothesis that the association with DCAF7 plays a fundamental role for the function of class 1 DYRKs. Figure 3 Mapping of DCAF7-binding sequences in Dictyostelium DYRK1 and human HIPK2. Mapping of the DCAF7 binding site in HIPK2 Deletion of the N-terminal domain of HIPK2 had been shown to abolish DCAF7 binding 18. However, HIPK2 shares no obvious sequence similarity with class 1 DYRKs outside the catalytic domain. Visual analysis identified a short segment within the N-terminal region as the best potential match with amino acids 93–104 from DYRK1A. This motif is conserved in all vertebrate HIPK2 sequences, while the corresponding sequence in HIPK1 differs in several positions. Co-IP experiments showed that DCAF7 bound to a GFP fusion protein containing the first 135 amino acids of HIPK2, but not to a shorter construct comprising amino acids 1–114. This result localizes the DCAF7 binding site of HIPK2 to a segment of 21 amino acids in the N-terminal region of HIPK2. Considering the difference in DCAF7 binding between HIPK1 and HIPK2, we speculated that the presence of a proline in the corresponding sequence of HIPK1 might disrupt the binding interface. Indeed, the substitution of Thr125 by proline abolished DCAF7 binding to HIPK2. As with DYRK1A, DCAF7 binding did not depend on the catalytic activity of HIPK2, since the interaction was maintained by the kinase deficient HIPK2 D324N point mutant. The higher electrophoretic mobility of this mutant results from its reduced autophosphorylation 30. DCAF7 is required for efficient binding of E1A to DYRK1A, DYRK1B and HIPK2 The E1A protein from HAdV-5 interacts with DYRK1A and DCAF7 24, 15, 26. To investigate the role of DCAF7 as an adaptor protein in this complex, we conducted co-IP experiments in HeLa cells co-expressing myc-tagged E1A and GFP-tagged constructs of DYRK1A, DYRK1B and HIPK2 with either FLAG-DCAF7 or a control plasmid. All three kinases formed complexes with E1A and DCAF7, while only very weak binding of E1A was observed without DCAF7 overexpression. As the association of E1A with HIPK2 has not been previously reported, we used the HEK293 cell line to confirm that endogenous E1A was also associated with HIPK2/DCAF7. The HEK293 clone was originally immortalized by transformation with fragmented HAdV-5 DNA and constitutively expresses the two major E1A splice variants of 243 and 289 amino acids. Next, we used untransfected HEK293 cells to analyze the interaction of DYRK1A, DCAF7 and E1A under normal expression levels of all proteins. This experiment showed that a small amount of the endogenous E1A associates with DYRK1A/DCAF7 complexes. Furthermore, both DYRK1A and DCAF7 were found in anti-E1A IP from HEK293, but not in otherwise identical experiments performed in HeLa cells, which do not express E1A. Figure 4 DCAF7 mediates binding of E1A to DYRK1A, DYRK1B and HIPK2. To prove that DCAF7 can simultaneously bind DYRK1A and E1A, we took advantage of a HEK293 derivative line that stably overexpresses GFP–DYRK1A under the control of a doxycyclin-regulatable promoter. After transient expression of FLAG-DCAF7, cell lysates were subjected to successive IP with anti-FLAG and anti-GFP antibodies. Following anti FLAG IP, bound proteins were eluted from the affinity gel with an excess of FLAG peptide, and the eluates were incubated with GFP trap paramagnetic beads to capture FLAG-DCAF7/GFP-DYRK1A complexes. Both forms of the E1A proteins were detected in the final immunoprecipitate, indicating that DYRK1A, DCAF7 and E1A are components of the same protein complex in HEK293 cells. To further characterize this complex, we conducted a series of GST-pulldown assays. The region of E1A responsible for interaction with DCAF7/DYRK1A has been mapped to a short sequence including residues 250–277 encoded by exon 2 15, 26. Therefore, we used recombinant GST-fused E1A-X2 as bait to pull down DYRK1A and DCAF7 from HeLa cell lysates. GST and a mutant of E1A with a deletion of the DYRK1A-binding region served as background controls. Non-specific binding was detected in some control lanes but was much weaker than specific binding of DCAF7 to E1A-X2. Overexpression of FLAG-DCAF7 markedly increased the binding of GFP-DYRK1A to E1A-X2, while binding of endogenous DYRK1A was unaffected by FLAG-DCAF7. This result is consistent with the assumption that endogenous DYRK1A exists already in a stoichiometric complex with endogenous DCAF7, whereas binding of overexpressed GFP-DYRK1A depends on the presence of overexpressed FLAG-DCAF7. In contrast, binding of FLAG-DCAF7 to E1A was not affected by the presence or absence of GFP-DYRK1A. Similarly, binding of E1A-X2 to immobilized GST-DYRK1A depended on the presence of DCAF7, whereas the association of DCAF7 with DYRK1A was not affected by the presence of E1A-X2. The pulldown of DCAF7/DYRK1A from HeLa lysates by GST-E1A does not prove direct binding of these proteins, since the complex may include one or more additional cellular proteins. Therefore, we produced GFP-DCAF7 by in vitro -translation for use as a prey in GST pulldown experiments. As shown in Fig. 4f,g, GFP-DCAF7 bound to bacterially expressed GST-E1A-X2 and GST-DYRK1A, but not to GST or GST-E1A-X2 Δ250–277 ). This result strongly suggests that DCAF7 directly binds to E1A and DYRK1A, although we cannot fully rule out the possibility that other proteins present in the rabbit reticulocyte lysate participate in the complex. We performed knockdown experiments to further determine the roles of DYRK1A and DCAF7 in forming a complex with E1A. Co-IP of E1A with FLAG-DCAF7 was not affected by knockdown of endogenous DYRK1A, whereas knockdown of DCAF7 eliminated binding of E1A to HA-DYRK1A. These results conclusively identify DCAF7 as an adaptor protein that is necessary for the association of E1A with DYRK1A. Figure 5 DCAF7 is an essential adaptor protein for the association of E1A with DYRK1A in vivo. Structural basis of the E1A-DYRK1A and E1A-HIPK2 binding We analyzed the binding of E1A to DYRK1A deletion constructs to further define the structural requirements for this interaction. As expected, GFP-DYRK1A Δ93–104, which is unable to bind DCAF7, did not bind E1A. This confirmed that the interaction with DCAF7 is necessary for DYRK1A to bind E1A. Next we tested truncated DYRK1A constructs that contained the DCAF7 interaction site. These deletion constructs showed minimal or no binding of E1A, although DCAF7 was efficiently precipitated. Thus, binding of DCAF7 to DYRK1A was necessary, but not sufficient, to establish an interaction with E1A that was stable enough to be detected by co-IP. Catalytic activity was not required for the assembly of the complex, since the kinase deficient DYRK1A K188R mutant showed strong binding to E1A. Interestingly, co-expression of wild type DYRK1A, but not the catalytically inactive mutant, resulted in a reduced electrophoretic mobility of the E1A bands, suggesting that DYRK1A phosphorylates E1A. Figure 6 Structural basis for E1A binding to DYRK1A and HIPK2. We performed pulldown experiments to explore the formation of the DYRK1A/DCAF7/E1A complex under in vitro conditions. GFP-DYRK1A Δ93–104 was not pulled down by recombinant E1A-X2, once more providing evidence that DCAF7 acts as an essential adaptor for this interaction. In contrast to the co-IP results, the interaction of GFP-DYRK1A 1–176 with E1A-X2 was clearly detectable under the conditions of this assay. Similar results were obtained with other deletion constructs including GFP-DYRK1A 77–113, which contains essentially little more than the DCAF7 binding motif of DYRK1A. This discrepancy between the co-IP result and the pulldown assay was consistently observed in replicate experiments. Of note, the complex of E1A with DCAF7/DYRK1A forms in vitro with an excess of immobilized E1A in the case of the pulldown experiment. In contrast, the co-IP identifies complexes that have formed in vivo in the presence of other potentially competing binding partners. It appears plausible that regions other than the DCAF7 binding site of DYRK1A support the formation of the DYRK1A/DCAF7/E1A under physiological conditions, but are not required under in vitro conditions. We also performed pulldown assays to further characterize the role of DCAF7 in the E1A/HIPK2 complex. As above, we used the GST-E1A-X2 fusion protein as bait and an E1A mutant deficient in DCAF7 binding as background control. Binding of GFP-HIPK2 to E1A-X2 depended on the presence of the DCAF7-interaction motif in E1A and was abrogated by the T125P mutation in HIPK2. Furthermore, HIPK2 1–135 was pulled down by E1A-X2, but HIPK2 1–114 was not, again demonstrating a requirement for the DCAF7 binding motif. Thus, DCAF7 functions as an adaptor in protein complexes of E1A with HIPK2 as well as DYRK1A. Phosphorylation of E1A We had previously identified a peptide mimicking the sequence around Ser219 in E1A as one of the best in vitro substrates of DYRK1A among 720 peptides. Moreover, this site in E1A matches the optimal DYRK1A target sequence 32 and is essential for the interaction of FOXK1 and FOXK2 with E1A 15. Kinase assays with recombinant GST-E1A-X2 confirmed that DYRK1A efficiently phosphorylates Ser219 in vitro, as detected by a phosphospecific antibody. However, overexpression of GFP-DYRK1A did not increase the phosphorylation of Ser219 in HEK293 cells, which was already high in the absence of exogenous DYRK1A. Nevertheless, overexpression of DYRK1A and DCAF7 induced the appearance of an E1A form with reduced electrophoretic mobility. This result suggests that DYRK1A phosphorylates E1A on sites other than Ser219. Figure 7 Phosphorylation of E1A by DYRK1A and HIPK2. To narrow down the region of this phosphorylation event, we used an E1A deletion construct comprising only the region encoded by exon 2. Overexpression of both DYRK1A and DCAF7, but not DYRK1A alone, resulted in a marked mobility shift of E1A-X2. The change in mobility was not caused by the phosphorylation of Ser219, since both the faster and slower migrating bands are detected by the pSer219 specific antibody. Treatment with phosphatase eliminated the upper band, indicating that the altered electrophoretic mobility results from phosphorylation on other site. The same upshift of myc-E1A-X2 was induced by overexpression of HIPK2 and DCAF7. Furthermore, this phosphorylation of E1A by DYRK1A and HIPK2 was strictly dependent on the presence of the DCAF7 binding sequence in E1A. Analysis of mutant DYRK1A constructs showed that the maximal effect on E1A electrophoretic mobility depended both on the catalytic activity of DYRK1A and on the capacity to bind DCAF7. A weak effect of DCAF7 overexpression was observed in the presence of catalytically inactive DYRK1A constructs, which may be due to recruitment of endogenous kinases to E1A. As observed for DYRK1A, the phosphorylation of E1A by HIPK2 was dependent on kinase activity and on DCAF7 binding. The requirement for DCAF7 was further supported by the fact that HIPK1 did not induce the mobility shift of E1A. Subcellular localization of the E1A/DCAF7/DYRK1A complexes Immunofluorescence experiments were performed to address the question whether the interaction of E1A, DCAF7 and DYRK1A altered the intracellular localization of the individual proteins. Wild type GFP-DYRK1A and GFP-DYRK1A Δ93–104 were co-localized in the nucleus with E1A, and the overexpression of E1A had no apparent effect on either DYRK1A construct. In contrast, FLAG-DCAF7 was only partially co-localized with DYRK1A in the nucleus and was also detectable in the cytoplasm. Strikingly, co-expression of both E1A and FLAG-DCAF7 resulted in an extensive relocalization to the cytoplasm of both DYRK1A and E1A. This effect was not observed with DYRK1A Δ93–104, providing further evidence that the DCAF7 binding site in the N-terminal domain of DYRK1A is able to direct the formation of complexes with E1A and DYRK1A in living cells. Figure 8 Subcellular localization of the E1A/DCAF7/DYRK1A complexes. Discussion In this study we have defined the DCAF7 binding region in the N-terminal domains of class 1 DYRKs and HIPK2. In addition, we show that the interaction with DCAF7 is highly conserved in class 1 DYRKs throughout evolution, from mammals, amphibians, fish and even in unicellular organisms like Dictyostelium discoideum. Furthermore, the present results identify DCAF7 as an adaptor protein that is necessary to establish complexes between the adenoviral E1A protein and the DYRK1A or HIPK2 kinases. The interaction between DCAF7 and class 1 DYRKs is conserved in evolution Our results localize the DCAF7 binding site in DYRK1A to a sequence of 27 amino acids and identify a core motif of 12 amino acids that is necessary for this interaction. Not only is this sequence highly conserved in evolution, but the DYRK1 ortholog from the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum was able to bind to human DCAF7 as efficiently as mammalian DYRK1A. This result implies that the binding interface between class 1 DYRKs and DCAF7 orthologs is functionally conserved throughout evolution. The interaction with DCAF7 is thus a fundamental property of class 1 DYRKs, as further evidenced by the fact that the DCAF7 binding motif is the only conserved sequence in Dd DYRK1 outside the catalytic domain. Figure 9 Evolutionary conservation of the DYRK/DCAF7 interaction. DCAF7 is highly conserved in eukaryotic organisms, and its orthologs interact with members of the DYRK family in zebrafish 19, Drosophila and minibrain ) 22 and Arabidopsis thaliana 33. Global interaction screens have also identified the yeast ortholog of DCAF7 as a binding partner of YAK1 34, 35, which is the only member of the DYRK family in baker’s yeast. It should be noted that At YAK1 and YAK1 do not belong to class 1 DYRKs, but are members of a DYRK branch that is absent from the animal kingdom 4. Thus, the interaction with DCAF7 appears to be an ancestral feature of the DYRK family that was lost in class 2 DYRKs. The remarkable conservation of the DCAF7/DYRK interaction is highlighted by results showing that human DCAF7 can partially complement a defect in flower pigmentation in petunia an11 mutants 36 and that the Drosophila wap protein can rescue the defects in craniofacial development of zebrafish caused by WDR68 mutation 19. Taking into consideration that DCAF7 was repeatedly co-purified with DYRK1A from various sources 14, 15, 16, 17, 37, we hypothesize that DCAF7 functions as an important subunit of DYRK1A and other class 1 DYRKs. RACK1 is a WD repeat scaffold protein that selectively interacts with PKC in the activated status 38. In contrast, DCAF7 binds to DYRK1A and HIPK2 independently of kinase activity, although the serine residue within the DCAF7 binding motif is a well characterized autophosphorylation site of DYRK1A 39. In this way, DCAF7 appears to function as a hub for protein-protein interactions, like the WD repeat domain of LRRK2 40. In accordance with this idea, DCAF7 coordinates signalling complexes by acting as an adaptor for proteins such as the cytoskeletal regulator mDia1 14 and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 1 18. DCAF7 does not seem to act as an anchoring protein for its interacting kinases, because previous studies showed that DCAF7 is recruited to the nucleus by overexpressed DYRK1A or HIPK2 16, 18. Unexpectedly, our results show that the simultaneous overexpression of E1A and DCAF7 induced a massive redistribution of DYRK1A and E1A from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. The bipartite nuclear localisation sequences of DYRK1A and E1A are located in close vicinity of the DCAF7 binding site or even overlap. It appears possible that steric hindrance by the interacting proteins in the DYRK1A/DCAF7/E1A complex shields the nuclear localisation sequences in DYRK1A and in E1A from interacting with the importin complex. The functional consequences of this redirection of DYRK1A and E1A to the cytoplasm remain to be elucidated. DCAF7 is an adaptor protein for the adenoviral E1A protein Our present results characterize DCAF7 as an adaptor protein that mediates the association of DYRK1A with E1A. DCAF7 is a single-domain WD repeat protein, and computer-aided structural analysis strongly suggests that it forms a classical seven-bladed β-propeller fold that encompasses the whole polypeptide chain 42. This structure serves as a rigid scaffold that allows WD domain proteins to interact with diverse proteins or peptides using multiple surfaces 11. Our co-IP and pulldown experiments indicate that DCAF7 binds to E1A independently of the presence or absence of DYRK1A. Conversely, the interaction of DYRK1A with E1A depends on the presence of DCAF7 and the DCAF7 binding motif in DYRK1A. The capacity to simultaneously bind different proteins at independent sites is critical for the scaffolding function of β-propeller proteins 11 and has been demonstrated in atomic detail for the WD protein WDR5 43. Interestingly, the previous identification of YAK1 as an interaction partner of E1A in a yeast two hybrid screen implies that the endogenous DCAF7 ortholog of yeast functioned as an adaptor between bait and prey 24. This further underscores the extraordinary evolutionary conservation of the DCAF7-DYRK interaction. Figure 10 Proposed model of the DYRK1A-DCAF7-E1A complex. Interactome studies in HEK293 cells have identified all major E1A binding proteins 44 as interaction partners of DYRK1A and DYRK1B 17. This result suggests that DYRK1A/B modulates the function of E1A in adenovirus-infected cells. Indeed, the interaction of E1A with DCAF7/DYRK1A has a suppressive effect on the proliferation and transformation of adenovirus-infected cells 15, which correlates with the function of DYRK1A as a negative regulator of the cell cycle 3, 28, 45. DYRK1A also catalyzes the phosphorylation of E1A at Ser219 in vitro, which is prerequisite for the interaction of E1A with the FOXK1/2 transcription factors that inhibit oncogenic cell transformation 15. FOXK1/K2 contain canonical forkhead associated domains, which function as phospho-specific protein–protein interaction motifs 46. Thus, the interaction and subsequent phosphorylation of E1A by DYRK1A may facilitate the interaction of E1A with FOXK1/2. Despite serving as an excellent substrate in vivo, we failed to detect a significant effect of DYRK1A overexpression on pSer219 in cell assays. However, DYRK1A clearly phosphorylated E1A in a DCAF7-dependent manner on other sites, as evidenced by the appearance of a slower migrating E1A form in in vivo experiments. Thus, E1A appears to hijack DCAF7 as an adaptor protein to facilitate its phosphorylation by DYRK1A via a mechanism of ‘enforced proximity’ between kinase and substrate. It remains to be shown whether DCAF7 also functions as a substrate recruiting subunit of class 1 DYRKs to phosphorylate non-viral target proteins under physiological conditions. Interaction of HIPK2 with DCAF7 Ritterhoff et al. 18 have characterized DCAF7 as a scaffold protein that controls the function of HIPK2. Here we show that DCAF7 does not bind to HIPK1, although HIPK2 and HIPK1 share a common domain structure and a high degree of sequence similarity 29. In stark contrast, HIPK2 is not structurally related with DYRKs outside the catalytic domain. Nevertheless, we identified a functional DCAF7 binding site in the N-terminal region of HIPK2. This sequence is fully conserved in HIPK2 from vertebrates, but is absent from HIPK orthologs from lower organisms. Thus, HIPK2 may have acquired the capacity to bind DCAF7 by convergent evolution after the separation of the HIPK1 and HIPK2 genes. DCAF7 controls the threshold, amplitude, and kinetics of HIPK2-triggered signalling events 18, suggesting that the association with DCAF7 is a functionally critical difference between HIPK1 and HIPK2 29. Given that DCAF7 binds to HIPK2 in a manner similar to DYRK1A, it is not surprising that the HIPK2/DCAF7 complex was also recruited to E1A. Interestingly, HIPK2 has previously been identified as a hit in a yeast two hybrid screen in which a complex of E1A and CtBP was used as the bait 47. The authors of this study propose that HIPK2 directly binds to CtBP, rather than E1A, whereas our results show that E1A interacts with HIPK2 via DCAF7. Further work will be necessary to exactly define the roles of CtBP and DCAF7 in the interaction of E1A and HIPK2. The deletion of the DCAF7 interaction site in E1A results in a hypertransforming effect of the adenoviral oncoprotein 15. This observation points to an important role of interaction with DYRK1A or HIPK2 on cellular growth. Further experiments will be necessary to reveal the individual contributions of these kinases on the biological effects of E1A. Materials and Methods Antibodies The following commercially available antibodies were used: rabbit monoclonal anti-DCAF7, rabbit polyclonal anti GFP, goat polyclonal anti-GFP and anti-c-Myc, mouse monoclonal anti-DYRK1A, anti FLAG, anti HA and anti E1A-pSer219. Monoclonal mouse antibodies for the adenovirus E1A protein. The M58 anti E1A and M2 anti FLAG monoclonal antibodies were used for immunofluorescence detection. A custom-made rabbit antiserum directed against DYRK1B 49 and a custom-made polyclonal goat antibody directed against an N-terminal epitope of DYRK1A were used for IP. Plasmids Bacterial and mammalian expression vectors are described in the Supplementary Methods. Cell culture and transfection HeLa cells were grown using Quantum 101 complete medium for HeLa cells or RPMI 1640 with 10% fetal bovine serum and kept at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO 2 atmosphere. Human fibrosarcoma HT-1080 cells and HEK293 cells were kept in DMEM or DMEM high glucose, respectively, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. HEK293 cells and HeLa cells were transiently transfected using the FuGENE HD reagent either in suspension before the cells were plated or on the following day after medium change. HT1080 cells were transfected using X-tremeGeneHP reagent following the manufacturer’s recommendations. HEK293- cells 50 were treated for 24 h with 2 μg/mL doxycyclin to induce GFP-DYRK1A expression. Immunoprecipitation and Western blotting Cells were washed twice with cold PBS and then lysed on ice for 20 minutes in 1 mL non-denaturing lysis buffer supplemented with phosphatase-/protease inhibitors. Lysates were sonicated twice for 45 s and cleared by centrifugation. Aliquots were taken for the input control. For the IP of GFP fusion proteins, extracts were tumbled for 1 h at 4 °C with 10 μL of paramagnetic GFP-Trap beads. The immunoprecipitates were isolated using a magnetic rack and washed 3 times. Bound proteins were eluted in Laemmli’s sample buffer for SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis. All other IPs were performed overnight at 4 °C using anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel or custom-made antibodies and protein G-coupled sepharose. Beads were washed and eluted with gel loading buffer for SDS-PAGE. Native elution from FLAG M2 affinity gel was achieved by incubation with an excess of 3xFLAG peptide at 4 °C for 30 min at a final concentration of 200 μg/mL. Samples were resolved on 8%, 10% or 12% acrylamide gels, depending on the size of the relevant protein, and transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane. Western blots were developed using horseradish peroxidase-coupled secondary antibodies. The Clean-Blot Detection Reagent was used as a secondary antibody for the detection of proteins that had been precipitated with the same antibody. Chemiluminescence signals were recorded using a LAS-3000 CCD imaging system and the AIDA 3.52 software. RNAi knockdown Downregulation of DYRK1A and DCAF7 were performed using Silencer Select siRNA in HT1080 cells, because this cell line gave the best knockdown effect. siRNA was delivered to HT1080 cells at a final concentration of 10 nM via transfection with siLentFect following the manufacturer’s instructions for a period of 24 h. A scrambled siRNA was used as a control. Ensuing co-IP and western blot analysis were performed as described previously 51. Bacterial expression of recombinant proteins GST fusion proteins were expressed in E. coli and affinity purified using glutathione Sepharose 4B. After extensive washing, the recombinant proteins were either eluted with 10 mM reduced glutathione in 50 mM Tris-HCl for use in kinase assays, or the resin with the bound protein was stored at −70 °C as a suspension in 50% glycerol/phosphate buffered saline for use in pulldown assays. Aliquots of the samples were analysed side by side with known amounts of bovine serum albumin by SDS-PAGE and subsequent Coomassie staining to adjust the amounts of protein used in the assays. GST-pulldown from HeLa cells HeLa cell lysates were processed from one near confluent 9 cm-dish as described above. Extracts were split in 2–3 aliquots and GST-tagged proteins immobilized on glutathione-Sepharose were added as indicated in the figure legends. Samples were incubated for 2 h at 4 °C in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.05% Igepal CA-630 supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors, followed by extensive washing. Bound proteins were eluted from the beads in Laemmli’s sample buffer for 5 min at 95 °C before SDS-PAGE and western blot analysis. In vitro -interaction assays In vitro -transcription of the mRNA template was performed using the pLEXSY-invitro-2 vector and a T7 RNA polymerase-dependent kit. The mRNA was used without purification to drive translation of GFP-hDCAF7 in the rabbit reticulocyte translation system for 1.5 h at 37 °C followed by 2 h at 30 °C. For GST-pulldown assays, 10 μL of the reaction mix were incubated for 2 h at 4 °C with ~10 μg of GST fusion proteins immobilized to glutathione Sepharose in a volume of 600 μL. The bait proteins were eluted with an excess of glutathione and bound proteins were detected by Western blotting. To produce untagged E1A-X2, glutathione Sepharose resin with immobilized GST-E1A-X2 was incubated with human thrombin for 3 h at 22 °C. The reaction was stopped by adding PMSF to a final concentration of 1 mM and the supernatant was used for interaction assays without further purification. E1A phosphorylation in vitro and in living cells For in vitro kinase assays, GST-E1A-X2 was incubated at 30 °C in kinase buffer and 1 mM ATP. The reaction was started by addition of GST-DYRK1A-ΔC. This mutant is routinely used for kinase assays because it exhibits the same substrate specificity but has higher specific activity than the wild type kinase 31, 32. Aliquot of 10 μL were taken at variable times and the reaction was stopped by addition of 2 μL of 100 mM EDTA. Phosphorylation of E1A was detected by Western blot analysis with a phosphospecific antibody directed against pSer219. To detect the phosphorylation of endogenous E1A or overexpressed myc-E1A, cells were grown in 6-well plates and transfected as indicated. Cells were lysed with hot SDS lysis buffer and total cellular lysates were analysed for E1A phosphorylation by western blotting. Immunofluorescence microscopy HeLa cells were grown on glass coverslips in 24-well plates in DMEM at 37 °C and transfected with plasmids as indicated in the figure legend using X-tremeGENE HP. Twenty-four hours later, cells were fixed in 3.7% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized on ice using 0.2% Triton X-100, and blocked with 3% bovine serum albumin in PBS. Samples were successively incubated with primary and secondary antibodies each for 1 h at room temperature and mounted using ProLong Gold reagent containing DAPI. Images were acquired using a Fluoview 1000 laser scanning confocal microscope. Additional Information How to cite this article : Glenewinkel, F. et al. The adaptor protein DCAF7 mediates the interaction of the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein with the protein kinases DYRK1A and HIPK2. Sci. Rep. 6, 28241; doi: 10.1038/srep28241. Supplementary Material Supplementary Information: Click here to view. 