Assays for Chemotaxis and Chemoattractant-Stimulated TorC2 Activation and PKB Substrate Phosphorylation in Dictyostelium You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Assays for Chemotaxis and Chemoattractant-Stimulated TorC2 Activation and PKB Substrate Phosphorylation in Dictyostelium Methods Mol Biol. 2009; 571: 255–270. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Methods in molecular biology Author Manuscript HHS Public Access Assays for Chemotaxis and Chemoattractant-Stimulated TorC2 Activation and PKB Substrate Phosphorylation in Dictyostelium Yoichiro Kamimura, Ming Tang, and Peter Devreotes Additional article information Summary Chemotaxis is a highly coordinated biological system where chemoattractants trigger multiple signal transduction pathways which act in concert to bring about directed migration. A signaling pathway acting through PIP 3, which accumulates at the leading edge of the cell, has been extensively characterized. However, chemotaxis still remains in cells depleted of PIP 3, suggesting there are PIP 3 -independent pathways. We have identified a pathway involving TorC2-PKBR1 as well as another containing PLA2 activity that act in parallel with PIP 3. Activation of PKBR1, a myristoylated Protein Kinase B homolog, is dependent on TorC2 kinase but is completely independent of PIP 3. In response to chemoattractant, PKBs rapidly phosphorylate at least eight proteins, including Talin B, PI4P 5-kinase, two RasGefs, and a RhoGap. These studies help to link the signaling pathways to specific effectors and provide a more complete understanding of chemotaxis. Keywords: Chemotaxis, Dictyostelium discoideum, PIP 3, PKB, TorC2 1. Introduction Investigations of Dictyostelium discoideum have been extremely useful in elucidating mechanisms of chemotaxis, motility, and cytokinesis. D. discoideum cells grow in their natural soil environment by consuming bacteria and yeasts. Known as a “social amoeba,” these protozoa change from a unicellular to a multi-cellular state upon nutrient starvation. In this process, cAMP is spontaneously released from central cells every 6 min and functions as a chemoattractant for the cells to aggregate. Within 24 h the multicellular structure undergoes morphogenesis and differentiation, forming a fruiting body which contains spores that resist harsh conditions. The chemotaxis toward cAMP is easily and consistently reproducible under standard laboratory conditions. The following additional features of this organism increase its value as a model system for studies of eukaryotic chemotaxis. With a sequenced 34-Mbp genome size, the organism is genetically and biochemically tractable. For example, gene disruption by homologous recombination, restriction enzyme mediated insertional mutagenesis, and chemical mutagenesis are easily achieved. It is also simple and convenient to generate up to 3 × 10 11 cells in suspension culture for biochemical assay and protein purification. Accumulated evidence now indicates that a network of signaling pathways contribute to efficient chemotaxis. Chemoattractant binds to G-protein-coupled receptors uniformly distributed around the cell's periphery and cause activation of the heterotrimeric G-protein consisting of Gα2 and Gβγ. This activation leads to a rapid, and in most cases, transient burst of responses such as production of the second messengers PIP 3, cGMP, and cAMP. PIP 3 accumulates locally at the front of cells by the opposing actions of PI 3-kinase and PTEN which reversibly convert PI P2 to PI P3. The information conveyed by the elevated PIP 3 is transmitted by recruitment of proteins containing PIP 3 -specific PH domains such as CRAC, PhdA, and PKBA. Although misregulation of PIP 3, as occurs in cells lacking PTEN greatly impairs chemotaxis, PI 3-kinase activity is not essential for chemotaxis. The search for PIP 3 -independent pathways has led to the isolation of PLA2 activity as an enhancer of PIP 3 -dependent chemotaxis. PLA2 activity appears to contribute to cell motility by regulating actin polymerization in parallel with PIP 3. Fig. 1 Model of chemoattractant signaling pathways in Dictyostelium discoideum. The chemoattractant, cAMP, binds to the cAR1 and activates the heterotrimeric G-protein. The activation conveys signals via multiple pathways to successfully achieve chemotaxis.... Recently, we have shown that the TorC2-PKBR1 pathway plays an important role in chemotaxis and is independent of PIP 3. D. discoideum has two PKB homologs, PKBA and PKBR1. Both proteins are structurally very similar to the mammalian PKBs, except for the membrane-binding domain at N-terminus. Like the mammalian enzymes, PKBA has a PIP 3 -specific PH domain which functions to recruit it to membrane-associated PIP 3, while the myr-istoylated PKBR1 is evenly distributed on the membrane. These proteins require specific phosphorylations in the activation loop and in the hydrophobic motif for the full activity. A commercial antibody specific for the phosphorylated state of PKB substrates in vivo has provided evidence that PKBR1 is the major PKB activity and that PKBA makes a minor contribution. PiaA, originally isolated in a forward genetic screen for chemotaxis and early development defects, is now recognized to be a subunit of TorC2 kinase. Work in Drosophila and mammalian cells identified TorC2 as the kinase responsible for the phosphorylation of the hydrophobic motif of PKB. Consistent with this, the activity of PKBR1 depends on TorC2 phosphorylation of its hydrophobic motif. The TorC2-PKBR1 pathway is insensitive to PIP 3 depletion and is selectively activated at the cell's leading edge. The PIP 3 -independent PKBR1 and PIP 3 -dependent PKBA pathways converge with their overlapping substrates, including TalinB, RasGEFs, RhoGAP, PI5K, and others. Work is currently focused on determining which substrates are involved in signaling and cytoskeletal regulation for proper chemotaxis. 2. Materials 2.1. Cell Culture Media, Buffer, and Solutions HL5 medium. 20 g maltose, 10 g proteose peptone, 5 g yeast extract, 0.51 g Na 2 HPO 4, 0.485 g KH 2 PO 4, H 2 O to 1 L. Autoclave for sterilization. DB. 100 mL 10× phosphate buffer, 1 mL 2 M MgSO 4, 0.2 mL 1 M CaCl 2, H 2 O to 1 L. 10× Phosphate buffer. 6.8 g KH 2 PO 4, 13.4 g Na 2 HPO 4 ·7H 2 O, H 2 O to 1 L. 100 mM caffeine. 1.94 g of caffeine, H 2 O to 100 mL. Store at −20°C. PM. 100 mL 10× phosphate buffer, 1 mL 2 M MgSO 4, H 2 O to 1 L. Basal buffer. 20 mM Tris–HCl of pH 8.0, 2 mM MgSO 4. 10 mM cAMP. 0.0369 g cAMP sodium salt monohydrate, H 2 O to 10 mL. Store at −20°C. 2.2. Micropipette Assay Femtotip microinjection needles. Microinjector. Lab-Tek one-well glass chamber. 2.3. Two-Drop Assay 1% melted agar in H 2 O. A drawn-out Pasteur pipette. Soften a Pasteur pipette in a flame, withdraw it from the heat, and quickly pull both ends to a thin diameter, then break. 2.4. Western Blotting Precast gels. Criterion Tris–HCl 4–15% gels. PVDF membrane. 3-MM Chr chromatography paper. Transfer Buffer. 25 mM Tris base, 190 mM glycine, 20% methanol. TBST. 20 mM Tris-HCl of pH 7.5, 137 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20. Blocking buffer. 5% nonfat dry milk in TBST. Secondary antibody. Antirabbit or antimouse IgG-conjugated HRP. ECL reagent. 2.5. Primary Antibodies for Western Blotting All phosphospecific antibodies from Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA. Rabbit antiphospho PKB substrate monoclonal antibody. Use 1:2,500 dilution in TBST containing 5% BSA; detect with antirabbit IgG-HRP. Mouse antiphospho PDK docking motif monoclonal antibody. Use 1:2,000 dilution in TBST containing 5% BSA; detect with antimouse IgG-HRP. Rabbit antiphospho PKC monoclonal antibody. Use 1:2,000 dilution in TBST containing 5% BSA; detect with antirabbit IgG-HRP. 2.6. Indirect Immunofluorescence Plasmid. pJK1-R1-AKT-HA transfected cells are selected with G418.. 18-mm coverslips and slideglasses. Fix solution. Mix 0.2 g paraformaldehyde and 5 mL of 20 mM PIPES Buffer in a 50-mL disposable tube, microwave in brief pulses until dissolved, and then cool quickly on ice to room temperature. Finally add 3.25 mL H 2 O, 0.25 mL 2.5 M sucrose, and then 1.5 mL saturated picric acid solution. Quenching solution. 100 mM glycine in PBS. PBS. 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na 2 HPO 4, 1.8 mM KH 2 PO 4. Blocking solution. 2% BSA in TBS-TX100. TBS-TX100. 20 mM Tris-HCl of pH 7.5, 137 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X100. Primary antibodies. Rabbit anti phospho AKT polyclonal antibody, diluted 1:50 in TBS-TX100. Anti HA polyclonal antibody, diluted 1:100 in TBS-TX100. Secondary antibody. Antirabbit IgG conjugated with rhodamine, diluted 1:100 in TBS-TX100. Mounting medium. Vectashield. 2.7. Immunopurification of PKB Substrates 2× NP-40 lysis buffer. 80 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaF, 4 mM Na 3 VO 4, 50 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1% NP-40, 2× protease inhibitor complete EDTA free, 2% protease inhibitor cocktail. Protein G-Sepharose ; wash twice with PBS containing 5 mg/mL BSA before use. Antibody. Antiphospho PKB substrate antibody. 1× RIPA buffer. Tris-HCl of pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1× protease inhibitor complete EDTA free, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail. 150 × 25 mm of tissue culture dish from. 2.8. PIP 3 Detection Biochemically Nucleopore Track-Etch membrane, 5 μm pore size. Syringes for cell lysis. For each, fold a Nucleopore membrane in half and place it between the needle and barrel of a 1-mL disposable syringe. 2.9. Genes and Dictyostelium Data Base Numbers All genes referred to in these protocols are listed in Table 1 together with their DDB numbers, which can be used to search dictybase to access a knowledge base for each gene, including sequence information, expression properties, relevant literature, and available resources. Table 1 Genes and DDB numbers 3. Methods 3.1. Preparation of Chemotactically Competent Cells D. discoideum shows reliable chemotaxis to cAMP at the early development stage, after 5-h starvation. These cells are typically used for chemotaxis analysis. This section describes the method for preparing the cells. 3.1.1. Starvation of Dictyostelium discoideum Cells Culture axenically in HL5 medium at 22°C to a density of less than 5 × 10 6 cells/mL. Centrifuge 1 × 10 8 cells for 5 min at 500 × g and remove the supernatant. Wash with 50 mL of DB buffer twice. Resuspend cells in 5 mL of DB at 2 × 10 7 cells/mL and rotate in a 50-mL flask for 1 h at 110 rpm. Pulse with 60 nM of cAMP every 6 min for the next 4 h. 3.1.2. “Basalation” of Cells Add caffeine to 5 mM. Shake at 200 rpm for 30 min. Centrifuge the cells for 5 min at 500 × g at 4°C and remove the supernatant. Wash with 30 ml of ice-cold DB twice. Resuspend at 2 × 10 7 cells/mL in DB and keep on ice before assay. 3.2. Under Buffer Assay This section describes a method to assess cell aggregation in response to starvation with or without an inhibitor, such as LY294002. This aggregation process includes chemotaxis and other cellular events. The method can also be applied to assess the defect in a mutant cell line. Plate 1 × 10 5 cells in HL5 medium in wells of a 96-well plate. Let them to adhere on the plate for 30–60 min. Aspirate the medium. Add 200 μL of DB with or without a drug. Incubate at 22°C for about 18 h to form aggregates. Take a picture using a dissection microscope. Fig. 2 Chemotaxis assays Under buffer assay. In the upper panel, the indicated cells are starved in DB and allowed to make aggregates. WT, Pla2A −, and PI3K1 − /2 − with the microinjector. Take photographs at 30-s intervals for 30 min. 3.4.1. Two-Drop Assay Pour 10 ml of 1% melted agar in a 90-mm Petri dish 1 h before assay. Dilute competent cells to about 1 × 10 6 cells/mL in DB. Disperse cells by pipetting several times or vortexing weakly. Spot a 3-mm-diameter drop of cell suspension on the agar surface using the fine tip of a drawn-out Pasteur pipette and capillary action. Spots of DB with or without 0.01, 0.1, or 1 μM cAMP are placed 3 mm from the cell spots. Wait for 30–60 min. Evaluate positive chemotaxis under a microscope by viewing each spot. Positive chemotaxis is scored when cells move to the edge of the drop toward the nearby cAMP and away from the far edge. 3.5. Detection of PIP 3 Production This section describes the detection of PIP 3 products, the output of the PI3K pathway, by imaging and by biochemical analysis. A PIP 3 -specific PH domain from either CRAC or PKBA is typically used as a biosensor. 3.5.1. PIP 3 Detection by a Biosensor, PH-GFP PIP 3 production following addition of uniform chemoattractant or spatial localization in cells under a variety of conditions is detected by one of the PIP 3 -specific PH domain fused with a fluorescent protein. Starve cells expressing this biosensor to chemotactic competence and uniformly stimulated with cAMP at a final concentration of 1 μM. Capture images at 2-s intervals for 1–2 min. To visualize the localized accumulation of PIP 3, cells are placed on the chamber coverslip and observed under fluorescence microscope doing chemotaxis toward spontaneously secreted cAMP or toward a gradient from a micropipette. 3.5.2. PIP 3 Detection by a Biosensor, PH-GFP Starve cells expressing PH-GFP at 2 × 10 7 cells/mL in 5 mL and basalate with caffeine as described in Subheading 3.1.1. Wash cells with 30 mL of ice-cold PM twice. Suspend cells in 1.25 mL of PM. Transfer the cells to a 5-ml disposable plastic beaker and add 100 μM of cAMP to a final concentration of 1 μM. Take 100 μL of cells at time points of 0, 5, 20, 60 s. Transfer into a 1-mL of disposable syringe containing 100 μL of basal buffer and lyse through 5-μm membrane into a micro-centrifuge tube containing 1 mL PM on ice. Microcentrifuge at full speed for 1 min at 4°C and aspirate the supernatant. Suspend the pellet in 50 μL of 1× SDS sample buffer and boil them for 5 min. Run SDS PAGE followed by western blotting with a-GFP antibody as a primary antibody. 3.6. Detection of PKB and TorC2 Activity This section describes methods to biochemically and cytologically assess PKB and TorC2 activity using the following phospho-specific antibodies. First, a phospho PKB substrate antibody used to detect the phosphorylated state of pp350, pp200, pp180, pp110, and pp65/67 and other substrates of PKB. Second, a phospho PDK docking motif antibody used to detect the phosphorylated state of the hydrophobic motif of PKBR1. For PKBR1 the extent of this phosphorylation correlates strongly with the activation state of TorC2. Third, a phospho PKC antibody used to detect the phosphorylation state of the activation loops of PKBR1 and PKBA. Evidence from other model systems suggests that these phosphorylations would be catalyzed by a PDK homolog and essential for their activities. Two PDK homologs are present in D. discoideum. Fourth, antiphospho AKT can be used to detect activation of TorC2 in cells expressing a chimeric protein where the PH domain of human AKT is replaced with the myristoylated N-terminal of PKBR1. 3.6.1. cAMP Stimulation and Sample Preparation Transfer 0.5-mL competent cells on ice at a density of 2 × 10 7 cells/mL to a 5-mL disposable plastic beaker shaking at 150 rpm. Within 2 min, add 100 μM of cAMP to final concentration of 1 μM. Transfer 40 μL of cells at time points of 10, 20, 30, 60, 120, 180 s into microcentrifuge tubes containing 10 μL of 5× SDS sample buffer. Quickly move tube to a hot-block at 95°C for 5 min. 3.6.2. Western Blotting Load wells of precast gels with 2.5 ml of sample for antiphospho PKB substrate antibody and 5 μl for antiphospho PDK docking motif antibody and antiphospho PKC antibody. Run gels by electrophoresis at 150 V for 85 min. To transfer proteins to a PVDF membrane, place a pad and two sheets of 3-MM paper wetted with the transfer buffer on the black side of the cassette holder. Place the gel on the 3-MM paper and lay the PVDF membrane on top of it. Remove bubbles between the gel and the PVDF and put two more sheets of 3-MM paper and a pad. Place the sandwich into the transfer tank such that the PVDF membrane is between the gel and the anode and fill the cold transfer buffer. Turn on the system for 80 min at 75 mV in the cold room. After the transfer, rinse the PVDF membrane with TBST twice quickly. Incubate the membrane in 50 ml of blocking buffer for 1 h at room temperature. Discard the blocking buffer and rinse the membrane with TBST twice quickly. Incubate the membrane with a primary antibody at 4°C overnight. Remove the primary antibody, rinse the membrane with TBST twice quickly, and further wash with TBST for 10 min, 5 min, and 5 min at room temperature. Incubate the membrane with a secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. Remove the secondary antibody, rinse the membrane with TBST twice quickly, followed by one 10 min and four 5 min washes with TBST at room temperature. Prepare the ECL reagent and incubate the membrane with it for 1 min. Remove the ECL reagent and wrap the membrane with plastic wrap. Expose the membrane to X-ray film in the cassette for a suitable time. To confirm the loading of proteins, stain the membrane in CBB solution for couple of minutes and destain it in 50% methanol for suitable time, typically a few minutes. Place the membrane on a bench to let it dry at room temperature. As shown in Fig. 3a, the phospho PKB substrate antibody stains few bands in competent cells prior to addition of cAMP. Following cAMP stimulation, about ten prominent bands rapidly appear and display characteristic time courses, eventually subsiding over the next several minutes. Seven or eight of these bands are specific PKB substrates which are greatly decreased in cells lacking PKB activity such as pkbR1 −, pkbR1 − /pkbA −, and pia −. These bands reappear when the appropriate proteins are expressed in the null mutants. A few of the bands are not dependent on PKB activity and are presumably substrates for other kinases with the consensus motif RXRXXS/T. Fig. 3 Assays to detect TorC2 and PKB activities. The in vivo PKB activity is evaluated by antiphospho PKB substrate antibody. The bands of pp350, pp200, pp180, pp110, pp90, and pp65/67 in WT cells are dependent on the activities... As shown in Fig. 3b, c, the phospho PDK docking motif antibody, very specifically detects the phosphorylation state of the hydrophobic motif of the PKBR1. This phosphorylation is completely absent in competent cells prior to stimulation. Following addition of cAMP, it increases rapidly, peaks at 30 s, and disappears within 2 min. This phosphorylation is completely absent in cells lacking PiaA and substantially decreased in cells lacking Rip3, indicating that it is a TorC2 substrate. As shown in Fig. 3c, the phospho PKC antibody specifically detects the activation loop phosphorylations of PKBA and PKBR1. The time courses of these phosphorylations closely follow those of the hydrophobic motif. The phosphorylation of PKBA is abolished in cells lacking PIP 3 production such as pi3k1 − /5 − cells and substantially reduced in piaA − cells. Interestingly, however, the phosphorylation of PKBR1 is unaffected by the absence of PIP 3. It does absolutely require a prerequisite phosphorylation at T470 since T309 is not phosphorylated in T470A versions of PKBR1 or in piaA − cells. These observations show that the activation of PKBR1 depends on TorC2 and not PIP 3, while activation of PKBA depends on both TorC2 and PIP 3. This blotting with the activation loop antibody can be used on any cell line to rapidly assess activation of TorC2 as well as PI3K. The antibody is also effective in detecting TorC2 activity cytologically in cells overexpressing PKBR1. 3.6.3. Indirect Immunofluorescence Place 18-mm coverslips on parafilm. Put 5 × 10 5 competent cells expressing R1-AKT-HA in 500 μL DB on the coverslip and allow cells to initiate chemotaxis for 20–30 min at room temperature. Place 500 μL fix solution on the parafilm and transfer the coverslip into this solution followed by 30-min incubation at room temperature. Transfer the coverslip into 500 μL of quenching solution on the parafilm followed by 10-min incubation at room temperature. Wash the coverslip with PBS twice. Permeabilize and block cells by incubation in the blocking solution for 30 min at room temperature. Remove the blocking solution and place the coverslip cells facing down on 100 μL of the primary antibody solution, either anti Phospho AKT or anti HA, on the parafilm followed by overnight incubation in the moist chamber at 4°C. Wash the coverslip in 3 mL of TBS using 6-well plate for 5 min three times. Incubate with 100 μL of the secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Wash the coverslip in 3 mL of TBS using 6-well plate for 5 min three times. Dip the coverslip once in deionized water. Invert the coverslip cells attached side down and put into a drop of mounting medium on a slide glass. Observe the sample under the fluorescence microscope by excitation at 543 nm. The TorC2-PKBR1 pathway is selectively activated at the leading edge of chemotaxing cells. The R1-AKT-HA chimeric protein, where the PH domain of human AKT is replaced with N-terminus PKBR1 containing the myristoylation site, is phosphorylated at S473 in the hydrophobic motif in response to cAMP stimulation. This response is completely dependent on TorC2 activity and does not occur in cells lacking PiaA. As shown in Fig. 3e, indirect immunofluorescence of a cell expressing the R1-AKT-HA by antiphospho AKT antibody can be used to visualize the activation of TorC2 cytologically. Prior to stimulation there is little or no staining of cells. In highly polarized cells the staining is found selectively at the leading edge. 3.7. Purification of Substrates of PKB This section describes the purification of PKB substrates. After basalating, cells are washed with 15 mL of ice-cold PM buffer twice. Stimulate cells with or without 1 μM cAMP for 30 s. After stimulation, lyse cells with an equal volume of 2× NP-40 lysis buffer on ice for 5 min. Centrifuge the cell extracts for 5 min at full speed in micro-centrifuge at 4°C. Transfer the supernatant to a new microcentrifuge tube. Incubate the supernatant with prewashed protein G-Sepharose for 1 h at 4°C. Centrifuge at 500 × g for 1 min and transfer the supernatant into a new microcentrifuge tube. Add antiphospho PKB substrate antibody and incubate it overnight at 4°C. Add prewashed protein G-Sepharose and incubate for further 1 h at 4°C. Centrifuge at 500 × g for 1 min and wash the beads with 1× NP-40 buffer four times. Repeat step 10 using 1× RIPA buffer. Elute the proteins by boiling beads in 1× SDS sample buffer. Separate proteins by SDS-PAGE on 18-well precast gels. Visualize proteins by silver staining in a 150 × 25 mm of tissue culture dish. 