Mechanical stress and network structure drive protein dynamics during cytokinesis You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Mechanical stress and network structure drive protein dynamics during cytokinesis Curr Biol. 2015 Mar 2; 25: 663–670. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Current biology : CB Author Manuscript HHS Public Access Mechanical stress and network structure drive protein dynamics during cytokinesis Vasudha Srivastava and Douglas N. Robinson Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials 1. NIHMS656234-supplement-1.pdf GUID: 84C596E4-BD01-430C-870D-2A462FDF6F2A 2. NIHMS656234-supplement-2.docx GUID: 7C57CFDF-77D8-4143-8F83-10DBC96AECBA Summary Cell shape changes associated with processes like cytokinesis and motility proceed on several second time-scales, but are derived from molecular events, including protein-protein interactions, filament assembly, and force generation by molecular motors, all of which occur much faster. Therefore, defining the dynamics of such molecular machinery is critical for understanding cell shape regulation. In addition to signaling pathways, mechanical stresses also direct cytoskeletal protein accumulation. A myosin II-based mechanosensory system controls cellular contractility and shape during cytokinesis and under applied stress. In Dictyostelium, this system tunes myosin II accumulation by feedback through the actin network, particularly through the crosslinker cortexillin I. Cortexillin-binding IQGAPs are major regulators of this system. Here, we defined the short time-scale dynamics of key cytoskeletal proteins during cytokinesis and under mechanical stress using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy, to examine the dynamic interplay between these proteins. Equatorially enriched proteins including cortexillin I, IQGAP2, and myosin II recovered much more slowly than actin and polar crosslinkers. The mobility of equatorial proteins was greatly reduced at the furrow compared to the interphase cortex, suggesting their stabilization during cytokinesis. This mobility shift did not arise from a single biochemical event, but rather from a global inhibition of protein dynamics by mechanical stress-associated changes in the cytoskeletal structure. Mechanical tuning of contractile protein dynamics provides robustness to the cytoskeletal framework responsible for regulating cell shape and contributes to cytokinesis fidelity. Results and Discussion Equatorial proteins have slower recovery times than polar crosslinkers, and exhibit reduced mobility at the cleavage furrow The short time-scale dynamics of proteins regulate their recruitment and localization. Actin-associated proteins may be classified into two groups – the equatorially enriched cleavage furrow proteins and the polar or globally distributed proteins. We used fluorescence recovery after photobleaching to examine the dynamics of these groups in interphase and dividing Dictyostelium cells, to explain differences in their spatiotemporal localization. We measured the fluorescence intensity in the bleached region until the recovery curve saturated, allowing accurate calculation of recovery times and immobile fractions for key cytoskeletal proteins. The characteristic recovery time is dominated by binding-unbinding rates, while the immobile fraction represents the population that does not turn over during the experiment. As Dictyostelium cells are highly motile, longer acquisitions can show additional long-scale recovery due to cellular motility instead of protein dynamics. Thus, for this study we only measure the fast dynamic recovery and mobility. GFP-actin recovers within a second, establishing the dynamicity of the actin network. The cortical actin recovery times and immobile fractions were significantly higher than for GFP or cytoplasmic GFP-actin. Thus, cortical GFP-actin dynamics reported by FRAP are dominated by actin filaments, even though ~70% of the total actin in Dictyostelium cells is monomeric. Figure 1 Changes in protein dynamics during cytokinesis Polar crosslinkers, including dynacortin and fimbrin, modulate cell mechanics and cortical tension, while equatorial proteins - myosin II and cortexillin I - regulate contractility during cytokinesis. As cytokinesis is largely a mechanical shape change process, several equatorial proteins also mediate cellular responses to externally applied mechanical stresses. The mechanoenzyme, myosin II, is the major driver of contractility and accumulates in response to internally or externally generated mechanical stresses. This stress-dependent myosin II accumulation results from cooperative interactions between the actin-bound myosin heads and the actin-bundling protein cortexillin I. Scaffolding proteins IQGAP1 and IQGAP2 bind to cortexillin I and regulate myosin II accumulation. IQGAP1 inhibits myosin II recruitment, while IQGAP2 relieves this inhibition. Consequently, the iqgap1/2 double null mutant exhibits enhanced myosin II accumulation under stress. IQGAP2 also transmits mechanical signals to spindle signaling proteins, promoting symmetric cell division. Genetic, biochemical and mechanical studies demonstrated cross-talk between the polar and equatorial modules. However, how these proteins interact dynamically to control these processes is unknown. The molecular events governing cytokinesis, including motor activity, actin filament turnover and rearrangement, and crosslinker interactions, occur at much faster time-scales than the associated cell shape changes. Hence, these short time-scale cytoskeletal dynamics must be defined to develop a mechanistic understanding of how cells respond to physical forces. Interestingly, we observed that actin dynamics changed during cytokinesis as the recovery time increased and the immobile fraction decreased in the furrow. In comparison, the dynacortin and fimbrin recovery times at the furrow increased significantly, while their mobility was unaffected. The polar cortex dynamics of dynacortin and fimbrin were similar to interphase values, while actin showed increased mobility at the poles. Myosin II, cortexillin I and IQGAP2, which localize to the cleavage furrow, recovered more slowly than actin or polar crosslinkers in the interphase cortex. Their much slower recovery than that of soluble GFP demonstrates that the fluorescence recovery is dominated by unbinding events at the cortex instead of diffusion. Further, their cytoplasmic recovery times are significantly faster than those in the cortex, indicating that the equatorial proteins form stable complexes at the cortex with slower unbinding, as compared to polar crosslinkers which recover more quickly. Cortexillin I recovery was slower at the furrow than in interphase, while myosin II and IQGAP2 showed no change. In contrast, myosin II recovery slows in anaphase as compared to metaphase in Drosophila S2 cells. The equatorial proteins were much more mobile during interphase compared to other proteins. The mobility of cortexillin I and IQGAP2 in the interphase cortex were comparable to those in the cytoplasm. However, the immobile fractions for these proteins increased significantly at the cleavage furrow. The magnitude of mobility shift for cortexillin I and IQGAP2 was higher than for myosin II. Thus, we focused on cortexillin I and IQGAP2 dynamics for the remainder of this study. The reduction in protein mobility at the furrow suggests that these proteins are stabilized at the cortex during furrow ingression, consistent with their slower recovery times. The high immobile fractions also likely promote their furrow enrichment. Therefore, determining the factors that cause this mobility shift is essential to explaining how the contractile proteins accumulate and remodel during furrow ingression. Genetic control of protein dynamics is suppressed at the furrow Previous genetic studies established the functional interplay between myosin II, cortexillin I, and the IQGAPs in governing protein accumulation and contractility at the cleavage furrow and in responding to mechanical stress. Thus, we tested whether the same genetic relationships also dictate protein dynamics, regulating their furrow accumulation. We conducted FRAP on cortexillin I and IQGAP2 at the interphase cortex and the furrow in cell lines lacking key components of this mechanoresponsive system. Figure 2 Changes in cortexillin I and IQGAP2 dynamics at the cleavage furrow Cortexillin I recovery time increased at the furrow compared to the interphase cortex in wild type cells. However, this slower recovery was not observed in myosin II and iqgap2 null cells. In contrast, while IQGAP2’s recovery time was unaltered at the furrow in WT cells, IQGAP2 had significantly higher recovery time at the furrow in myoII cells. Both cortexillin I and IQGAP2 had >2-fold higher immobile fractions at the cleavage furrow. Cortexillin I immobile fractions were higher in interphase myoII and iqg2 compared to WT, but were unchanged at the furrow in these mutants. This demonstrates that while myosin II and IQGAP2 are important for maintaining a mobile pool of cortexillin I, additional factors such as mechanical stress could dominate cortexillin I mobility at the furrow, ensuring its recruitment during cytokinesis, as cortexillin I also shows mechanical stress-dependent accumulation. Consistently, the cleavage furrow localization of cortexillin I was not affected in any of the mutants tested. IQGAP2 immobile fraction was also higher in interphase myoII as compared to WT, suggesting that myosin II drives the dynamic remodeling of the cytoskeletal network. Myosin II’s full power stroke is required for this mobility regulation, as the 10-fold slower S456L mutant myosin II, which only takes a 2-nm step, fails to rescue the IQGAP2 and cortexillin I mobility defects seen in myoII cells. Although myosin II regulates the actin cortex dynamics in epithelial cells, deletion of myosin II, cortexillin I or IQGAP2 had no impact on actin dynamics. The deletion of IQGAP1 did not affect the interphase or furrow dynamics of either cortexillin I or IQGAP2, in agreement with its role as a damper of stress-dependent protein accumulation. Because IQGAP1 and IQGAP2 interact with distinct domains of cortexillin I, we also studied cortexillin I dynamics in the iqg1/2 double mutant. Here, cortexillin I still showed faster recovery at the furrow as compared to WT, similar to iqg2. However, the immobile fraction at the furrow was higher in the double mutant compared to the WT or iqg2 mutant. The iqg1/2 cells show enhanced stress-dependent protein accumulation, while iqg2 cells are unresponsive due to IQGAP1 inhibition. Thus, the reduced mobility of cortexillin I at the furrow is likely due to mechanical stresses locking in the cytoskeletal network of these highly mechanoresponsive cells. To examine molecular scale events driving the protein dynamics changes, we used fluorescence correlation spectroscopy to measure the in vivo diffusion of cortexillin I and IQGAP2 across various mutant backgrounds. FCS experiments were performed in the cytoplasm as cell movement precluded positioning the confocal volume at the cortex. We compared the diffusion time for cortexillin I and GFP in the cytoplasm to that of purified proteins in vitro. GFP had 5-fold reduction in diffusion time in cells while cortexillin I showed >8-fold slower diffusion, confirming that cortexillin I is a part of large molecular assemblies. The deletion of myosin II did not impact the cytoplasmic diffusion of either cortexillin I or IQGAP2 though it increased the immobile fraction of both proteins at the cortex, implying that myosin II affects protein dynamics by regulating contractility and cytoskeletal structure. The diffusion time for cortexillin I was increased by ~30% in iqg2 cells. This suggests that without IQGAP2, the effective mass of the cortexillin I complex roughly doubles as diffusion time is approximately proportional to the cube root of the effective molecular weight of the diffusing species. As expected, cortexillin I diffusion also showed a similar trend in the iqg1/2 double mutant. Thus, the changes in cortexillin I mobility could arise from changes in biochemical interactions in the absence of IQGAP2. Collectively, the FRAP and FCS experiments enabled us to attribute changes in cortexillin I mobility to either protein-protein interactions or to cortex re-structuring. We demonstrated that the dynamics of cortexillin I and IQGAP2 at the cleavage furrow are well conserved across mutants, though differences emerge during interphase. As cleavage furrow contractility is common to all cells, we hypothesized that mechanical stresses acting at the furrow could override the biochemical signals to define cleavage furrow protein dynamics. Physical mechanisms such as myosin II-mediated force generation, Laplace pressure-mediated furrow thinning, and protrusive forces from the polar cortex drive furrow ingression. Thus, we next examined whether mechanical stresses at the cleavage furrow were sufficient to shift the dynamics of these mechanoresponsive proteins. Mechanical stress drives the reduction in cleavage furrow mobility of cortexillin I and IQGAP2 In addition to enrichment at the cleavage furrow, myosin II, cortexillin I and IQGAP2 accumulate to sites of externally applied mechanical stress, thereby allowing the cell to retract against this stress. Hence, we applied compression using agarose overlay to test if mechanical stress, as compared to biochemical signaling, affects protein dynamics changes at the cleavage furrow. Flattening of the cells drives the accumulation of the mechanoresponsive proteins studied here to the cell cortex to counter this stress. The ratio of fluorescence intensity in the cortex to that in the cytoplasm is dependent on the thickness of agarose and plating density, confirming that the increase in cortical intensity is driven by mechanical stress and is not simply due to volume effects. Further, soluble GFP does not change in cortical intensity upon compression. We examined cortexillin I and IQGAP2 interphase dynamics in presence or absence of compression across mutants studied above. Cortexillin I exhibited a slower recovery time under compression, but IQGAP2’s recovery time was unaffected. Both cortexillin I and IQGAP2 showed a >2-fold increase in the immobile fraction under compression, similar to the observation at the furrow. By FCS, the cortexillin I diffusion time also doubled under compression, while IQGAP2 diffusion was unaffected. Both the recovery time and immobile fraction for IQGAP2 increased in compressed myoII compared to WT. Cortexillin I and IQGAP2 dynamics under compression did not change in other mutants as compared to WT. The cortexillin I mobility shift in iqg2 cells under compression was higher than that observed at the furrow, suggesting that under compression cortexillin I directly responds to mechanical stress, compared to the cleavage furrow where biochemical signals through IQGAP2 also contribute to cortexillin I mobility. Importantly, both compression and cleavage furrow showed a consistent, >2-fold increase in immobile fractions of both cortexillin I and IQGAP2 compared to the unstressed, interphase cortex across various mutants. This validates the importance of mechanical stress in driving the dynamics of equatorially enriched proteins at the cleavage furrow, thereby ensuring their robust localized accumulation. In addition, by measuring dynamics of cortexillin I and IQGAP2 in cells lacking the small GTPase racE, we assessed the contribution of cortical tension on protein dynamics, as racE is a major regulator of cortical mechanics. For cortexillin I, the immobile fraction was higher and the recovery time was shorter in racE cells, while IQGAP2 dynamics were unchanged. Thus, cortexillin dynamics are not only affected by mechanical stress but also by general cortical mechanics. Furthermore, the mobility and recovery times of GFP-actin were not affected by compression. Overall, cortexillin I dynamics are more sensitive to compressive stresses than the dynamics of IQGAP2, actin and GFP are. Figure 3 Mechanical stress drives changes in dynamics and mobility of cortexillin I and IQGAP2 As compression reduced cell height by up to 4-fold, we measured GFP dynamics to examine the impact of altered protein transport and cellular structure upon compression. The immobile fraction and diffusion time for GFP nearly doubled, suggesting sieving effects may become significant under compression. The altered GFP dynamics under compression confirm that network structure and intracellular environment are important contributors to mechanical stress-dependent protein dynamics. However, in myoII cells, GFP FRAP dynamics did not change upon compression, rather GFP diffusion was faster in compressed myoII cells, suggesting that myosin II is important for stabilizing the cortex under mechanical stress, and in its absence the cortical dynamics are dominated by passive diffusive behaviors. As the actin cytoskeleton forms a highly dense meshwork in Dictyostelium, structural changes between interphase and furrow cortex cannot be resolved by confocal and electron microscopy. Thus, we next chemically perturbed the cytoskeleton to determine how these network properties affect protein mobility and dynamics. Alterations to cortical structure and mechanics shift mobility of cortexillin I To test the effect of cytoskeletal structure on protein dynamics, we perturbed the actin cytoskeleton by treating the cells with either latrunculin-A or jasplakinolide. Latrunculin-A prevents F-actin assembly by sequestering free G-actin monomers, while jasplakinolide enhances actin filament nucleation. We quantified changes in F-actin amount upon treatment with latrunculin-A and jasplakinolide by measuring the relative fluorescence intensity of cells stained with phalloidin 15-minutes post-drug treatment. Anti-actin staining was also used to visualize changes in actin level and cytoskeletal morphology. Interestingly, even with 5 µM latrunculin-A, cells still had ~50% residual F-actin, suggesting sufficient F-actin binding sites for the ~1 µM actin crosslinkers. The residual F-actin mostly concentrated in puncta illustrating discontinuity of the cytoskeletal network, also reflected by the increase in the recovery time and immobile fraction of GFP even though its diffusion is unaffected. Latrunculin-A had a drastic effect on cellular mechanics, as 1 µM latrunculin-A-treated cells had 12-fold lower cortical tension as measured by micropipette aspiration, consistent with the 85% reduction in viscoelasticity previously reported for latrunculin-B treatment. 5 µM latrunculin-A-treated cells were too soft for mechanical measurements. In contrast, jasplakinolide enhanced the cellular F-actin levels ~4-fold inducing the formation of F-actin clusters, and increased cortical tension slightly. Jasplakinolide also increased the recovery time of soluble GFP while not affecting its immobile fraction or diffusion. Thus, we were able to directly probe the impact of changes in cytoskeletal structure and mechanics on protein dynamics by using these two compounds. Figure 4 Changes in cytoskeletal network structure result in altered protein dynamics Latrunculin-A or jasplakinolide treatment did not significantly affect cortexillin I recovery time, but both compounds appreciably increased its immobile fraction. Latrunculin-A also increased the recovery time and immobile fraction of IQGAP2. IQGAP2 diffusion was insensitive to both drugs. However, cortexillin I showed two differently diffusing populations with latrunculin-A treatment – one with a similar diffusion time as the control and another much slower population. This slower population likely reflects the diffusion of cortexillin I in actin clusters observed upon F-actin staining. Though jasplakinolide treatment promoted F-actin cluster formation, its effect on protein dynamics was not as pronounced. These results demonstrate that the connectivity of the cytoskeleton network is extremely important for maintaining normal protein dynamics. Remarkably, cortexillin I remained localized at the furrow in latrunculin-A-treated cells, though its distribution was non-uniform. Its recovery time and mobility in the furrow were unaffected by latrunculin-A. Thus, the cortexillin I immobile fraction under mechanical stress is either saturated or becomes independent of network structure. In contrast, myosin II completely lost its cortical localization upon latrunculin-A treatment and formed puncta throughout the cell. Latrunculin-A also increased actin mobility and recovery rate, while jasplakinolide had no effect. The increased actin mobility with latrunculin-A is quantitatively similar to that at the furrow, 4D ), further validating the importance of cytoskeletal restructuring during cytokinesis. These dynamic features also explain why actin does not show a significant accumulation at the cleavage furrow or upon micropipette aspiration. Overall, perturbations to the cytoskeletal structure are sufficient to affect changes in the dynamics of cytoskeletal proteins. Similarly, protein dynamics are also affected by mechanical stress which leads to accumulation of equatorial proteins during cytokinesis. Conclusions Mechanical stresses are important for driving cellular processes like cell division and motility, and play a major role in determining cell fate. Understanding the effect of mechanical stress on protein dynamics is critical for having predictive power over these cellular behaviors. Here we identified that equatorial protein mobility significantly reduces at the cleavage furrow, while that of polar crosslinkers is unchanged. Both biochemical associations and myosin II-mediated remodeling affect protein dynamics. Compressive stress applied externally also leads to reduced mobility. The molecular mechanisms that result in this drastic reduction in protein mobility need to be examined. Even when key contractile proteins are eliminated, the cytoskeleton is capable of maintaining fairly normal dynamics. 3 ). Interestingly, most of the mutant phenotypes in protein dynamics are seen in the unstressed, interphase cortex, while the dynamics are unchanged across mutants during cytokinesis or upon compression. 3 ). Thus, the cell’s contractile system is built as a highly adaptive machine, maintaining fairly normal dynamics under mechanical stress ensuring fidelity of protein recruitment. In contrast, in other scenarios mechanical stress can exaggerate many mutant phenotypes. For example, myoII null cells cannot perform cytokinesis without substrate adhesion or when challenged by mechanical stress. Further, changes to cytoskeletal structure are sufficient to drive similar changes in protein dynamics, highlighting the importance of network properties in governing protein and cellular behaviors. Myosin II emerges as the major driver of active processes in the cortex, in accordance with previous studies 3 ). The mechanical tuning of protein dynamics and recruitment is an important mode of regulating cellular responses to physical stimuli, and requires protein-protein interactions to be stabilized or disrupted under mechanical load. Protein-protein stabilization can induce protein clustering and provide signal amplification, while disruption can lead to signal dissipation. This is the classical paradigm for any signal transduction system. Basic molecular mechanisms for protein clustering in response to mechanical stress include catch bond formation and structural cooperativity, while slip bonds allow for force-induced disassembly. These fundamentals are important in directing macromolecular assembly of actin crosslinking proteins. Here we have demonstrated that these mechanisms are also applicable to scaffolding proteins like IQGAP2, emphasizing the importance of network structure and higher order self-assembly in governing cellular behavior. Indeed, cellular systems are engineered as smart materials where many of the constituents are mechanoresponsive. Experimental Procedures Experimental procedures for Dictyostelium cell culture, agarose overlay, FRAP analysis, FCS analysis, latrunculin-A and jasplakinolide treatment, F-actin quantification by phalloidin staining and cortical tension measurements by micropipette aspiration are given in the supplemental experimental procedures. All curve fitting and statistical analysis was done using KaleidaGraph. Significance of difference was determined using Analysis of variance with a Fisher’s LSD post-test. ​ Highlights Equatorially enriched proteins have reduced mobility at the cleavage furrow Mechanical stress felt by the cytoskeleton inhibits equatorial protein dynamics Structural changes in cytoskeletal network are sufficient to alter protein dynamics Cortical protein dynamics are robust to genetic and mechanical perturbations Supplementary Material 1 Click here to view. 2 Click here to view. Acknowledgements We thank members of the Robinson lab for their valuable comments during manuscript preparation. This work was funded by the Hay Graduate Fellowship Fund, NIH grant GM66817, NIH grant S10 OD016374, and the Johns Hopkins Physical Sciences in Oncology Center. Footnotes Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. Supplemental Information Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures, four Tables and four Figures. Author Contributions V.S. and D.N.R. designed the experiments, analyzed the data, and prepared the manuscript. V.S. conducted the experiments. Article information Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 Mar 2. Published in final edited form as: Curr Biol. 2015 Mar 2; 25: 663–670. Published online 2015 Feb 19. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.01.025 PMCID: PMC4348339 NIHMSID: NIHMS656234 PMID: 25702575 Vasudha Srivastava a, c and Douglas N. Robinson a, b, c Vasudha Srivastava a Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205 c Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218 Find articles by Vasudha Srivastava Douglas N. Robinson a Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205 b Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205 c Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218 Find articles by Douglas N. Robinson a Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205 b Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205 c Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218 Corresponding Author: Douglas N. Robinson, Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725 N. Wolfe Street, Physiology 100, Baltimore, MD 21205, ude.imhj@rnd, Phone: 410-502-2850 PMC Copyright notice Publisher's Disclaimer The publisher's final edited version of this article is available free at Curr Biol 