 Eukaryotic cells use dynamins—mechano-chemical GTPases—to drive the division of endosymbiotic organelles. Here we probe early steps of mitochondrial and chloroplast endosymbiosis by tracing the evolution of dynamins. We develop a parsimony-based phylogenetic method for protein sequence reconstruction, with deep time resolution. Using this, we demonstrate that dynamins diversify through the punctuated transformation of sequence segments on the scale of secondary-structural elements. We find examples of segments that have remained essentially unchanged from the 1.8-billion-y-old last eukaryotic common ancestor to the present day. Stitching these together, we reconstruct three ancestral dynamins: The first is nearly identical to the ubiquitous mitochondrial division dynamins of extant eukaryotes, the second is partially preserved in the myxovirus-resistance-like dynamins of metazoans, and the third gives rise to the cytokinetic dynamins of amoebozoans and plants and to chloroplast division dynamins. The reconstructed sequences, combined with evolutionary models and published functional data, suggest that the ancestral mitochondrial division dynamin also mediated vesicle scission. This bifunctional protein duplicated into specialized mitochondrial and vesicle variants at least three independent times—in alveolates, green algae, and the ancestor of fungi and metazoans—accompanied by the loss of the ancient prokaryotic mitochondrial division protein FtsZ. Remarkably, many extant species that retain FtsZ also retain the predicted ancestral bifunctional dynamin. The mitochondrial division apparatus of such organisms, including amoebozoans, red algae, and stramenopiles, seems preserved in a near-primordial form. Eukaryotes arose through the acquisition of mitochondria by an archaeal host cell about 2 billion y ago, a watershed moment in the evolution of the modern compartmentalized cell plan. A second transformative endosymbiotic event, the acquisition of a cyanobacterium by a eukaryotic host to form chloroplasts, gave rise to the photosynthetic eukaryotic lineages. As the endosymbionts became integrated with their hosts, their growth and division became regulated by host–cellular machinery. Proteins of the dynamin superfamily were central to this process: Mitochondria and chloroplasts originally divided using a constricting ring of the prokaryotic cytoskeletal protein FtsZ, but dynamins have been recruited to these roles in all extant eukaryotes. By reconstructing the evolutionary history of dynamins, we can probe the process of endosymbiont integration. The dynamin superfamily is diverse, and different dynamin variants remodel membranes at different cellular locations. A major class of dynamins is essential for mitochondrial and peroxisomal division. Another large group drives the scission of clathrin-coated vesicles in organisms such as fungi and alveolates. A related group, the so-called “classical” dynamins that drive clathrin-coated vesicle scission in metazoans and land plants, contains a membrane-targeted pleckstrin homology domain. Members of the phragmoplastin class of dynamins participate in cell plate formation in land plants. The myxovirus-resistance-like dynamins are implicated in antiviral activity in vertebrates. A truncated dynamin variant is involved in cytokinesis in amoebozoans and plants, as well as in chloroplast fission in photosynthetic lineages; another truncated variant drives mitochondrial inner membrane fusion in fungi and metazoans. Finally, mitofusins and the related bacterial dynamin-like proteins are potentially ancient members of the dynamin superfamily ; these are excluded from our study because they are highly diverged at the sequence level. Here we present the most comprehensive analysis of dynamin evolution yet reported, including thousands of functionally diverse dynamins from hundreds of broadly sampled eukaryotic species. We reconstruct the series of events that led from the primordial dynamins of the 1.8-billion-y-old last eukaryotic common ancestor to the great variety of present-day dynamins. The outcome is a nuanced picture of protein diversification, mirroring key events in the evolution of eukaryotes themselves and shedding light on the earliest stages of endosymbiont integration. Results Functionally Diverse Dynamins Are Found Across Eukaryotic Supergroups. Members of the dynamin superfamily are characterized by three major domains: an N-terminal GTPase domain, a stalk region formed by helices of the middle domain, and a GTPase effector domain that folds back across the stalk to regulate GTPase activity. Most dynamins act by forming homo-oligomeric rings around membrane necks through interactions of the stalk, driving scission via GTP hydrolysis. Starting with a curated list of functionally diverse dynamins, we used ND, MD, and GED alignments to query a broadly sampled protein sequence database. We thus identified and aligned 3,827 eukaryotic dynamins from 854 species or strains representing all extant eukaryotic supergroups, as well as 14 bacterial dynamins. Fig. 1. Breaking dynamin into evolutionary segments. The crystal structure of human dynamin 1. Dynamins have three conserved domains: the N-terminal GTPase domain, the middle domain, and... To examine the diversity within this dataset we used the graphical CLANS tool, which clusters proteins by sequence similarity. Applying CLANS to the full alignment, we found that the proteins split into seven major classes, each associated with distinct functional annotations, whose mutual relationships were not well resolved. Three of these—which we term superclasses A, B, and C—span multiple eukaryotic supergroups. Given a set of present-day proteins and a backbone tree of eukaryotic species, we define the “root species” as the last common ancestor of the species in which those proteins are found and the “root protein” as the last common ancestral protein itself. Class A consists of 1,891 dynamins, including those involved in mitochondrial and peroxisomal division, vesicle scission, or cell plate formation, with LECA as the root species; class B consists of 1,390 myxovirus-resistance-like dynamins, with LECA as the root species; class C consists of 136 ND-only dynamins, including those involved in cytokinesis or chloroplast division, with the last common ancestor of amoebozoans and archaeplastids as the root species. The remaining four classes are confined to individual lineages: 16 alveolate-specific proteins related to class C, 252 fungal and 142 metazoan mitochondrial fusion dynamins, and 14 bacterial dynamins. Ancestral Dynamins Can Be Reconstructed by Parsimony. We are interested in inferring sequence and function of the root proteins of present-day dynamin superclasses. Although evolutionary rates can vary over time and across the protein sequence at billion-year timescales, maximum-likelihood methods incorporating rate heterogeneity can accurately reconstruct protein phylogenies. In effect, conserved regions of a protein similar to the ancestral sequence provide a reliable phylogenetic signal. However, outside these regions, the reconstructed sequences are often inaccurate. Here we present a sequence reconstruction method based on parsimony, which can outperform maximum likelihood when evolution is heterogeneous. This relies on a compact representation of protein sequence that makes clear which regions of an ancestral protein have been reliably reconstructed. We break up the alignment into a small number of contiguous “evolutionary segments”. For a given protein at a given segment, we compress the entire amino acid sequence into a single letter, such that two proteins with the same letter have similar sequences, beyond some threshold identity X %. Each present-day protein is thus assigned a short signature consisting of a string of letters: Each position corresponds to a segment, and each letter labels a cluster of proteins with highly similar sequences across the relevant segment. Dollo parsimony then implements the following rule : If two present-day proteins have the same letter at a given segment, then their root protein must also have that letter. Ancestral proteins are thus assigned a signature, but with gaps wherever the sequence cannot be reconstructed. If an ancestral signature has a certain letter, it implies the ancestral sequence is > X % identical to present-day proteins with the same letter across the relevant segment. Crucially, the results of Dollo parsimony are guaranteed to be valid independent of the choice of segments and thresholds, as long as convergence can be ruled out. To prevent convergence, we must use some combination of long segments and high thresholds, so the chance of two unrelated proteins accidentally having > X % identity across the entire segment is negligible. However, if the segments are too long or the threshold is too high, it is likely that only recently diverged protein pairs have > X % identity across whole segments. We would then be able to reconstruct recent ancestral proteins, but the signatures of ancient proteins would consist mostly of gaps. Also, if the threshold were so low that any pair of homologous proteins would have > X % identity across all segments, all proteins both present day and ancestral would trivially have the same signature. This would prevent us from inferring the function of ancestral variants. The details of how segment boundaries are chosen and how sequence stretches at each segment are grouped into clusters corresponding to letter labels are given in SI Text, Evolutionary Segments and SI Text, Sequence Clustering. To understand our results, only the following properties of segments and letter clusters are relevant. First, we find that dynamins split into eight well-defined evolutionary segments ranging in length from 22 to 118 residues, smaller than domains but significantly correlated with secondary-structural elements. In practice, segments 20 residues or longer are sufficient to prevent accidental convergence and can retain nearly as much phylogenetic information as an entire protein. Our segments are therefore sufficiently long for parsimony to be valid. Second, when we examine the clusters of sequences corresponding to each segment-wise letter label, almost all clusters have a median pairwise identity > X = 35%. This is comparable to the level of conservation between pairs of proteins with similar function. Therefore, if we do find present-day proteins with signatures nearly identical to those of some reconstructed ancestor, we can infer the function of the ancestor based on the function of its extant descendants. Ancient Segments, Unchanged for Billions of Years, Are “Living Fossils.” It is illuminating to benchmark our segment-based approach against a maximum-likelihood phylogenetic analysis; further validation steps are described in Fig. S3 and SI Text, Benchmarking Segment-Based Parsimony. Each letter label at each segment is associated with a cluster of proteins. For each such cluster, we define three attributes : Attribute 1: The pairwise identity between sequences within a cluster. This allows us to estimate the sequence of root proteins: If convergence is ruled out, the root protein of a pair of present-day proteins is at least as similar to each of them as they are to one another. Of 238 clusters, 223 have a median intracluster pairwise identity >35%. If the phylogeny within such clusters is balanced, this implies that the root protein is >35% identical to at least one present-day protein over the relevant segment. Attribute 2: The root species of a cluster. This allows us to estimate the age of root proteins: Assuming no horizontal transfer, if a cluster contains proteins from multiple eukaryotic supergroups, its root species and root protein are necessarily ancient, over 1.5 billion y old. In contrast, the root proteins of supergroup-specific clusters are potentially more recent. We find few ancient clusters: Class A dynamins have an ancient cluster at each of segments 1–8, class B dynamins have an ancient cluster at each of segments 1–4 and 6, and the ND-only class C dynamins have an ancient cluster at each of segments 1–3. Attribute 3: Whether the cluster is monophyletic. This establishes that the root protein of one cluster is not ancestral to that of any other cluster. To be monophyletic, member sequences of a cluster must repeatedly form a well-defined clade over 1,000 bootstrap phylogenetic trees calculated for a given segment. The majority of supergroup-specific clusters were strongly monophyletic. However, we found that the monophyly support levels of ancient clusters were significantly different from those of supergroup-specific clusters. This is striking, given that both ancient and supergroup-specific clusters had sequence identities in the same range of 50–90%. Whereas ancient class C clusters were monophyletic, ancient class A and B clusters were not. Fig. 2. Living fossils: tight, ancient, paraphyletic clusters. Schematic protein tree. Proteins are grouped into clusters of high pairwise identity corresponding to letter labels. For each cluster we show extant proteins... There are two reasons a cluster might not be monophyletic: Either its phylogenetic support is weak or it is paraphyletic, meaning its root protein is ancestral to members of multiple clusters. As evident in Fig. 2 B the ancient class A and class B clusters at each segment are truly paraphyletic: They are not only ancient, but also ancestral to other supergroup-specific class A and class B clusters. To reflect their important status, we label the unique ancestral cluster at each segment after the class itself. These clusters are living fossils: sets of extant proteins similar in sequence to the ancient root proteins of functional superclasses. Although sequence remnants of the root class C dynamin are lost, those of the root class A and class B dynamins persist to the present day. Entire Ancestral Dynamin Variants Are Preserved in Extant Species. Every protein in our dataset is assigned an eight-letter signature. By carrying out the parsimony analysis independently for each segment, we can reconstruct the full signatures of ancestral protein variants. We find that LECA had a class A dynamin identical in signature to that of mitochondrial and peroxisomal division dynamins of many extant species. Vesicle scission dynamins in fungi and metazoans retain similarity to the ancestral variant only in their N-terminal GTPase domains; those of land plants and alveolates are even more diverged. A class A variant of unknown function in green algae appears to have duplicated in land plants, into a vesicle dynamin and a phragmoplastin responsible for cell plate formation. LECA also had a class B dynamin whose closest extant variants are found in the metazoans. These dynamins have a patchy present-day distribution and appear to have undergone a recent radiation in fungi; in vertebrates these myxovirus-resistance-like proteins have antiviral functions. Fig. 3. Punctuated diversification of dynamins across 1.8 billion y. The heterogeneous nature of dynamin evolution is highlighted, over time and across the protein sequence. The evolutions of different dynamin superclasses and of mitochondrial FtsZ... Because the ancestral class C dynamin appears lost and therefore cannot be reconstructed by parsimony, we carried out a phylogenetic analysis of GTPase domains for every class C dynamin in our dataset. This revealed that the cytokinetic dynamins were monophyletic, and represented a sister group to the chloroplast division dynamins. The last common ancestor of amoebozoans and archaeplastids therefore had a class C cytokinetic dynamin that persists essentially unchanged in many lineages, as well as another class C dynamin of unknown sequence. Descendants of this unknown ancestor are specialized for chloroplast division in archaeplastids and plastid-bearing stramenopiles such as diatoms ; other diverged descendants are present but uncharacterized in alveolates, amoebozoans, one rhizarian, and one diatom. Because diatom plastids are derived from the secondary endosymbiosis of red algae and the chloroplast dynamins of these lineages branch close to one another, we attribute the occurrence of the PQR variant in stramenopiles to horizontal transfer. Extant Eukaryotes Have Separate Mitochondrial and Vesicle Scission Dynamins or a Potentially Bifunctional Dynamin. Alveolates, land plants, metazoans, and fungi each have distinct class A dynamins specialized for mitochondrial division and vesicle scission. In amitochondriate eukaryotes such as microsporidia and the Entamoebidae, the ancestral class A variant appears diverged or deleted. Surprisingly, several eukaryotic lineages encode just a single class A dynamin; these include both the oomycete and diatom lineages of stramenopiles, red algae, and excavates. Assuming that dynamins are essential for mitochondrial division as well as for clathrin-coated vesicle scission, we predict these lone dynamins to drive both processes. There is partial although not conclusive experimental support for this idea. The class A dynamin of the excavate Trypanosoma brucei localizes to mitochondria but appears to be required for mitochondrial fission as well as endocytosis ; that of the amitochondriate excavate Giardia lamblia colocalizes with clathrin-coated vesicles. The class A dynamin of the red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae has a punctate distribution on the cell surface between mitochondrial division events, suggesting it might also participate in vesicle scission. The amoebozoan Dictyostelium discoideum has two class A variants, of which DymA is ancestral; this protein is not essential for mitochondrial fission but influences mitochondrial morphology and participates in both mitochondrial and vesicle activities. Discussion LECA Had a Bifunctional Dynamin That Duplicated Multiple Independent Times. Eukaryotic lineages fall into two groups: those that use two distinct dynamins for mitochondrial and vesicle scission and those for which there is support for a single bifunctional dynamin. Three independent arguments suggest that the ancestral protein itself was bifunctional. First, we find no evidence of a distinct ancestral vesicle scission dynamin : Features shared across vesicle dynamins are also shared with mitochondrial dynamins. Second, the scenario in which LECA had a single bifunctional dynamin is more parsimonious than scenarios in which LECA contained specialized mitochondrial and vesicle dynamins. Third, given extant bifunctional and specialized variants, a population-genetic analysis strongly supports a bifunctional ancestor. Together, these observations imply that the bifunctional ancestral dynamin duplicated and specialized into mitochondrial and vesicle variants at least three independent times : in green algae, in alveolates, and in the opisthokonts. Independent observations support this multiple-duplication scenario: The PH domains of plant and metazoan classical vesicle dynamins appear to have independent origins ; the mitochondrial and vesicle dynamins of alveolates are suggested to be related ; and the mitochondrial and vesicle dynamins in yeast share a role in peroxisomal division, indicating a recent divergence. Following duplication, the mitochondrial variant retains most of its ancestral signature. Conversely, all specialized vesicle scission dynamins have diverged from the ancestral state in segments 6, 7, and 8, where the oligomerization interface is found. This suggests that hetero-oligomerization must be suppressed before a duplicate dynamin is free to take on new roles. Fig. 4. Duplication and specialization of a bifunctional ancestral dynamin. Present-day lineages have either a bifunctional dynamin with both mitochondrial and vesicle roles or two dynamins specialized for mitochondrial division... The Primordial Mitochondrial Division Apparatus Is Preserved in Many Extant Lineages. Most present-day chloroplasts and plastids are simultaneously squeezed from the outside by dynamin and pulled from the inside by an FtsZ ring during division. However, most present-day mitochondria have lost their prokaryotic FtsZ apparatus entirely and rely on dynamin to drive division. All known lineages that use specialized mitochondrial and vesicle dynamins have independently lost mitochondrial FtsZ, although the order of specialization and FtsZ loss is not clear. The excavates, which use a potentially bifunctional dynamin, have also lost FtsZ. However, mitochondrial FtsZ persists in amoebozoans, red algae, glaucophytes, haptophytes, and stramenopiles, as well as in the apusozoan Thecamonas trahens. LECA therefore must have used FtsZ, along with a bifunctional dynamin, to divide its mitochondria. The dynamins of glaucophytes, haptophytes, and Thecamonas are currently uncharacterized; by determining their roles we might elucidate the correlation between specialization and FtsZ loss. Remarkably, the remaining FtsZ-containing species appear to retain LECA’s mitochondrial division apparatus in its entirety: Stramenopiles, red algae, and amoebozoans all encode an ancestral class A dynamin known or predicted to be bifunctional, as well as mitochondrial FtsZ. A detailed characterization of mitochondrial division in these organisms would provide a glimpse of an early period of eukaryote evolution in which dynamin interacted both with the clathrin-coated vesicles of the host and with the FtsZ ring of the endosymbiont. Frozen in time, the persistence of ancestors converts a problem of evolutionary speculation into a problem of experimental measurement, allowing us to probe the cell biology of ancient organisms across a span of billions of years. Methods Construction of the Dynamin Database. We built a nonredundant protein database combining UniProtKB with proteomes inferred from 65 protist genomes. We assembled a curated list of dynamins from seven model organisms. We used HMMER to annotate protein domains according to the Pfam database of hidden Markov models and used MUSCLE to build multiple-sequence alignments of the ND, the MD, and the GED. For each domain, we performed PSI-BLAST against the protein database, with the most lenient E -value cutoff consistent with convergence within 50 iterations. We checked whether functional dynamin subtypes were able to pick up members of other subtypes; the highly diverged mitofusins and BDLPs failed this cross-validation step and were excluded. From the resulting dataset, we used IsoSVM to detect splice isoforms and retained the longest isoform per gene. We used HMMER and DomainFinder3 to annotate the ND, MD and GED of these sequences, using an E -value cutoff of 1, and retained sequences that contained at least one of these domains. For 387 proteins we found multiple hits to the same HMM profile; in these cases we retained the most C-terminal hit for the alignment, but retained all hits for clustering. This produced a final alignment of 3,841 sequences across 556 residues. A total of 3,827 sequences were from 854 eukaryotic species or strains according to NCBI Taxonomy IDs : 646 opisthokonts*, 1 apusozoan, 16 amoebozoans*, 36 exacavates*, 69 archaeplastids*, 2 hacrobians, and 84 species from the SAR supergroup*. Fourteen additional dynamins mapped to bacteria. Maximum-Likelihood Analysis. We computed all maximum-likelihood trees using RAxML, with an LG amino acid substitution model and gamma-distributed rate heterogeneity. The protein evolution model was selected using ProtTest. Because running RAxML on the full dataset is computationally expensive, we assessed the monophyly of clusters, using a sampling strategy. For each segment, we ran 100 bootstrap replicates on a dataset consisting of 10 random representatives from each cluster. We repeated this process for 10 randomly subsampled datasets, thus generating 1,000 trees for each segment. We scored each cluster by asking how many times it was recovered as precisely monophyletic from these 1,000 trees. Consensus split networks were generated using SplitsTree4 with default parameters, with the “Use weights” and “Convex hull” options unchecked. Supplementary Material Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. 