 Dictyostelium discoideum GPHR /Gpr89 is a developmentally regulated transmembrane protein present on the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus. Transcript levels are low during growth and vary during development, reaching high levels during the aggregation and late developmental stages. The Arabidopsis ortholog was described as a G protein-coupled receptor for abscisic acid present at the plasma membrane, whereas the mammalian ortholog is a Golgi apparatus-associated anion channel functioning as a Golgi apparatus pH regulator. To probe its role in D. discoideum, we generated a strain lacking GPHR. The mutant had different growth characteristics than the AX2 parent strain, exhibited changes during late development, and formed abnormally shaped small slugs and fruiting bodies. An analysis of development-specific markers revealed that their expression was disturbed. The distributions of the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus were unaltered at the immunofluorescence level. Likewise, their functions did not appear to be impaired, since membrane proteins were properly processed and glycosylated. Also, changes in the external pH were sensed by the ER, as indicated by a pH-sensitive ER probe, as in the wild type. INTRODUCTION The highly conserved GPR89, also known as GPHR, has for a long time been thought to be an orphan G protein-coupled receptor. In recent reports, the proteins from Arabidopsis, Drosophila, and mouse were characterized with regard to their roles. The Arabidopsis orthologs GTG1 and GTG2 were identified as abscisic acid receptors. Mutants lacking GTG1 and GTG2 exhibit abscisic acid hyposensitivity. GTG1 and GTG2 are unique among the GPR89 proteins, as they harbor a degenerate Ras GTPase-activating protein domain at their C termini and have GTPase activity. The green fluorescent protein -tagged Arabidopsis proteins GTG1 and GTG2 were detected at the cell peripheries of protoplasts. This localization contrasts with that of the Drosophila and mouse GPHRs, which were found at intracellular membranes. Recently, the view that GTG1 and GTG2 have a GPCR-type structure has been challenged, since they have more than seven predicted transmembrane regions. In mammalian cells, the protein was identified in a search for a protein involved in pH regulation. It was identified as an anion channel critical for acidification and functions of the Golgi apparatus, hence the name GPHR, a term that we use for the D. discoideum protein, as well. GPHR could restore delayed protein transport, impaired glycosylation, and Golgi apparatus disorganization in mutant Chinese hamster ovary cells by reestablishing Golgi apparatus acidification. The authors also demonstrated voltage-dependent anion channel activity after reconstitution of the protein into planar lipid bilayers. Earlier studies had identified the gene in a search for human genes that activate NF-κB and MAPK signaling pathways. Expression analysis in the mouse showed ubiquitous presence. The inactivation of the single mouse gene by homologous recombination resulted in lethality of the homozygous mutants, whereas no notable phenotype was observed for the heterozygous mice. A keratinocyte-specific GPHR knockout led to hypopigmented skin, hair loss, and scaliness. As an underlying defect, diminished formation of lamellar bodies that resulted in an impaired skin barrier was noted. Through the secretion of lamellar bodies, lipids and proteins are delivered to the extracellular spaces of the stratum corneum, where they establish the barrier functions. The Drosophila GPHR is associated with the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus. Loss of the protein caused disorganization of these compartments and a defective secretory pathway. At the organismal level, it led to a growth defect, and to death in the late larval stages. Expression in neuronal or gut cells rescued the growth defect. The authors suggested that this might be due to the restoration of the secretion of some unknown factor. We analyzed the D. discoideum GPHR homolog by expressing the protein as a GFP fusion protein and generating knockout cells. DdGPHR localized to internal membranes, primarily of the ER, and also accumulated at the Golgi apparatus. Its loss led to a defect during growth in shaking suspension, and GPHR − cells exhibited severe changes during late development that can be explained by the developmental expression pattern of the gene. The morphologies of the slugs and of fruiting bodies were significantly altered, as well as the expression patterns of developmentally regulated genes, where timing and abundance were affected. MATERIALS AND METHODS Growth and development of D. discoideum strains and mutant generation. The D. discoideum strains used were AX2, AX2 expressing GFP-LimD, a GPHR-deficient strain derived from AX2, and GPHR – expressing GPHR carrying a GFP tag at its C terminus. The strains were grown submerged at 22°C in axenic medium or on a lawn of Klebsiella aerogenes on SM agar plates in order to obtain sufficient quantities of cells for experimental analysis. Growth on Escherichia coli B/r in shaking suspension was done as described previously. Development was initiated by resuspending cells in Soerensen phosphate buffer at a density of 1 × 10 7 cells/ml and shaking at 160 rpm. The cells were sampled at the indicated time points and used for protein analysis. These conditions allowed the formation of aggregates. For development on a solid substratum, which allows development until fruiting body formation, 5 × 10 7 cells were spread onto Soerensen phosphate-buffered agar plates and incubated at 22°C. Photographs were taken at identical times after plating for comparison of the developmental stages. The GPHR gene was amplified from genomic DNA derived from strain AX2 and cloned into pGEM-T Easy. The sequence was verified and used for all further cloning steps. For inactivation of the GPHR gene, a gene replacement vector was established. Nucleotides 7 to 630 and 866 to 1410 of the genomic DNA were cloned into the pLPBLP vector. The plasmid was transformed into AX2, and transformants were selected using blasticidin S at 1.5 μg/ml. Single colonies were selected on a Klebsiella lawn, DNA was isolated from nuclei using phenol-chloroform extraction, and PCR analysis was carried out with primers that allowed detection of the gene replacement event. For size determination of the PCR products, a 100-bp ladder was used. For expression of GPHR-GFP, the genomic DNA was cloned into p1ANeo8. A plasmid allowing expression of the ER marker calreticulin fused to ratiometric pHluorin was obtained from dictybase. It was transformed into AX2 and GPHR − cells. Selection of transformants was done with G418. Fluorescence measurements. Excitation scans were generated using a Tecan fluorescence plate reader. Cells were washed and starved for 2 h in Soerensen phosphate buffer, and 1 × 10 6 cells expressing calpHluorin were added per well of a 96-well plate. Excitation scans were performed between wavelengths 340 nm and 490 nm. Emission was set at 510 nm. For pH experiments, cells were harvested, starved for 2 h in Soerensen phosphate buffer at a density of 1 × 10 7 cells/ml in order to reduce autofluorescence due to the medium that had been taken up, and resuspended in the appropriate buffer. To manipulate the intracellular pH, cells were harvested by centrifugation, and the Soerensen phosphate buffer was replaced by 20 mM 2-ethanesulfonic acid buffer, pH 6.0, containing 20 mM propionic acid or by 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, containing 20 mM NH 4 Cl. Both reagents, propionic acid and NH 4 Cl, diffuse through the plasma membrane and dissociate in the cell, where they alter the pH. For live-cell microscopy, the pH was changed by adding MES buffer containing increasing concentrations of propionic acid or NH 4 Cl. Mutant analysis. Growth analysis, Saccharomyces cerevisiae phagocytosis, measurement of mannosidase activity, analysis of cell motility, and phototaxis were done as described previously. Mannosidase activity was determined in cell pellets and in the supernatant. Cells were starved at a density of 1 × 10 7 cells/ml. At the beginning of the experiment and after 2, 4, and 6 h, 500 μl of cell suspension was taken to measure mannosidase activity. For determination of the secreted enzyme, 100 μl of the supernatant was mixed with 100 μl Na-citrate buffer, pH 5.0, and 200 μl substrate solution. The substrate was dissolved in dimethylformamide. The reaction was stopped after a 30-min incubation at 37°C by addition of 600 μl sodium borate, and the product was extracted into butanol. Nitrophenol formation was estimated by measuring the absorbance at 405 nm. For determination of the total enzyme activity, cells were lysed by addition of Triton X-100. For chemotaxis analysis, cells were starved in suspension at a density of 1 × 10 7 cells/ml and taken for analysis of cell motility after 5 h of development. Twenty-five to 30 μl of cell suspension was diluted in 3 ml of Soerensen phosphate buffer and mixed well by pipetting in order to dissociate cells from aggregates; 1.5 ml of the diluted cells was then transferred onto a glass coverslip with a plastic ring placed on a Leica inverse microscope equipped with a 20× UplanFl 0.3 objective. Time-lapse image series were captured and stored on a computer hard drive at 30-s intervals with a JAI CV-M10 charge-coupled device camera and an Imagenation PX610 frame grabber controlled through Optimas software. Cells migrating toward an aggregation center were analyzed. DIAS software was used to trace individual cells along image series; it automatically outlined the cell perimeters and converted them to replacement images from which the position of the cell centroid was determined. Speed and change of direction were computed from the centroid position. Development on phosphate agar was followed by visual inspection and determining the expression of developmental markers by quantitative real-time PCR experiments using the primers listed in Table 1 and Western blot analysis probing for development of specific proteins. For qRT-PCR, defined amounts of D. discoideum annexin 7 cDNA was used as an internal standard. RNA was isolated from AX2 and GPHR − cells that had been starved on phosphate agar plates using phenol-chloroform extraction after cell lysis with SDS and converted into cDNA using reverse transcriptase and random primers. GAPDH amounts were used for normalization. For spore viability assessment, development was carried out on phosphate-buffered agar plates, spores were harvested and treated or not with Triton X-100, and colony formation was checked by plating appropriate numbers of spores onto a lawn of Klebsiella. Spore and stalk cells were assessed after staining with calcofluor white stain. They were incubated for 1 min in a solution prepared according to the data sheet and analyzed under UV light. Calcofluor white binds to cellulose that is present around differentiated spore and stalk cells. Development was also followed after neutral red staining of cells. Neutral red, a vital dye, is specific for prestalk cells, which have large acidic vacuoles. Cells were incubated for 1 min in an equal volume of 0.1% neutral red solution and subsequently washed and plated onto phosphate agar. To analyze growth behavior under stress, cells were grown in petri dishes in axenic medium in the presence of 30 mM NaCl or 115 mM sorbitol. For statistical analysis, the Student t test was used. TABLE 1 Primers used for qRT-PCR Immunofluorescence, Western blot analysis, and antibodies used. For immunofluorescence analysis, methanol-fixed cells were stained for actin with the mouse monoclonal antibody act1, tubulin was detected with rat MAb YL1/2, CAP with mouse MAb 223-445-1, protein disulfide isomerase with MAb 221-135-1, annexin 7 with MAb 185-338-1, and the nuclear envelope-associated protein interaptin with MAb 260-60. MAb 190-340 recognized the Golgi apparatus marker comitin, MAb 83-418 the 56-kDa D2 protein, MAb 130-80 the 69-kDa crystal protein CP, and MAb 70-11-1 the 30-kDa mitochondrial porin. MAb 221-35-2 is directed against the vacuolar ATPase subunit VatA. For detection, goat anti-mouse or goat anti-rat antibodies coupled to Alexa Fluor 488 were used. Mitochondria were also stained using MitoTracker. Cells in medium were incubated for 15 min with MitoTracker at room temperature and fixed with ice-cold methanol. The cells were then stained with the MAb act1 to visualize the boundaries of the cells. Analysis of fixed and living cells was done by laser scanning confocal microscopy using a Leica TCS SP5 microscope equipped with a very sensitive hybrid detector. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, blotted onto nitrocellulose membranes, and probed with appropriate antibodies. GFP-tagged protein was detected with MAb K3-184-2, and the cell adhesion molecule contact site A with MAb 33-294. N- and O-glycosylation of csA was detected with MAb 123-353, which primarily recognizes N-glycosylated csA, and MAb 24-210, detecting O-glycosylated proteins, with MAb 188-19 directed against cap32 as a loading control. The centrosome was labeled with MAb K68-332-3, detecting CP250. In Western blots, proteins were detected with enhanced chemiluminescence using horseradish peroxidase-coupled secondary antibodies. RESULTS Characterization of DdGPHR. DdGPHR, a member of the orphan vertebrate Gpr89 group, is highly conserved across eukaryotes. Its closest homologs in BLAST searches are an Acanthamoeba castellanii protein and Golgi apparatus pH regulator-like isoform 1 from the marine mammal Trichechus manatus latirostris. The identity with the mouse protein is also 41%, and 32% with the Arabidopsis thaliana receptors GTG1 and GTG2. A phylogenetic analysis also showed that DdGPHR is evolutionarily more closely related to the animal proteins than to the plant proteins. The DdGPHR gene is located on chromosome 4 and harbors two small introns. It encodes a 547-amino-acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 64,244 Da containing eight predicted transmembrane domains, a DUF3735 domain, and an ABA_GPCR domain. Similar domain structures are predicted for all the homologs. The mRNA is present throughout all stages of development. The levels are lowest during the growth phase, and they increase strongly during aggregation, with a peak at 8 to 12 h after the start of starvation on phosphate agar plates. Then, they fall and rise again during late development, when slugs are formed and culmination occurs. FIG 1 Evolutionary tree, GPHR domain structure, transcript accumulation during development, and subcellular distribution of GPHR-GFP. Evolutionary tree for selected GPHRs from fungi, plants, amoebozoa, and animals. A CLUSTALX alignment of GPHR full-length... Since the antibodies we had generated against DdGPHR did not react with the protein in Western blots or immunofluorescence analysis, we could not assess its abundance and localization in D. discoideum. To localize DdGPHR in cells, we ectopically expressed the protein as a GFP-tagged fusion protein in AX2 cells. GFP was fused to the C terminus of GPHR, and expression was under the control of the actin 15 promoter, which is active throughout growth and development. The fusion protein is functionally active, as described for the rescue experiments below. DdGPHR-GFP staining was observed around the nucleus and on a network throughout the cell. This network was identified in coimmunofluorescence studies as the ER because it overlapped with the ER marker PDI. At the nucleus, GPHR-GFP overlapped with interaptin, which is located at the nuclear envelope. The ER network emanates from the outer nuclear membrane and extends throughout the cytosol. GPHR-GFP also colocalized with the Golgi apparatus marker comitin, detected by MAb 190-340. Comitin strongly stained the Golgi membranes in the vicinity of the nucleus and overlapped with the microtubule organizing center, from which microtubules labeled by MAb YL1/2 originated and which was stained with monoclonal antibodies recognizing centrosomal protein CP250. The PDI-specific antibodies did not label the GPHR-GFP-decorated membranes associated with Golgi membranes. Staining for CAP, an actin cytoskeleton-associated protein, was used to reveal the cell cortex. Characterization of DdGPHR-deficient cells. The single DdGPHR gene in strain AX2 was inactivated using a gene replacement vector. Disruption of the gene in the transformants was analyzed and confirmed by PCR using primers located outside the vector sequences. A GPHR-deficient clone was isolated and characterized, with focus on the analysis of growth and development and on processes that might be impaired by changes in membrane trafficking based on the presence of GPHR on ER and Golgi membranes and the phenotype described for the mouse ortholog. DdGPHR-deficient cells had an appearance similar to that of AX2 cells, but they were significantly smaller when grown on a plastic surface. A difference was also observed for cells grown on a lawn of K. aerogenes, where cells are in general smaller. We found cell sizes of 8.80 ± 1.08 μm for GPHR − and 9.92 ± 1.82 for AX2. In this case, the difference was not significant. Mutant and wild-type cells were mainly mono- and dinucleated. Growth in axenic medium in petri dishes, which is also a measure of pinocytosis activity, was slightly slower than that of the parental AX2 strain. Growth was not impaired in the presence of NaCl and sorbitol, which indicates that stress resistance is normal. Cells did not grow in shaking suspension. On a lawn of K. aerogenes, growth was not significantly altered; however, we noted differences with regard to plaque formation. At the same time point after plating, AX2, but not the GPHR − strain, had formed multicellular structures in the centers of plaques. When grown on a suspension of E. coli B/r, the mutant cells had an extended lag phase; however, once growth started, they attained a duplication time similar to that of AX2, consumed all the bacteria, and formed aggregates. Fig 2 Generation and characterization of GPHR-deficient cells. Strategy of the knockout vector and PCR analysis of AX2 and mutant DNA using the indicated primers. PCR product obtained with primer pair loxp-3′-for and gpcr-3′-rev.... To assay the phagocytic capability, we performed yeast phagocytosis assays and quantified the ingested yeast particles after 15, 30, and 45 min of incubation in the presence of yeast. We found that the mutant had ingested fewer yeast particles at each time point and during incubation with different concentrations of yeast. In the presence of 5 × 10 7 yeast particles per 1.4 × 10 6 cells, only ∼17% of AX2 cells did not contain yeast particles at the 45-min time point, whereas in the case of GPHR −, ∼72% of the cells had not ingested yeast, indicating a severe phagocytosis defect. TABLE 2 Yeast phagocytosis Analysis of intracellular-membrane compartments and of endoplasmic reticulum dynamics. Because of the presence of GPHR-GFP on the ER, we probed the integrity of intracellular membranes at the immunofluorescence level using markers for the nuclear membrane, the centrosome, the ER, the Golgi apparatus, the endolysosomal system and the contractile vacuole, and mitochondria. We did not observe differences in the localization and morphological appearance of these organelles at the microscopic level, except for mitochondria. In AX2, they were present as well-defined circular structures after staining both with the porin-specific MAb 70-11-1 and with MitoTracker; in GPHR −, the mitochondria had a more diffuse appearance with both stains. GPHR in mammalian cells is a Golgi apparatus pH regulator that functions as a counter-ion transport channel in the acidification of the Golgi apparatus. The pH of the ER resembles that of the cytosol. It has been reported that the ER membrane is highly permeable to protons and that the pH of the lumen is susceptible to alterations of the pH in the cytosol. We therefore expressed calpHluorin in AX2 and GPHR − in order to assess the pH of the ER in resting cells and to follow the response to pH changes in living cells. CalpHluorin is a fusion protein composed of calreticulin and ratiometric pHluorin, a pH-sensitive GFP. CalpHluorin was distributed in an ER-like pattern in both strains, confirming the unaltered ER morphology in the mutant. We first performed excitation scans between 340 nm and 490 nm with emission set at 510 nm using the calpHluorin-expressing cells. No difference between the wild type and the mutant was observed for the resting-stage pH. We then manipulated the pH by adding propionic acid and ammonium chloride. Both substances are freely permeable and lead to acidification and alkalinization of the cytosol, respectively. Propionic acid traverses the membrane, dissociates in the cytosol into H + and propionate, and lowers the pH. The measurements revealed characteristic fluorescence changes depending on the pH in similar manners in wild-type and mutant cells. We further performed ratiometric analyses at different pHs, determining the ratio by dual excitation at 410 and 470 nm, which normalizes the expression levels of the fluorescent proteins, and obtained similar ratios. We conclude that the pH in the ER is regulated in AX2 and the mutant in similar manners. FIG 3 Response of the ER to pH changes. Ratiometric analysis. CalpHluorin was expressed in AX2 and GPHR − cells. They were placed in a buffer containing propionic acid or NH 4 Cl and analyzed in a plate fluorimeter by dual excitation at 410 nm and... When we probed the response of the ER to changes in the cytosolic pH, analyzing the cells by live-cell microscopy, we observed that upon addition of propionic acid the ER membranes in the cytosol collapsed into large patches in the cell periphery. For GPHR − cells, the collapse of the structures was apparent earlier than in AX2 cells. When the pH was neutralized by the addition of ammonium chloride, the patches were disassembled, and normal ER structures appeared. The time courses of disassembly and formation of normal structures were comparable in the two strains. Similar results were obtained for AX2 and GPHR −, which were fixed after the treatments and stained with PDI-specific antibodies to reveal the morphology of the ER. It appears that the distribution of the ER in the GPHR − cells is more sensitive to acidification than in AX2 cells. Protein modifications and secretory processes involving the endoplasmic reticulum. The ER is a biosynthetic organelle. In general, secreted proteins are synthesized as precursors into the ER, where they are proteolytically processed, folded, N-glycosylated, further modified, and then passed on to the Golgi apparatus for additional modifications. To assess the capacity of the mutant GPHR − to carry out ER-associated modifications, we studied the posttranslational modification of the csA protein. csA is an ∼80-kDa glycoprotein involved in the formation of EDTA-stable cell-cell adhesions during the aggregation stage of development. It is synthesized as a 53-kDa protein; modified in the ER and the Golgi apparatus by N- and O-glycosylation, respectively; and converted from a 68-kDa intermediary product into the mature ∼80-kDa protein, which is held in the plasma membrane by a phospholipid anchor. We used MAb 33-294 directed against the protein moiety of csA to study the protein in Western blots. In AX2 and in mutant cells, csA was detected when the cells formed aggregates and migrated as an ∼80-kDa protein in SDS-polyacrylamide gels, indicating that its synthesis and processing were not noticeably altered. Antibodies detecting the N- and O-glycosylated csA molecule also reacted with the mature protein. The faint band below the 80-kDa csA is an incompletely glycosylated form of the protein that can be frequently observed. Two more posttranslationally modified proteins, D2 and the crystal protein CP, were included in our analysis. They are present in growth phase cells and increase in amount during development, when they are detected in crystalline inclusion bodies, hence the name. Both proteins are synthesized as precursors and secreted into vesicles that are surrounded by an ER membrane. We observed unaltered sizes and developmental expression patterns of the proteins, indicating correct synthesis and processing in the GPHR − strain. Also, crystals were detected by immunofluorescence analysis in aggregation stage cells. From the results, we conclude that protein transport through the endomembrane system is not disturbed and that glycosylation is not impaired. FIG 4 Posttranslational protein processing and modification of developmentally regulated proteins and secretion of mannosidase. Protein modification of developmentally regulated proteins. Cells were starved in Soerensen phosphate buffer in shaken suspension,... We further tested the secretion of α-mannosidase. α-Mannosidase is a lysosomal hydrolase produced during growth and the first hours of development. The protein is posttranslationally modified on its way through the ER and Golgi apparatus to the late lysosomes before it is secreted. During growth, mannosidase activity is mainly found inside the cell, and very little of the enzyme is secreted. This changes during development, and the amounts of the enzyme secreted into the supernatant increase greatly. When we tested the mannosidase activity, we found that AX2, GPHR −, and GPHR − expressing GPHR-GFP cells exhibited similar total mannosidase activities during growth and development; however, their abilities to secrete the enzyme differed. For AX2 cells, ∼73% of mannosidase activity was present in the supernatant at the 6-h time point of development, whereas GPHR − cells secreted only 42% of the enzyme. Expression of GPHR-GFP in the GPHR − strain corrected the defect. TABLE 3 Mannosidase secretion of AX2 and GPHR − and AX2 and GPHR − expressing GPHR-GFP a Motile behavior. Cell motility is a characteristic feature of Dictyostelium amoebae during all phases of growth and development. GPHR − cells exhibited a severe defect. We tested chemotactic motility of aggregation stage cells and found a significant alteration of their migratory behavior. The speed was reduced from 14.22 ± 2.0 μm/min for AX2 amoebae to 4.13 ± 1.49 μm/min for GPHR amoebae. Furthermore, the mutant cells changed direction more frequently and were less persistent. TABLE 4 Analysis of cell motility a Developmental analysis. D. discoideum multicellular development is initiated upon starvation and is controlled through extracellular signaling molecules that include cyclic AMP. To evaluate possible roles of GPHR during development, we followed aggregation by starving cells in Soerensen phosphate buffer in shaken suspension and on phosphate-buffered agar as a solid substratum. In suspension, cells develop until the aggregation stage and form tight aggregates; on a solid substratum, they can undergo the complete developmental cycle, which results in the formation of fruiting bodies composed of a stalk and a spore head. We monitored development in suspension by following the decrease in the optical density at 600 nm due to aggregate formation. GPHR − cells and AX2 cells formed aggregates in similar manners. The csA protein, which mediates cell-cell contacts in the aggregates, was detected in a timely manner in both strains. When developed on phosphate agar plates, the GPHR − cells aggregated normally; however, during later stages, abnormalities were noted. Many of the slugs did not have the typical cigar-like shape with a smooth and even surface; instead, they often had a knobby appearance and were of uneven thickness and irregular shape. FIG 5 Analysis of late developmental stages. Slugs and fruiting bodies of AX2, GPHR −, and GPHR − expressing GPHR-GFP are shown. Starvation was on phosphate-buffered agar. The photographs were taken at the same time after plating... In order to analyze pattern formation during development, we used the vital stain neutral red. Neutral-red-stained tips were observed in aggregates of AX2 and GPHR −. In GPHR − aggregates, a significant number of neutral-red-stained cells were present throughout the aggregate. In AX2 slugs, the staining was retained at the tip, where the prestalk cells reside, and in the back of the slug, as reported previously. Neutral-red-positive cells, which correspond to anterior-like cells, were also scattered throughout the prespore region. In GPHR − slugs, neutral-red-stained cells were not strongly enriched at the tip but were present throughout the slug. Toward the rear of the slug, they were less prominent. We also noted that mutant multicellular structures were smaller than those of AX2. To confirm the reduction in size, we determined the numbers that were formed from identical numbers of cells initially plated. We found that for AX2, a defined area contained ∼6 slugs or aggregates, whereas for GPHR −, we counted ∼22 multicellular structures in a similar-size area. The mutant slugs developed into small fruiting bodies, and the head contained viable spores. Stalk cells and spores were fully differentiated, as detected by calcofluor white staining. AX2 and GPHR − stalk cells were large and had irregular shapes, while spores from AX2 had an elliptical shape and were of relatively uniform size. For GPHR − spores, we detected various shapes from round to oval. Also, their sizes varied, and the majority of them were smaller than the spores of AX2. Slugs are motile and migrate toward light. In phototaxis experiments, AX2 slugs migrated in a highly oriented fashion toward the light source. Mutant slugs formed but migrated over short distances only and were less directed. The developmental defect was rescued by reexpression of DdGPHR-GFP and by mixing mutant and wild-type cells in a ratio of 70 to 30. When we mixed AX2 cells expressing a GFP-tagged protein with GPHR − cells, multicellular structures that contained both types of cells were formed. Also, the GFP-positive cells were distributed equally throughout the slug and did not show particular enrichment in a special area. To analyze development further, we monitored the expression of developmental markers at the mRNA level by quantitative real-time PCR. Development was on phosphate-buffered agar, and RNA was isolated at the indicated time points. For early developmental markers, we studied the mRNA levels of cadA, carA, and csA. cadA is a cadherin-like cell adhesion molecule that is responsible for the formation of EDTA-sensitive cell adhesions, carA is the cAMP receptor that senses cAMP signals during early aggregation, and csA mediates EDTA-stable adhesions. The highest mRNA levels for cadA, carA, and csA were reached in GPHR − at the 12.5-h time point, which corresponds to the aggregation stage. The levels were higher than those in AX2 at this time point. Maximum levels of carA and csA transcripts were reached at 16.5 h in AX2. Markers specific for later developmental stages showed a different pattern. The mRNAs for ecmA and pspA, prestalk- and prespore-specific genes that encode structural components of the stalk and of spores, respectively, showed maximum accumulation at 12.5 h in AX2, while in GPHR −, the levels reached a maximum at 16.5 h. Maximum levels of ecmA were comparable in both strains, whereas maximum pspA levels were lower in the mutant. The product of the ecmB gene is a marker for stalk cell differentiation and has a structural role in the stalk tube. The corresponding transcript levels showed similar patterns of accumulation in both strains; however, the amounts were strongly reduced in GPHR −. Dramatically lower transcript levels were noted for the late developmental marker spiA in GPHR-deficient cells. spiA is a marker of terminal differentiation. It is a spore coat protein, and the gene is expressed concomitant with the encapsulation of spores. Taken together, the pattern of developmental-gene expression, in particular of genes that are expressed at the later developmental stages, is strongly disturbed in the mutant, which may lead to the morphological alterations. FIG 6 Transcript levels of late developmental markers as analyzed by qRT-PCR. Starvation was on phosphate-buffered agar plates. Cells were harvested at the indicated time points. Evaluation of the developmental stage was by visual... DISCUSSION Dictyostelium GPHR is primarily an ER-associated protein with some accumulation at the Golgi apparatus. This parallels the localization of the GPHR of Drosophila, with which it shares a high homology. Since our results were obtained using GFP-tagged GPHR that was expressed under the control of the actin 15 promoter, we cannot exclude the possibility that the distribution of the endogenous protein might differ. In the Drosophila studies, a hemagglutinin -tagged protein was overexpressed and used for localization studies. GPHRs have been well studied in only a few organisms so far, and functions ranging from abscisic acid receptor to Golgi apparatus pH regulator have been identified for plants and mammalian cells, respectively. Ablation of the Drosophila ortholog disturbed the ER and Golgi apparatus organization and affected growth. In D. discoideum, we observed changes at the growth phase and during late development. The altered ER dynamics in response to acidification were remarkable. The peripheral ER of cells is highly dynamic and undergoes constant rearrangement. Furthermore, ER tubules are retracted toward the cell center and extend outward again. This mechanism ensures correct distribution of the peripheral ER. It involves the cytoskeleton—in yeast, the actin cytoskeleton and a type V myosin, and in animal cells, mainly the microtubule system. CalpHluorin expression allowed us to follow the ER dynamics in response to pH changes in vivo. Acidification by propionic acid caused the formation of ER patches in the cell periphery. In GPHR −, this response occurred at a concentration as low as 20 mM, whereas for AX2, 30 mM propionic acid was needed. The regulation of ER dynamics in D. discoideum has not been under extensive investigation. Involvement of the class I myosin MyoK in the delivery of ER membranes to the early phagosome has been reported, and recruitment of calnexin-positive ER to Legionella pneumophila -containing vacuoles. From the published data, it is reasonable to assume that the ER associates with the actin and the microtubule cytoskeletons in D. discoideum. For the actin cytoskeleton, pH-sensitive regulators have been described, such as α-actinin, hisactophilin, and cofilin, which have the capacity to influence the cytoskeletal reorganization in a pH-sensitive manner, and thereby, they may also influence the ER dynamics. Posttranscriptional processing and modifications of proteins were probed for the plasma membrane protein csA and for D2 and CP, which are contained in membrane-surrounded structures in the cytosol. The modifications and trafficking occurred in a timely manner during development in GPHR −. These findings, together with similar responses of the ER pH sensor calpHluorin to pH changes in AX2 and GPHR −, may be an indication that pH regulation in the ER is ensured by additional proteins, as has been suggested for Drosophila. Multiple assurance of pH homeostasis seems to be essential for a free-living unicellular organism like D. discoideum, which in its natural habitat is subjected to frequent environmental changes, such as changing pH and osmotic conditions. In contrast, the secretion of mannosidase was impaired in the mutant. In AX2, the majority of the protein was secreted during development, reaching more than 70% of the total enzyme activity, whereas in GPHR −, only about 40% of the enzyme activity was secreted. Differences between the wild type and mutant were also noted during late development. GPHR − developed in a timely manner, but the multicellular structures were smaller and the slugs and stalks had aberrant shapes. The slugs were of uneven thickness, and the stalks were knobby. For the fruiting bodies, we noted a reduction in size and variability with regard to stalk shape and length. We presume that this is due to the deranged expression pattern of developmental marker proteins, which may not allow timely synthesis of essential proteins for differentiation and morphogenesis. A role in development is also suggested by the expression pattern of the GPHR gene, where we noted two maxima of expression, one during aggregation and a further one in late development. The slugs of the GPHR − strain resemble those of strains carrying a mutation in Gα1, converting it to a constitutively active molecule. Gα1 was proposed to be involved in signaling pathways that play an essential role in regulating multicellular development by controlling prestalk morphogenesis. Whether Gα1 and GPHR act in the same pathway is not known, and how GPHR regulates expression of developmentally regulated genes is unclear at present. Regulation by the ER at the level of transcription occurs in the unfolded-protein response. With the UPR, a network of signaling pathways is described that maintains the protein-folding capacity of the ER. It is initiated by proteins in the ER membrane that detect incompletely folded or unfolded proteins and activate a transcriptional program that leads to correction of the defect. These sensors are normally present in the ER. Upon stress, they are cleaved and released into the cytosol. The cytosolic portion migrates into the nucleus and functions as a transcriptional regulator. A role in this response system could be an intriguing possibility for GPHR. 