 The GATA transcription factor GtaG is conserved in Dictyostelids and is essential for terminal differentiation in Dictyostelium discoideum, but its function is not well understood. Here, we show that gtaG is expressed in prestalk cells at the anterior region of fingers and in the extending stalk during culmination. The gtaG − phenotype is cell-autonomous in prestalk cells and non-cell-autonomous in prespore cells. Transcriptome analyses reveal that GtaG regulates prestalk gene expression during cell differentiation before culmination and is required for progression into culmination. GtaG-dependent genes include genetic suppressors of the Dd-STATa-defective phenotype as well as Dd-STATa target-genes, including extracellular matrix genes. We show that GtaG might be involved in the production of two culmination-signaling molecules, cyclic di-GMP and the spore differentiation factor SDF-1, and that addition of c-di-GMP rescues the gtaG − culmination and spore formation deficiencies. We propose that GtaG is a regulator of terminal differentiation that functions in concert with Dd-STATa and controls culmination through regulating c-di-GMP and SDF-1 production in prestalk cells. KEY WORDS: GtaG, Dictyostelium, Terminal differentiation, c-di-GMP, SDF-1 Summary: GtaG is involved in the production of two culmination-signaling molecules – c-di-GMP and the spore differentiation factor SDF-1. Addition of c-di-GMP rescues culmination and spore-formation deficiencies of gtaG mutant. INTRODUCTION Dictyostelium discoideum is a free-living soil amoeba. Individual cells prey on bacteria and divide as solitary amoebae when food is abundant. In the laboratory, they grow in association with bacteria or axenically in defined liquid medium. When the amoebae starve, they stop dividing and begin to aggregate, forming multicellular structures of about 100,000 cells each. The multicellular organisms begin to develop and undergo a series of morphological changes. After initial formation of loose aggregates at around 8–10 h of development, the structures envelope themselves in a cellulosic sheath and become tight aggregates at about 12 h. During that time, the cells differentiate into prestalk and prespore cells that are initially intermixed. Later, the prespore and prestalk cells segregate from one another. Most of the prestalk cells migrate to the top of the tight aggregate, forming a tip that leads the elongation of the structure until it assumes a finger shape. At that stage, about 16 h into development, the anterior part of the structure comprises solely prestalk cells, and the posterior contains mostly prespore cells and a small proportion of prestalk cells. The prestalk cells at the very tip of the finger are called prestalk A cells, and the prestalk cells immediately behind them are called prestalk O cells. The cells in the posterior part of the prestalk region near the substratum are called prestalk B cells. The prestalk cells that are scattered throughout the posterior part of the finger are called anterior-like cells. In certain instances, the fingers might fall over and migrate on the substrate as slugs, which utilize phototaxis and thermotaxis to reach the surface of the soil. The final stages of development begin as the slugs erect themselves into a second finger. The bottom of the finger expands and shortens until the structure assumes a ‘Mexican hat’ shape. At that stage, the prestalk cells at the top of the structure begin to accumulate a large internal water vacuole and deposit a cellulosic cell wall around themselves. As they do so, they descend through the prespore cell mass while forming a stalk tube. Once the elongating stalk tube hits the substratum, the entire structure begins to rise away from the surface along the stalk tube in a process called culmination. During that time, the prespore cells begin to sporulate – they become desiccated and enveloped in a thick spore coat. The final fruiting body comprises a cellular stalk, about 1 mm tall, that carries a ball full of spores. The spores can disperse and germinate when food is abundant again, whereas the stalk cells die in place. The entire developmental process takes about 24 h and it is highly synchronous, such that thousands of aggregates develop and undergo morphogenesis in lockstep. The developmental process is accompanied by differentiation at various levels, including gene expression. Examination of the developmental transcriptome has revealed vast changes in gene expression that occur in bursts during different developmental stages. The most prominent change in gene expression coincides with the transition from unicellularity to multicellularity, at around 8–10 h of development. Initial changes take place in most cells, but differentiation into prespore and prestalk cells is accompanied by expression of cell-type-specific genes. The pattern of cell-type-specific gene expression, as studied by performing in situ RNA hybridization, has been used to define several subsets of prespore and prestalk domains in the finger and to reveal specific markers for these subtypes. Patterns that have been determined with in situ RNA hybridization largely agree with patterns of gene expression that have been studied by using reporter gene fusions and by performing RNA-seq analyses of separated cell types, suggesting that most of the transcriptome dynamics is determined by regulating promoter activity. One of the intriguing properties of Dictyostelium development is the striking similarity between the developmental transcriptomes of D. discoideum and D. purpureum. These two species are as evolutionarily diverged as humans and fish, yet their developmental transcriptomes are nearly 50% identical. It is therefore interesting to explore the conserved mechanisms that regulate these transcriptomes. The D. discoideum genome is surprisingly poor in genes that encode transcription factors. In fact, it has the lowest fraction of genes that encode transcription factors among all known eukaryotic genomes. Some of the transcription factors have been studied in detail, and they appear to have a wide range of roles in development. One of the most recently described transcription factors is gtaC, which is a central regulator of gene expression during aggregation and in subsequent developmental stages. Examination of several transcription factors, including stkA, gtaC, srfA and gbfA, suggests that conservation of sequence and expression patterns between D. discoideum and D. purpureum is tightly correlated with key regulatory functions in development. We are using this guideline in our quest to analyze the transcriptional regulators of the D. discoideum developmental process. In this report, we analyzed the role of gtaG in development. We found that gtaG expression and amino acid sequence are conserved in various Dictystelids and that gtaG activity is essential for prestalk development in a cell-autonomous manner. Transcriptional analysis revealed that gtaG is involved in the regulation of prestalk gene expression and that its activity overlaps with that of another well-characterized transcription factor, Dd-STATa. gtaG appears to be directly involved in terminal prestalk differentiation, and indirectly involved in culmination and sporulation. Both activities appear to be mediated by regulation of cyclic di-GMP and Spore Differentiation Factor-1 production. RESULTS gtaG is evolutionarily conserved and enriched in the prestalk gtaG is an intronless gene that encodes a GATA transcription factor on the Crick strand of D. discoideum Chromosome 1. The open reading frame length is 3018 bp, and the predicted protein contains 1006 amino acid residues with a calculated molecular weight of 110.9 kDa, according to dictyBase. The protein sequence includes a nuclear localization signal and a single conserved CX 2 CX 18 CX 2 C motif that is characteristic of non-vertebrate zinc-finger proteins type IVb, followed by a short basic domain. The predicted protein sequence is highly conserved in D. purpureum, Polysphondylium pallidum and D. fasciculatum. Comparing the gene expression profiles of gtaG in the developmental time courses of D. discoideum and D. purpureum indicates that the two organisms have similar gtaG mRNA abundance profiles. In both organisms, gtaG mRNA is developmentally regulated, with almost no expression at the onset of development and increasing accumulation thereafter. The mRNA is preferentially expressed in prestalk cells in both organisms. This conservation of coding sequences and gene regulation suggests conservation of function. gtaG is expressed in prestalk cells and required for terminal differentiation A restriction-enzyme-mediated integration mutation in the gtaG gene leads to developmental arrest at the slug stage in development on non-nutrient agar. We recapitulated the REMI mutation and studied the phenotype in more detail. We found that development of the gtaG − cells was morphologically indistinguishable from wild-type development up to 12 h. We started to observe slight differences at 16 h, when both strains formed fingers; the mutant fingers were slightly more plump and shorter than the wild-type fingers. The differences became even more pronounced in the following 8 h – the wild type continued to develop into early culminants at 20 h and fruiting bodies, comprising stalks and sori, at 24 h, whereas most of the mutant structures remained at the finger stage. We also observed a few feeble fruiting bodies at 24 h of gtaG − development. These differences were also observed in cells that had been grown on nutrient agar plates in association with bacteria. Both mutant and wild-type strains made plaques in the bacterial lawn, and both developed multicellular structures inside the plaque, but the gtaG − cells formed aberrant structures that resembled slugs with a curly trail behind them, whereas the wild type formed proper fruiting bodies. The absence of slime trails around the gtaG − plaque suggests the mutant is not a ‘slugger’. Fig. 1. The gtaG − gene is required for terminal development. We developed the gtaG − mutant and the wild type on black nitrocellulose filters, and photographed the multicellular structures at 12, 16, 20 and 24 h,... We verified the insertional mutation in gtaG by performing Southern blot and PCR analysis, but we were unsure whether the insertion had generated a null allele. We therefore tested gtaG mRNA expression in the wild type and in the mutant using RNA-seq. Fig. S2D shows that the gtaG mRNA was truncated at the REMI plasmid insertion site, and Fig. S2D and E show that the region encoding the zinc-finger domain was not transcribed during development of the gtaG − mutant cells. Nevertheless, it is possible that the gtaG mRNA upstream of the insertion site has a function that could account for the phenotype. We therefore generated a deletion allele of gtaG by replacing most of the coding domain, including the NLS, with a Blasticidin-S-resistance cassette, such that the region downstream of the replacement was out of frame and not transcribed. We validated the gene replacement by performing Southern blot and PCR analysis. The phenotype conferred by the deletion allele was indistinguishable from the phenotype conferred by the gtaG − REMI insertion – normal development up to the finger stage and developmental arrest thereafter. These results suggest that both alleles cause a loss of gtaG function. Subsequent experiments were performed using the REMI insertion mutation. The developmental defects we observed suggest that both spore and stalk differentiation are compromised in the mutant, but according to RNA-seq analysis, gtaG expression is highly enriched in prestalk cells. In order to validate the prestalk enrichment of gtaG expression, we generated a reporter construct by fusing the gtaG promoter to the Escherichia coli lacZ gene. X-gal staining of wild-type cells that had been transformed with the gtaG/lacZ reporter indicated promoter activity in PST-A cells, at the very tip of the prestalk region of fingers and very weak staining in some of the ALC population after staining for a long time with X-gal. Stained cells were also evident in the elongating stalk tube at early culmination and throughout the stalk at late culmination. These results confirm the observation that gtaG is expressed exclusively in PST-A and stalk cells, suggesting that the sporulation defect in the gtaG − mutant is non-cell-autonomous. To test that possibility directly, we performed mixing experiments between wild-type and gtaG − mutant cells. Development of pure populations confirmed that the gtaG − mutant cells had a sporulation defect – their sporulation efficiency was about one-quarter of that of the wild type. Mixing the gtaG − mutant cells with an equal number of wild-type cells restored the mutant sporulation efficiency to near wild-type levels without compromising the sporulation efficiency of the wild type. These results suggest that gtaG − confers a non-cell-autonomous defect on sporulation. Developmental morphogenesis also appeared to be restored in the mixed population. Transcriptome analysis of gtaG − cells We analyzed the transcriptomes of gtaG − and wild-type cells as a means of comparing their molecular phenotypes. Transcriptome-wide gene expression comparisons can be summarized by multi-dimensional scaling. Briefly, the transcriptome of each strain can be thought of as a single point in a multidimensional space, where each gene defines a dimension and each mRNA abundance value determines the position of the point in that dimension. An MDS plot provides a two-dimensional view that is the best representation of the multidimensional distances between the points. When two points in the graph are close, it means that the transcriptomes of the two samples are similar to one another. Fig. 2 A compares the transcriptional phenotypes of the wild type and the gtaG − mutant. At early stages of development, the transcriptomes of the two strains are nearly indistinguishable – there is almost no distance between the gtaG − and the wild-type points at 0–8 h. It is also noticeable that the 0-h and 4-h samples cluster together, and there is a big distance between them and the 8-h sample, consistent with the finding that the biggest transcriptional transition in D. discoideum development occurs during the transition from single cells to multicellular behavior. The distances between the two strains at 12 and 16 h are also rather small. These findings, which rely on the mRNA abundance of all the genes in the genome, are consistent with the more subjective morphological comparison. Examination of the last two time points reveals that although the wild-type transcriptome continued to progress at 20 h and 24 h, the gtaG − transcriptome remained rather similar to the 16-h transcriptome at those time points. This finding is consistent with the lack of morphological progression beyond the finger stage. These findings suggest that the morphological arrest of gtaG − at the finger stage is the result of attenuation in the overall developmental program of the mutant cells. Fig. 2. Transcriptome differences between gtaG − and the wild type. We developed cells on nitrocellulose filters for 24 h and analyzed samples by performing RNA-seq at 4-h intervals. Multi-dimensional scaling visualization of distances... Comparing the transcriptome of the wild type to that of a transcription-factor-defective mutant is a way of identifying potential transcriptional targets for that factor. We performed differential expression analysis at each time point and found over 3000 genes that exhibited differential expression between the wild type and the gtaG − mutant throughout development. Fig. 2 B shows the number of differentially expressed genes as a function of developmental time, indicating that the maximal level of differential expression is seen at 20 h of development. This result is also consistent with the lack of further developmental progression in the mutant. The 1071 genes whose expression is higher in the wild type than in the mutant at any one of the time points are potential activated targets of GtaG, and the 2009 genes whose expression is lower in the wild type are potential repressed targets. The GO-enrichment analysis of these two gene sets is presented in Table 1. In the induced-gene list, the terms ‘cellulose binding’ and ‘extracellular region’ suggest roles in extracellular matrix production. The terms ‘sporulation’ and ‘cell differentiation’ are consistent with the developmental defects and the non-cell-autonomous nature of the sporulation phenotype, and the term ‘cell morphogenesis’ is consistent with the overall morphological and developmental arrest. In the repressed gene list, the terms ‘gene silencing’, ‘histone deacetylation’ and ‘core TFIIH complex’ are enriched, suggesting that there is a general transcriptional response. Table 1. Selected GO terms enriched in the list of GtaG-dependent genes GtaG is a putative transcription factor that functions in the latter half of development, so we were mainly interested in GtaG-induced genes that were differentially expressed at late stages of development. We also explored the cell-type preference of GtaG-induced genes because gtaG itself is preferentially expressed in prestalk cells. We found that prestalk genes were significantly overrepresented among GtaG-induced genes at 12 and 16 h of development, supporting the idea that GtaG is a prestalk-specific transcription factor. Interestingly, however, prespore genes were more enriched at 20 h of development. Considering the expression levels of gtaG itself and the phenotypes of the gtaG − mutant, we closely looked at early GtaG-induced genes in 12- and 16-h samples. At 12-h and 16-h of development, 41 and 163 genes, respectively, are induced by GtaG, and both sets include two types of gene families that encode hssA/2C/7E-family proteins and uncharacterized 57-amino-acid proteins. The hssA gene, which encodes a 93-amino-acid polypeptide, was originally identified as a high-copy suppressor of the Dd-STATa mutant. However, its expression is independent of Dd-STATa and dependent on GbfA. Dd-STATa was overexpressed after 12 h of development in the gtaG − mutant. Members of the 57-amino-acid protein family are highly similar to each other, most of the genes encoding these proteins are located in a cluster on Chromosome 4 and the expression of some is also GbfA-dependent. Many genes of this family are highly expressed during development, and most of them are predominantly expressed in prestalk cells. In the gtaG − mutant, hssA was underexpressed after 12 h of development, and some of the 57-amino-acid-family genes, including DDB_G0283421 and DDB_G0286193, exhibited similar expression patterns. The functions of these gene families are unknown, but their dependence on GtaG suggests a link between GtaG, GbfA and Dd-STATa. Two of the interesting differentially expressed genes, ecmF and dgcA, were chosen for additional analysis from the induced-gene list. gtaG is required for ecmF expression ecmF encodes a putative cellulose-binding extracellular matrix protein. It has been characterized as a cell-type-specific marker gene and a putative transcriptional target of Dd-STATa, but its function is unknown because an ecmF -knockout mutation has no obvious phenotype. Our RNA-seq data showed that ecmF mRNA accumulates during late development, peaking at 20 h in the wild type, whereas it was barely detectable in the gtaG − mutant. Furthermore, ecmF mRNA accumulates preferentially in PST-A cells, similar to gtaG, so it might be a direct target of the GtaG transcription factor activity. To test that possibility, we generated a reporter construct in which the ecmF promoter was fused to the E. coli β-galactosidase gene, and transformed it into D. discoideum cells. As a control, we chose ecmA because it did not exhibit differential expression between the wild type and the gtaG − mutant in the RNA-seq data. In addition, the ecmA/lacZ reporter labels most of the prestalk cells. We found that ecmF/lacZ activity in the wild type was specific to PST-A cells at the finger stage, and that it localized to the elongating stalk tube at early culmination and to the anterior part of the stalk at late culmination, nearly identical to the published RNA in situ hybridization pattern of ecmF expression. This finding suggests that the reporter construct faithfully represents the promoter activity. In the gtaG − background, ecmF/lacZ expression was undetectable by performing X-gal staining in gtaG − fingers. In rare cases, where aberrant culmination took place, we observed light staining at the very end of the tips, suggesting that GtaG is required for proper ecmF expression, especially in the elongating stalk tube and stalk cells at culmination. In the control experiments, we found no obvious difference between the wild type and the mutant regarding the spatial pattern of ecmA/lacZ expression and ecm0/lacZ expression, suggesting that the gtaG − mutation does not have a wholesale effect on the function of prestalk cells, PST-A cells, PST-O cells and some of the ALCs. To quantify these findings, we measured the catalytic activity of β-galactosidase in the reporter strains. The results shown in Fig. 3 J support the spatial information – ecmF expression is greatly dependent on gtaG whereas ecmA expression is independent. Moreover, we also examined the effect of GtaG function on PST-B cells. In the RNA-seq data, the PST-B marker gene ecmB was expressed normally until 16 h of development in the gtaG − mutant, but it was significantly underexpressed at later time points. X-gal staining fingers that were developing at 16 h also showed no obvious difference between the wild type and the mutant regarding the spatial pattern of ecmB/lacZ expression. Fig. 3. The gtaG − gene is required for PST-A cell differentiation. We obtained data from the RNA-seq experiments in Fig. 2 and plotted the standardized mRNA abundance of ecmF, ecmA and ecmB... Some of the gtaG − phenotypes are non-cell-autonomous, but if GtaG were indeed a direct regulator of ecmF expression, then the ecmF expression phenotype should be cell-autonomous. To test that possibility, we made chimerae in which gtaG − mutant cells carrying ecmF / lacZ were mixed with unlabeled AX4 or gtaG − mutant cells and measured the spatial pattern and level of β-galactosidase activity. We found that the regulation of ecmF / lacZ activity by gtaG was cell-autonomous. The gtaG − mutant exhibited similar levels of X-gal staining in the PST-A region in either chimerae with unlabeled AX4 cells or unlabeled gtaG − mutant cells at 21 h of development, indicating that ecmF expression in the gtaG − mutant is unaffected by the neighboring wild-type cells. In the control chimerae between unlabeled gtaG − and labeled AX4 cells, AX4 cells exhibited strong X-gal staining in the PST-A region and in the descending stalk tube, indicating that the ecmF expression phenotype is indeed cell-autonomous. Further support for that conclusion is provided in Fig. 4 D, where quantitative analysis of β-galactosidase activity in the three types of chimera shows that each chimera exhibited about half the activity of the respective pure populations, and that gtaG − cells carrying ecmF / lacZ expressed low levels of ecmF / lacZ regardless of the chimeric partner genotype. These results suggest that GtaG acts as a direct regulator of the ecmF promoter, but it is clear that other regulators are also involved because ecmF expression is not completely abolished in the absence of GtaG. Fig. 4. The PST-A defect of gtaG − is cell-autonomous. We used wild-type and gtaG − strains, either unlabeled or labeled with the PST-A marker ecmF /lacZ, and made chimerae of one labeled strain with one unlabeled strain. We developed... Relationships between gtaG and culmination-signaling molecules dgcA encodes diguanylate cyclase, an enzyme that synthesizes c-di-GMP. The dgcA promoter is active in prestalk cells, and the phenotype of the dgcA − mutant is similar to that of the gtaG − mutant. Because the differential expression analysis revealed that dgcA expression at 20 h of development was slightly but significantly reduced in the gtaG − mutant, we wanted to test the functional relationship between the two genes, even though the expression pattern of dgcA suggests that gtaG is not a major regulator of dgcA expression throughout development. Testing the sporulation efficiency of the relevant mutants indicated that both gtaG − and dgcA − mutants were severely defective in sporulation when they developed in pure populations, and mixing experiments with the wild type showed that these defects are non-cell-autonomous, albeit to different extents. 5 A). Mixing the two mutants together did not alleviate the sporulation defects in either mutant, suggesting that the non-cell-autonomous sporulation defects of two mutants might have a common molecular basis because just the addition of c-di-GMP can restore dgcA − mutant deficiency. The simplest explanation is that gtaG − cells fail to sporulate because they are defective in c-di-GMP production. To test that possibility, we added c-di-GMP to developing fingers of gtaG − cells and measured their ability to sporulate. Fig. 5 B shows that addition of c-di-GMP at the finger stage restored gtaG − sporulation efficiency in a concentration-dependent manner, with 2 mM c-di-GMP resulting in sporulation levels that were indistinguishable from those of the wild type. Developmental morphogenesis was also rescued by c-di-GMP – we developed gtaG − cells to the finger stage and added buffer or 1 mM c-di-GMP. After 12 h, the buffer control sample was still at the finger stage, whereas many of the structures that had been treated with c-di-GMP developed into fruiting bodies. The restored fruiting bodies seemed to fall down easily, suggesting some other factor is required for proper stalk cell differentiation. These results suggest a causal relationship between GtaG activity, DgcA activity and c-di-GMP production. Fig. 5. c-di-GMP can rescue the culmination defect of gtaG −. We developed wild-type and mutant cells in chimerae with unlabeled dgcA − cells, which are defective... The secreted peptides signals SDF-1 and SDF-2 are also components of the culmination-signaling pathway. To study the GtaG pathway further, we tested the gtaG − cells in mixing experiments with tagB − cells, which cannot process the precursor of SDF-1, and acbA − cells, which cannot produce the precursor of SDF-2. Mixing of gtaG − cells with acbA − cells resulted in sporulation of both strains, whereas mixing of gtaG − cells with tagB − cells did not restore the sporulation of either strain. These results suggest that the gtaG − mutant strain is able to release SDF-2 but that its SDF-1 signaling pathway is compromised. We also performed mixing experiments with dstA − cells, which is the Dd-STATa-null mutant. As expected, the dstA − strain did not synergize with the gtaG − strain, suggesting that GtaG and Dd-STATa have overlapping functions in terminal differentiation. This result is consistent with the fact that GtaG shares some of targets of Dd-STATa. Fig. 6. Chimerae between gtaG − cells and other developmental mutants. We plotted the standardized mRNA abundance of the following genes as a function of developmental time : acbA, tagB and dstA, as indicated above each profile.... Fig. 7. Expression profiles of genes that are related to culmination. We plotted the standardized mRNA abundance of the following genes as a function of developmental time : acgA, pkaR, pkaC, aslA-1, ecmJ, hssA, stlA, crlA, gpaA,... DISCUSSION The mutant phenotypes indicate that gtaG is essential for terminal differentiation in D. discoideum. Morphologically, the gtaG − mutant fails to progress beyond the finger stage of development, and fruiting body formation is greatly compromised. The molecular phenotypes, including RNA-seq and ecmF/lacZ reporter expression, support this conclusion and extend it by showing that most of the developmental transcriptional program is halted after the finger stage. The observations that spore formation is not completely abolished in the mutant and that gtaG is a prestalk-specific gene suggest that the gtaG − phenotype is cell-autonomous in prestalk cells and non-cell-autonomous in prespore cells. The mixing experiments confirmed that idea – the ecmF expression phenotype is cell-autonomous and the sporulation defect is not. Moreover, the inability of the gtaG − mutant to synergize with the dgcA − or tagB − mutants and the finding that adding exogenous c-di-GMP rescues gtaG − sporulation suggest that the sporulation defect in the gtaG − mutant is due to defective signaling from prestalk cells to prespore cells during culmination. The role of prestalk cells in signaling to prespore cells during culmination is well documented, because inactivation of prestalk cell differentiation by various means results in complete loss of sporulation that can be reversed by mixing with wild-type cells. Signaling is effected through an intricate system that coordinates culmination and terminal differentiation, involving secretion of the polyketide 4-methyl-5-pentylbenzene-1,3 diol that is produced by StlA and the small peptide SDF-1 that is processed by TagB. In addition, c-di-GMP is a stalk-inducing morphogen that is also essential for spore formation in a non-cell-autonomous way, although the direct function of c-di-GMP in sporulation is unclear. Our experiments cannot precisely determine which prestalk-to-prespore signal is compromised in the gtaG − mutant, but they suggest that the c-di-GMP and SDF-1 signaling pathways are disrupted. These findings are consistent with the observation that expression of the c-di-GMP synthetic gene dgcA is compromised in the gtaG − mutant. GtaG might regulate some other factors that control the proper amount or timing of c-di-GMP production. Our finding that addition of c-di-GMP largely rescued the gtaG − culmination and sporulation defects despite the deficiency of SDF-1 signaling also raises a possibility of crosstalk between the c-di-GMP and SDF-1 signaling pathways. In addition, the fragility of the stalks in the fruiting bodies restored by c-di-GMP suggests that GtaG has both cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous functions in stalk differentiation. We have not tested whether GtaG is indeed a transcription factor, but its sequence features and the mutant phenotype support that possibility, and there is no evidence against it. GtaG is likely to be one of the terminal nodes in a transcriptional regulatory network that functions in the specification and differentiation of prestalk cells. gtaG mRNA accumulates preferentially in PST-A cells, and the gtaG promoter is active almost exclusively in these cells, suggesting that it is subject to tight regulation in the PST-A region. GtaG does not seem to regulate its own expression because the gtaG promoter is active in the gtaG − mutant, as indicated by the RNA-seq experiments. Therefore, at least one other transcription factor must be at play in specifying this expression pattern. Several lines of evidence suggest that Dd-STATa is involved. First, many Dd-STATa-dependent transcripts, including ecmF, ecmJ and aslA, are gtaG -dependent. Second, gtaG is essential for the expression of several genetic suppressors of the Dd-STATa-defective phenotype, including some members of the hssA/7E/2C family. Third, dstA − cells fail to synergize with gtaG − cells in mixing experiments. However, the relationship between GtaG and Dd-STATa might not be simple. Dd-STATa was overexpressed after 12 h of development in the gtaG − mutant, but the Dd-STATa-dependent transcript ecmF is probably directly and positively regulated by GtaG. Another target gene, ecmB, is expressed normally in the gtaG − fingers, even though Dd-STATa directly represses ecmB expression in PST-A cells. The precise gene-regulatory networks that control culmination are therefore not quite clear yet. Some of the genes whose expression depends on gtaG and on Dd-STATa encode cellulose-binding proteins, and some of these proteins have been identified as extracellular matrix components of the slug sheath and the stalk. Interestingly, Loomis has proposed that culmination is caused by changes in sheath properties at the tip of the slug. The specific expression of gtaG and its downstream genes at the tip of the slug suggests that gtaG could participate in terminal differentiation by regulating culmination through regulation of sheath properties. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture, strain maintenance and development We maintained D. discoideum cells at 22°C in HL5 liquid medium with the necessary supplements as indicated in Table S3. To induce development, we collected mid-log growing cells and washed them twice in 20 mM potassium phosphate buffer. We deposited 1.8×10 6 cells/cm 2 on nitrocellulose filters on top of a PDF-buffer-soaked paper pad or KK2 agar plate and incubated them at 22°C for development. PDF buffer was composed of 20.1 mM KCl, 5.3 mM MgCl 2, 9.2 mM K 2 HPO 4, 13.2 mM KH 2 PO 4 and 1 mM CaCl 2. Plasmid construction and mutant generation We generated the gtaG insertion mutation by homologous recombination using the plasmid rescued from BCM REMI insertional mutant V10633. To knock gtaG out, we first amplified the entire gtaG ORF by performing PCR using the following primer set: kpn I-gtaG_F: 5′-GGGGTACCATGAAATTATATTCTATTGACTTTCC-3′ and kpn I-gtaG_R: 5′-GGGGTACCATTTAAAGTATTTCTTGTATTTTCAGG-3′ and cloned the DNA fragment into pCR™-Blunt II-TOPO. Then, we digested with Mfe I restriction endonuclease to delete the region between base pairs 785 and 2165 of the gtaG ORF and ligated with a BSR-cassette flanked by Eco RI sites. We linearized the plasmid with Kpn I restriction endonuclease and transformed it into AX4 cells. We selected the transformants with 10 µg/ml Blasticidin S and verified the homologous recombination mutants by performing Southern blot analysis and by PCR across the homologous recombination junctions using genomic DNA from the cloned strains. To generate LacZ reporter constructs, we used the Gateway ® cloning system. We cloned the upstream region of gtaG from −753 to +36, and ecmF from −677 to +33 in the pENTR™ Directional TOPO vector and performed LR recombination with pPT134. We transformed these plasmids, in addition to pEcmA-Gal, pEcmO-Gal and pEcmB-Gal, into AX4 or gtaG − cells and selected for resistance to 10 µg/ml G418. RNA-seq We collected samples at 4-h intervals during development in two independent replicates, prepared total RNA using Trizol and performed poly selection twice, as described previously. We prepared multiplexed cDNA libraries and performed RNA-seq using the Illumina sequencing platform as described previously. Transcriptome analyses We mapped the resulting sequences to the Dictyostelium reference genome and obtained mRNA abundance values for each gene in the genome, as described previously. The data were deposited in Gene Expression Omnibus. We visualized relative distances between the wild-type and gtaG − transcriptomes using classic multi-dimensional scaling. All biological replicates were very similar to one another. We performed differential expression analyses, as described previously with minor modifications. Using custom R scripts, we compared the transcriptomes between wild-type and gtaG − strains at each developmental time point and considered genes with false discovery rates lower than 0.01 and likelihoods greater than 0.9 as differentially expressed genes. We visualized the standardized mRNA abundance of genes that were differentially expressed at any time point during development as a heat map. For gene ontology enrichment analyses on all gene sets, we used custom R scripts using the GO annotation files for D. discoideum from dictyBase. We also calculated the fold change in enrichment for cell-type-enriched genes, hssA/2C/7E-family genes and 57-amino-acid-family genes, which are not annotated as gene ontology terms, in the same way as in the gene ontology enrichment analyses. Briefly, the fold enrichment was calculated as the sample frequency, which is the proportion of the defined genes in the input list, and was compared to the background frequency, which is the proportion of the defined genes in the whole genome. We used the Fisher's exact test to obtain P -values. Mixing experiments and flow cytometry We performed mixing experiments, as described previously with minor modifications. After collecting each strain, we adjusted each cell suspension to a density of 1×10 8 cells/ml in PDF buffer. We mixed two strains in equal proportions, deposited 1.8×10 6 cells/cm 2 on a nitrocellulose filter and incubated them at 22°C for development. After 48 h, we collected whole cells in detergent solutions and measured the proportion of fluorescent and non-fluorescent spores within each mix by using the Attune Acoustic Focusing Cytometer. We also counted the spores by hand by using phase microscopy and calculated total spore numbers in each sample. ONPG assay We harvested developing cells, washed them in Z buffer and lysed them in Z buffer containing 1% Triton X-100. After removal of cell debris by centrifugation, we measured and calculated β-galactosidase enzyme activity using the ONPG assay, as described previously. Briefly, we incubated 20 µl of the cell extract with 100 µl of ONPG solution at room temperature, terminated the reaction by adding 80 µl of 1 M Na 2 CO 3 and monitored enzyme activity by performing spectrophotometry at 420 nm. Units of β-galactosidase enzyme activity were standardized by measuring the protein abundance, the reaction time and lacZ copy number. X-gal staining We performed X-gal staining to visualize β-galactosidase activity in whole mounts, as described previously with minor modifications. We fixed developing cells with 4% paraformaldehyde in KK2 buffer for 10 min and then permeabilized them with 0.1% NP-40 in Z buffer for 20 min. After washing once with Z buffer, we added X-gal staining solution, waited for the blue color to develop, washed with Z buffer and counterstained with eosin Y. Induction of sporulation with c-di-GMP We spotted 10-µl droplets of cells at a density of 1×10 8 cells/ml on black nitrocellulose filters and incubated them at 22°C until the finger stage. We added 10-µl droplets of c-di-GMP on top of the multicellular structures and continued incubation for another 12 h. We collected spores by harvesting the entire filter, counted the spores with phase microscopy and calculated sporulation efficiency as the proportion of cells that became spores. We also performed c-di-GMP addition experiments on KK2 agar plates and photographed the developing cells before addition and after 12 h of incubation with c-di-GMP. Acknowledgements We thank M. Toplak, J. Kokošar, M. Stajdohar and B. Zupan from the University of Ljubljana for assistance with the RNA-seq data management and computational support; J. M. Sederstrom for expert assistance with cytometry and cell sorting; and A. Kuspa for useful suggestions and discussions. We thank Christopher Thompson for providing a plasmid containing the BSR-cassette with added EcoR I sites. We are grateful to the Dicty stock center for maintaining and providing vectors and strains. Footnotes Competing interests The authors declare no competing or financial interests. Author contributions M.K.-K. and G.S. conceived and designed the experiments. M.K.-K. performed the experiments and M.K.-K. and B.S. analyzed the data. M.K.-K. and G.S. prepared the manuscript and all authors contributed to the discussion. Funding This work was supported by grants from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development – ‘the Dictyostelium Functional Genomics Program Project Grant’ ; and by the Cytometry and Cell Sorting Core at Baylor College of Medicine with funding from the National Institutes of Health. Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months. Data availability The relevant data sets have been deposited under the accession number } GSE70558 and can be accessed at. Supplementary information Supplementary information available online at Article information J Cell Sci. 2016 Apr 15; 129: 1722–1733. doi: 10.1242/jcs.181545 PMCID: PMC4852770 PMID: 26962009 Mariko Katoh-Kurasawa, * Balaji Santhanam, and Gad Shaulsky * Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA * Authors for correspondence Received 2015 Oct 1; Accepted 2016 Feb 20. Copyright © 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd Articles from Journal of Cell Science are provided here courtesy of Company of Biologists 