 We present the first in silico model of the weak binding actomyosin in the initial powerstroke state, representing the actin binding-induced major structural changes in myosin. First, we docked an actin trimer to prepowerstroke myosin then relaxed the complex by a 100-ns long unrestrained molecular dynamics. In the first few nanoseconds, actin binding induced an extra primed myosin state, i.e. the further priming of the myosin lever by 18° coupled to a further closure of switch 2 loop. We demonstrated that actin induces the extra primed state of myosin specifically through the actin N terminus-activation loop interaction. The applied in silico methodology was validated by forming rigor structures that perfectly fitted into an experimentally determined EM map of the rigor actomyosin. Our results unveiled the role of actin in the powerstroke by presenting that actin moves the myosin lever to the extra primed state that leads to the effective lever swing. Keywords: Actin, Enzyme Kinetics, Enzyme Mechanism, Molecular Dynamics, Myosin, Protein Structure, Enzyme Cycle, Powerstroke, Structural Model Introduction Myosin is a ubiquitous molecular motor that generates force and moves along the actin filament. However, actin is not only a passive track for myosin but also its allosteric activator. The steady-state ATPase activity of myosin is accelerated by several orders of magnitude due to its cyclic interactions with actin. The mechanically effective step of the actomyosin cycle is the powerstroke. Three enzymatic events must be harmonized to result in the powerstroke: actin rebinding, the up-to-down lever swing, and actin-binding cleft closure of the myosin head leading to strong actin binding. Actin rebinding to the up-lever M·ADP·P i 4 state is weak, thermodynamically unfavorable, however, mechanistically the resulting weak actomyosin complex represents a key enzymatic state, i.e. the primed prepowerstroke state of the motor system. Actin must bind to the lever-up state of myosin to produce a mechanically effective, up-to-down lever swing, otherwise a non-productive, futile cycle occurs. Although actin binding to M·ADP·P i is thermodynamically unfavorable, a kinetic pathway selection mechanism channels the cycle into the effective route by the actin-driven acceleration of the rate-limiting lever swing. In other words, in the absence of actin the rate-limiting step is the up-to-down lever swing, which is accelerated by actin, resulting in a large flux toward the effective lever swing pathway. Recently, we found that the activation loop located in the upper part of the relay region of myosin binds to the N-terminal segment of actin. This actomyosin interaction specifically accelerates the rate of the up-to-down lever swing of M·ADP·P i, thus it is responsible for maintaining the high ratio of flux of the effective versus futile lever swing pathways. Consequently, mutations that weaken the interaction between actin and the activation loop reduce the efficiency of the actomyosin system. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanism of the actin-induced acceleration of the lever swing is still unrevealed. This leads us to the fundamental question: what are the conformational rearrangements that occur upon actin binding to the up-lever, prepowerstroke state of myosin? FIGURE 1. Structural changes in myosin during its chemomechanical cycle. The initial state of the powerstroke is the weak actomyosin·ADP·P i complex with an up position of the lever. The magnitudes of... The answer to this question is not easily accessible, as there are no crystal structures of the actomyosin complex. Atomic structural models of the rigor actomyosin complex have been presented based on high resolution electron microscopy. Recently, ATP-induced actin dissociation from myosin has been modeled by in silico simulations. To understand the mechanism of the powerstroke, there is a great demand to solve the initial state of the powerstroke, i.e. the weak A·M·ADP·P i up-lever state complex. Determination of this weak binding actomyosin complex is experimentally challenging due to its low proportion and very short lifetime in equilibrium and steady-state systems, respectively. Thus, despite serious efforts, no high resolution EM-based structure is available of any weak actin-binding actomyosin complex. Therefore, we have determined the atomic model of the weak actomyosin, up-lever complex by in silico techniques using protein-protein docking and long time molecular dynamics simulation. For validation of the simulated weak actomyosin structures, rigor actomyosin complexes were also resolved by the same methods and compared with experimentally determined rigor structures. We found that upon actin binding, the closed switch 2 loop of prepowerstroke myosin becomes more closed, which conformational rearrangement is coupled to an 18 degrees further up movement of the up positioned lever, resulting in an “extra primed” state of myosin. We also demonstrate the specific role of the activation loop in the communication pathway between the actin-binding site, the nucleotide-binding pocket, and the converter domain. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Protein Structures Preparation The Dictyostelium discoideum myosin 2 motor domain up-lever state was extended with the missing amino acids based on the structure by Jon Kull 5. Missing residues of the squid S1 apo state were completed with Modeler 9.2. Coordinates of all atoms of the Dictyostelium myosin 2 motor domain apo state are well defined. Vanadate in the nucleotide-binding pocket of PDB 1VOM was replaced by P i. We calculated the partial charges and coordinates using the AMBER force field. The ADP parameters applied in the AMBER force field were provided by Meagher et al.. Restrained electrostatic potential charges of H 2 PO 3 − were calculated by Gaussian 03 and ANTECHAMBER. The calculations were carried out for a set of structural conformations of the H 2 PO 3 − group by covering the accessible space in the system. The density functional algorithm with the B3LYP exchange and the 6–312+g basis set were selected for calculation in Gaussian 03. The resulting charges were averaged over all of the conformations. All crystal waters were stripped except for two in the nucleotide binding pocket of PDB 1VOM, which stabilize the position of ADP and P i through interactions with the magnesium ion. The missing N terminus of the actin trimer was sequentially extended and capped with acetylate preceding the molecular minimization. Protein-Protein Docking After a 20-ns long molecular dynamic relaxation of the prepared crystal structures, the averaged myosin structures were docked to the refined actin trimer using the HADDOCK program, resulting in dock A·M up, dock A·M rigor, Dd, and dock A·M rigor,sq. Intermolecular restraint residues for docking were defined by the experimentally determined actomyosin interface, regarded as flexible segments and divided into active and passive amino acids for protein-protein docking. Active residues take part in actomyosin binding and passive residues are the neighboring residues of active residues. Overall, six active and 10 passive residues were selected from myosin, five active and five passive residues were selected from actin. Ambiguous interaction restraints identified from these residues was used to drive the docking process, with a maximum effective distance of 8.0 Å, which was available for the active-active and active-passive, but not for the passive-passive residues. The best 200 of 1000 refined complexes were obtained from rigid body energy minimization and then submitted to the semi-rigid simulated annealing process. These structures were exposed to a 12-Å shell of TIP3P water solvent for molecular dynamic simulations with a cutoff value of 5 Å. The best 100 complexes were selected according to the evaluation score of their average interaction energies and buried surface area. The HADDOCK score, as the main criteria for selection, was calculated on the basis of the Equation 1, where E VWD is the Van der Waals, E ELEC is the electrostatic, E AIR is the ambiguous interaction restraint, and E DESO is the desolvation energy. Finally, optimal candidates with the lowest HADDOCK scores were collected into subsets with more than 10 structures by a backbone-based root mean square deviation clustering with a cut-off value of 7.5 Å. All parameters and processes were carried out through the HADDOCK online service. Molecular Dynamic Simulations The module of sander in molecular dynamics package AMBER11 was used for molecular dynamics simulations. The prepared crystal structures and the refined actin trimer before docking were relaxed for 20 ns. After docking, the actomyosin structures were also relaxed by a 100-ns long molecular dynamics, resulting in rel A·M up, rel A·M rigor, Dd, and rel A·M rigor,sq. After introducing mutations into the rel A·M up complex, the structures were relaxed for the same length of time leading to rel A·M up,R520Q, rel A·M up,R562Q, and rel A·M up,K622Q/K623Q complexes. All structures were neutralized by adding a discrete number of Na + in the most appropriate electronegative areas around proteins. Complexes were then solvated in a truncated octahedron box of TIP3P water with a 12-Å cut-off value along each dimension. Long-range electrostatic interactions were treated by particle-mesh Ewald method in periodic boundary conditions. By a 1000 steps of the steepest descent and conjugate gradient energy minimization, the compact system was slowly heated up to 300 K and equilibrated at constant temperature for 20 ns and then at constant pressure for 80 ns. The Berendsen coupling algorithm was used for temperature control. The SHAKE algorithm was applied for constraints on covalent bonds and all hydrogen atoms. Binding Free Energy Calculation Binding free energies of actomyosin complexes from 2500 snapshots of the last 60 ns of the MD simulations were calculated by the molecular mechanic Poisson-Boltzmann surface area method. The pbsa module in AMBER was used to evaluate the polar contribution to the solvation free energy. The grid spacing of the cubic lattice was set at 2 Å, and the dielectric constant values for the interior and exterior of the system were 1 and 80. The non-polar contribution to the solvation free energy was calculated from the solvent-accessible surface area. The surface tension γ and the offset β were set to 0.00542 kcal mol −1 Å −1 and 0.92 kcal mol −1, respectively. The contribution of entropy based on ligand receptor association was performed with normal-mode analysis. 1000 snapshots were collected and submitted to molecular minimization with a distance-dependent dielectric constant, E = 4r. The end of convergence was not achieved until the root mean square deviations of the gradient vector were less than 1 × 10 −4 kcal mol −1 Å −1. Residues close to the binding surface with a distance less than 20 Å were acquired to estimate the contribution of entropy. RESULTS After completing the actin trimer and the different myosin 2 structures with their missing residues, they were relaxed by molecular dynamics and docked to each other using the HADDOCK program. The docked structural models and the uncomplexed actin and myosin structures were placed into explicit water boxes and relaxed by a 100-ns long molecular dynamics. To validate the structural simulation by molecular dynamics, we compared the rigor structures with the rigor actomyosin model created using the electron microscopy density map. The comparison validated the applied in silico procedures as the non-directed protein-protein docking and molecular dynamics simulations resulted in a highly similar structure to the experimentally determined one. During the molecular dynamic relaxation, actin induced the closure of the actin-binding cleft of dock A·M rigor, Dd and dock A·M rigor,sq resulting in similarly closed clefts as in EM A·M rigor,ch. Actin-binding clefts of the non-actin-bound M apo states did not change upon relaxation. Furthermore, we found that the orientation of myosin relative to the actin filament in dock A·M rigor, Dd and dock A·M rigor,sq did not match well with EM A·M rigor,ch, whereas in the first 10 ns of the molecular dynamics, myosin oriented to the experimentally determined position of EM A·M rigor,ch. A further validation of the applied in silico method is that the difference of the binding free energy between the weak and strong actomyosin complexes in the simulated and experimentally determined values do not differ significantly. TABLE 1 The applied nomenclature of myosin and actomyosin structures and the occupancy of their nucleotide-binding sites FIGURE 2. The structure of the docked and relaxed rigor actomyosin complexes. Actomyosin structures are fitted into the electron density map of EM A·M rigor,ch with their actin trimers as best fits for the map. Myosin... TABLE 2 Structural states of the actin-binding cleft of myosin and actomyosin complexes TABLE 3 Weak and strong binding of the relaxed actomyosin complexes The binding surface areas of myosin increased upon molecular dynamics in all docked actomyosin complexes. All actomyosin interactions are listed in Table 4. The comparison of the rel A·M up and rel A·M rigor, Dd /sq structures demonstrates that the actin-binding surface area of myosin expands during the weak to strong actin-binding transition due to the increasing contribution of loop 4 and cardiomyopathy loop in actin binding. These results are in accordance with the interactions depicted by the electron micrography-based actomyosin structure, EM A·M rigor,ch. TABLE 4 Interactions of actomyosin complexes FIGURE 3. The actin-binding interface of myosin in its different actin-binding states. A, the actin-binding myosin interface of the relaxed actomyosin complexes are shown as a colored surface representation of myosin. Loop 3, H-loop and the N-terminal segment of actin. Recently we described that the activation loop of myosin plays a key role in actin activation of the ATPase activity of myosin. In all relaxed states Arg 520 located in the activation loop interacts with the negatively charged N-terminal segment of actin. This interaction was not established in the protein-protein docking procedures, whereas it was formed spontaneously in the first few nanoseconds of the molecular dynamics relaxations. In the EM A·M rigor,ch model, this interaction was not described because the N-terminal region of actin was missing from the actin crystal structure used for creating the model. In the weak actin-binding state, conformation of the activation loop is different from that of the rigors. Arg 520 in rel A·M up has a salt bridge with Asp 1 of actin, whereas in rel A·M rigor it forms a more extended salt bridge cluster with Asp 3 and Glu 4. These interactions are stable as their occurrence is 95% throughout the whole molecular dynamics. Loop 2 goes through a large conformational change during the weak to strong actin-binding transition. In both states, there is a salt bridge between myosin Lys 622 and actin Asp 25, whereas the C-terminal part of loop 2 forms a salt bridge with the actin N-terminal peptide in rigor. The helix-loop-helix element, structurally coupled to the activation loop, has stronger hydrophobic interactions with residues 143–147 of actin in rigor compared with the weak binding state. These results are in agreement with previous indications that hydrophobic interactions create expanding networks of the actin-myosin interface during the weak to strong actin-binding transition. Furthermore, a conformational rearrangement of the interaction network occurs between the activation loop and the actin N-terminal region upon the up-to-down lever movement and the weak to strong actin-binding transition, which indicates that actin may directly affect the relay/converter/lever movement through their structural coupling to the activation loop. Upon molecular dynamics of dock A·M up, significant conformational relaxations occurred in the relay/converter and the nucleotide-binding region. All conformational relaxations were completed in the first 10 ns and remained stable in the following 90 ns of the simulations. The most striking effect induced by actin binding was an 18° further up movement of the myosin lever. The further up-lever movement occurred within 5 ns of the relaxation and remained stable in the following 95 ns. To investigate the role of the activation loop-actin interaction in this effect, Arg 520 of rel A·M up was mutated in silico to Gln. This mutation interrupts the salt bridge interaction between the activation loop and the actin N-terminal region. The mutated construct was relaxed by molecular dynamics for 100 ns. In the first 5 ns the lever moved back to the same up position as that the actin detached myosin. This specific effect on the extra priming caused by the activation loop-actin interaction is supported by the fact that mutations in other actin-binding regions caused only slight ”back“ relaxations and the lever remained mainly in the further up position. TABLE 5 Converter/lever and switch 2 positions of prepowerstroke myosin and weak binding actomyosin complexes upon molecular dynamics FIGURE 4. The extra primed state of the weak binding actomyosin complex. A, after docking and relaxation of myosin and actin, the rel A·M up possesses a further up-lever and a further closed switch 2 compared with rel M up. As a result, the C-terminal part of the switch 2 loop in rel A·M up possesses a further closed position. Similarly to the lever relaxation, when Arg 520 of the activation loop was mutated to Gln, the switch 2 loop relaxed to the same closed position as that of the actin detached, closed conformation, whereas in loop 3 and loop 2 mutants switch 2 remained in the further closed position without any back relaxations. The effect of mutation in the activation loop indicates that the activation loop has a key role in the extra priming of myosin. The structural changes in myosin caused by actin binding are transmitted from the activation loop to the nucleotide binding pocket and relay region through the wedge loop. Upon actin binding, the wedge loop forms interactions with the lower 50-kDa helix-loop-helix region, the relay helix, and the C-terminal region of switch 2, thereby structurally connecting these regions in the weak actin-binding state. This interconnection between the upper relay and switch 2 does not exist in the rigor state and in the absence of actin. When a salt bridge is formed between Asp 1 of actin and Arg 520 of the activation loop in the weak actomyosin state, a conformational change is induced in the lower 50-kDa domain. Leu 529 of the upper relay is positioned to form a hydrophobic cluster with Trp 584 of the wedge loop and Phe 466 of the relay. The repositioned Glu 580 side chain of the wedge loop creates a salt bridge interaction with Lys 462 of switch 2. This newly formed interaction pulls switch 2 to its further closed position. The relay helix is reoriented and stabilized, resulting in the further up position of the lever by the Leu 529 -Trp 584 -Phe 466 hydrophobic cluster and the Glu 580 -Lys 462 salt bridge. This reorientation of switch 2 and the relay does not occur in the activation loop mutant, whereas they remain in the same orientation in loop 3 and loop 2 mutants. These results indicate that the activation loop is a specific sensor of actin binding and is responsible for transferring the information of actin binding to the nucleotide binding pocket and the relay/converter region. FIGURE 5. Transmission of structural changes from actin to the relay/converter and nucleotide binding pocket. In the rel M up structure, β-sheet, switch 2, and the relay are not connected through the wedge loop to the upper relay... We analyzed changes of the motional correlations of the functional regions of myosin upon actin binding. Positive motional correlation between the two regions is defined as their coupled dynamics is high. In the absence of actin the dynamics of switch 2 is weekly coupled to other functional regions of myosin. The dynamic coupling between switch 2 and the relay is highly increased in the weakly and strongly actin-bound states. The dynamic coupling becomes very high between switch 2 and the upper relay, including the activation loop, the relay helix, and the wedge loop. When the salt bridge interaction between the activation loop and actin was interrupted by the R520Q mutation, the motional correlations between these regions decreased to the same level as that of the actin detached states. Mutations in loops 3 and 2 did not decrease the motional correlation of switch 2 to the level of the actin detached states. These effects picture the same communication pathways found by the analysis of the structural rearrangements described above. FIGURE 6. Motional correlations of switch 2 with different structural regions of the myosin motor domain. Motional correlations of switch 2 with different regions of myosin in the relaxed myosin and actomyosin structures are quantitatively represented by the red-white... DISCUSSION Recently, the mechanism of the powerstroke has been proposed on the basis of crystal structures and pseudoatomic cryo-EM models. However, neither the starting nor the end states of the powerstroke structures of actomyosin are available. Generally, the actin detached, up-lever myosin head complexed with an ADP·P i analog is discussed as the starting state of the powerstroke and additionally the formation of the ADP·P i up-lever state has been modeled recently. However, one may assume that an actin-detached state is not the initial state of the powerstroke, because an effective powerstroke must start in an actin-attached state. Also, the electron micrograph rigor structures cannot be considered as part of the powerstroke, because the powerstroke ends in a nucleotide-bound state. The actin-induced conformational changes in the M up ·ADP·P i state were speculated based on comparison of the rigor cryo-EM model and the actin-detached M up ·ADP·VO 4 crystal structures. Actin-binding cleft closure was considered to be the major actin-induced conformational change that was supposed to initiate rearrangements in the nucleotide binding pocket leading to the powerstroke. To overcome the problem of the missing structure of the initial state of the actomyosin prepowerstroke, in this study we constructed the atomic model of the weak actin-binding state. We demonstrate that the lower 50-kDa subdomain, including loop 3, H-loop, and the activation loop, is the major contributor for the initial, weak actin binding of myosin. We also confirm the interaction of loop 3 with two actin monomers, which are among the initial weak actin-binding interactions. Structural and mutational studies indicate that dynamic interactions of loop 2 with different regions of actin in the different states of actomyosin reflect its role in the weak to strong actin-binding transition of myosin. We found that loop 2 positioned differently in rigor compared with the weak actin-binding state. As actin binding strengthens, loop 2 starts to compete with the activation loop for the highly negatively charged N-terminal region of actin, while also still interacting with other regions of actin. Similarly to our results, a recently published in silico structural study also demonstrates that the activation loop and loop 2 interact with the actin N-terminal region in rigor actomyosin. Within the first 15 ns of their molecular dynamic simulation, the activation loop forms stable interactions with Glu 2 and Asp 3, whereas it competes with loop 2 for Asp 1 of actin. In rigor actomyosin a similar ”sandwich-like“ pattern was found in the rigor actin-myosinIE complex. Former rigor models lack the interaction of the activation loop with actin, because of the missing N-terminal region of the applied actin structures, although this interaction is crucial for actin activation of myosin. We found that actin binding causes a structural relaxation of the myosin structure. We note that conformational relaxations are not hindered by free energy barriers, and thus occur at the nanosecond time scale, therefore they must be distinguished from first-order kinetic steps. The major structural rearrangements occur in the relay/converter/lever region and the switch 2 loop: an 18° further up-lever movement is coupled to a further closure of the switch 2 loop. A minor actin-binding cleft closure was also detected upon molecular dynamics relaxation. We demonstrated that the activation loop has an essential role in the extra priming of myosin, because the actin-induced conformational changes are transmitted through the activation loop toward the relay and active sites. This structural finding is in accordance with recent experimental evidence that the activation loop is specifically responsible for actin activation of the ATPase activity of myosin by accelerating the up-to-down lever movement. Irrespective of the lever swing occurring in ADP·P i or ADP states of myosin, the initial state of the powerstroke is undoubtedly the open actin-binding cleft rel A·M up state, which weakly binds to actin. Intriguingly, myosin 6 complexed with ADP·VO 4 is highly similar to the presented structure of rel A·M up, possessing a further up-lever and a further closed switch 2. The existence of such a state demonstrates that it is a structurally accessible state of myosin. FIGURE 7. Comparison of the extra primed state in myosin 2 and myosin 6 and their structural transmission pathways in the absence of actin. A, activation loop, switch 2, the relay and the converter region are highlighted from myosin. Myosin 6 prepowerstroke... Here, we determined the relaxed conformational structure of the weak actomyosin complex in the prepowerstroke state. Its significance is that the powerstroke starts from this initial state. The presented rel A·M up structure may lead to further experiments to reveal a more detailed reaction coordinate pathway of the powerstroke. Supplementary Material Supplemental Data: Click here to view. Acknowledgment We thank Ken Holmes for discussion and comments on the manuscript. * This work was supported in part by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences and European Community's Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007–2013)/European Research Council Grant Agreement 208319. This article contains supplemental files relAMrigorDd.pdb, relAMrigorsq.pdb, relAMup.pdb, relAMupR520Q.pdb, and relAMupR562Q.pdb. 5 J. Kull, unpublished data. 4 The abbreviations used are: M myosin A actin A.M actomyosin up up-lever dock docked rel relaxed ch chicken myosin sq squid PDB Protein Data Bank. Article information J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 16; 290: 1679–1688. Published online 2014 Nov 21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.606665 PMCID: PMC4340411 PMID: 25416786 Boglárka H. Várkuti, ‡, 1, 2 Zhenhui Yang, ‡, 1 and Andras Malnasi-Csizmadia ‡ § ¶, 3 Boglárka H. Várkuti From the ‡ Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biology and Find articles by Boglárka H. Várkuti Zhenhui Yang From the ‡ Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biology and Find articles by Zhenhui Yang Andras Malnasi-Csizmadia From the ‡ Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biology and the § ELTE-HAS Molecular Biophysics Research Group, Eötvös Loránd University, H-1117 Budapest and ¶ Optopharma Ltd., H-1015 Budapest, Hungary Find articles by Andras Malnasi-Csizmadia From the ‡ Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biology and the § ELTE-HAS Molecular Biophysics Research Group, Eötvös Loránd University, H-1117 Budapest and ¶ Optopharma Ltd., H-1015 Budapest, Hungary 3 To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dept. of Biochemistry, Institute of Biology, Eötvös Loránd University, Pázmány Péter sétány 1/C, H-1117 Budapest, Hungary., Tel.: 36-1-372-2500 ; Fax: 36-1-381-2172; E-mail: moc.oohay@balanlam. 1 Both authors equally contributed to this work. 2 Supported by the European Union and the State of Hungary, co-financed by the European Social Fund in the framework of TÁMOP 4.2.4.A/1-11-1-2012-0001 “National Excellence Program.” Received 2014 Sep 3; Revised 2014 Nov 13 Copyright © 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc. Articles from The Journal of Biological Chemistry are provided here courtesy of American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 