 INTRODUCTION Highly motile amoeboid cells, such as neutrophils, macrophages and Dictyostelium discoideum are professional phagocytes that track down bacteria by chemotaxis and capture and destroy them via phagocytosis. Both chemotaxis and phagocytosis require two processes: first, detection of external cues, and second, activation of a signaling network that controls the actin cytoskeleton to generate pseudopods for cell migration or engulfment of the targets. G-protein-coupled receptors for chemokines, detect chemoattractants generated by bacteria, and activate signaling pathways to regulate actin polymerization for cell migration towards the bacteria. After catching them, various receptors, such as Fcγ and C3a receptors, bind the targets and activate signaling pathways to generate actin polymerization around the bacteria to form phagocytic cups. While GPCRs are essential for chemotaxis, their roles in phagocytosis are not clear. As an established model for the study of chemotaxis and phagocytosis, D. discodieum cells areknown to chase bacteria via chemotaxis to folic acid and ingest them as food through phagocytosis. It is also acknowledged that chemotaxis towards secreted cAMP is essential for the development of D. discoideum into fruiting bodies under starvation conditions. The cAMP receptor, cAR1, was the first chemoattractant GPCR discovered in eukaryotic cells. However, although folic acid was shown to be a chemoattractant for D. discoideum to seek bacteria more than 40 years ago, a folic-acid receptor has not been identified. Chemoattractant GPCRs are recognized to activate downstream signaling events, including phosphorylation or de-phosphorylation of key components in the signaling network. A recentlydeveloped phosphoproteomic technique reveals the temporal dynamics of site-specificphosphorylation events in vivo upon receptor activation. Significantly, massspectrometry based quantitative phosphoproteomics generates large-scale data sets, whichprovide a global view of signaling networks. Here we developed a phosphoproteomic approach for discovering missing components in a particular signaling network by combining the information from phosphoproteomic data sets with an annotated genome database. We used this approach to identify an orphan receptor as the long-sought-after folic acid receptor, fAR1. Our studies demonstrate that fAR1 controls both chemotaxis towards folic acid and phagocytosis of bacterial particles. Moreover, our data indicate that fAR1-mediated signaling events promote not only chemoattractant-mediated cell migration in a folic acid gradient but also chemoattractant-mediated engulfment of folic acid-coated particles. RESULTS Quantitative Phosphoproteomic Analysis Reveals Dynamic Phosphorylation upon Chemoattractant Stimulation Our phosphoproteomic approach combines tandem mass tag chemical labeling for time-point specific quantification, basic reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography and immobilized metal affinity chromatography for phosphopeptide enrichment, and multistage MS for identification of phosphopeptides and quantification of phosphorylation sites. First, D. discoideum were stimulated with either cAMP or folic acid. Protein samples were collected at various time points, reduced, alkylated and enzymatically digested. The resulting peptides from each time point were then chemically linked to distinct TMT labeling reagents of identical mass. The TMT-labeled peptides from all time points were then mixed and separated into 12 fractions by basic reverse-phase HPLC, followed by enrichment of phosphopeptides on Fe-NTA columns. For phosphopeptide and phosphorylation site identification, each fraction was analyzed by online liquid chromatography MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Phosphopeptides of identical sequence but carrying different TMT tags were eluted as a single characteristic peak. Upon fragmentation, the position of the phosphorylated residue was determined by fragment ions, and each TMT tag releases a unique reporter ion, the intensity of which reflects the relative abundance of phosphorylation sites at each time point. Quantification of phosphorylation sites was processed and analyzed by Proteome Discoverer and MaxQuant software. Figure 1 Ligand induced GPCR phosphorylation detected by quantitative mass spectrometry A total of 9946 phosphorylation sites corresponding to 2468 proteins were identified from cAMP-stimulated cells, and 7966 phosphorylation sites corresponding to 2209 proteins were identified from folic acid-stimulated cells. Among those phosphopeptides, 79%, 20% and 1% were phosphorylated at serine, threonine and tyrosine residues respectively. This data set provided an opportunity for us to identify components in the cAMP and folic acid signaling networks based on phosphorylation sites that dynamically change in response to stimulation. Folic-Acid-Induced Phosphorylation of GPCR Candidates Previous studies indicated that folic-acid signaling functions through a GPCR pathway because downstream responses required both the heterotrimeric G-protein subunits Gα4 and Gβ. Because chemoattractant GPCRs are typically phosphorylated at Ser or Thr residues on their C-terminal, cytoplasmic tails upon ligand stimulation, we used the D. discoideum genome data as a reference and searched the relevant global phosphoproteomic data for putative seven-transmembrane proteins that contain chemoattractant-induced phosphorylation at Ser or Thr within their C-terminal domains. To evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of this approach, we first searched for cAMP receptors using the data from cAMP-induced cells. By searching the annotated genome of D. discoideum, we identified two seven-transmembrane proteins, including the cAMP receptor cAR1 and GrlE, each of which yielded three C-terminal domain phosphorylation sites, among 55 potential seven-transmembrane proteins encoded in the genome of D. discoideum. cAR1 displayed a clear increase in phosphorylation at Ser303 and Ser304 upon cAMP stimulation, which corroborates earlier site-directed mutagenesis findings. Figure 1E shows the topology of cAR1, the sequence of the identified phosphopeptide, and MS spectra of the phosphopeptide showing phosphorylation at Ser303. Thus, our phosphoproteomic approach has been validated because it clearly identified cAR1 as the cAMP receptor. Using the same protocol, we searched the annotated genome of D. discoideum using the data from folic-acid stimulated cells, and found two seven-transmembrane proteins, GrlL and GrlG, whose phosphorylation at Ser652 and Ser659, respectively, increases upon stimulation. The topology of GrlL, the identified phosphopeptide, and MS spectra are shown for GrlL in Figure 1G, and those for GrlG are shown in Figure S1. These results indicate that the two orphan receptors, GrlL and GrlG, are candidate f olic- a cid r eceptors. Thus, we designated GrlL as fAR1 and GrlG as fAR2, respectively. fAR1 is Essential for Folic Acid Binding and Folic Acid-Mediated Signaling To examine the function of fAR1 and fAR2, we generated grlL -null and grlG - null strains by homologous recombination. The genotype of each null mutant was confirmed by PCR analyses. Both mutant strains exhibited a wild-type growth rate in axenic shaking medium. While far2 − mutants appeared normal when developed on lawns of Klebsiella aerogenes, the far1 − mutant phenotype was characterized by the formation of small plaques. far1 − mutants, however, did form aggregates, indicating that cAMP signaling remained intact. Expression of C-terminal-tagged fAR1-YFP fusion protein rescued the far1 − mutant phenotype. Interestingly, Gα4-null cells, which also remain responsive to cAMP and are able to aggregate, form small plaques on bacterial lawns likely due to their inability to respond to folic acid. Gβ-null cells, which do not respond to either chemoattractant, also form small plaques and do not aggregate. These results are consistent with the notion that fAR1 is a folic-acid receptor linked to the Gα4βγ heterotrimer. Figure 2 fAR1 is required for folic acid binding and folic acid-meditated signaling To examine the roles of fAR1 and fAR2 in folic-acid mediated signaling events, we first examined the role of fAR1 and fAR2 in folic acid-induced ERK2 signaling. Stimulation induces ERK2 activation and can be detected by monitoring an increase in the phosphorylation state of ERK2 by Western blot. We found that folic acid stimulation induced ERK2 phosphorylation in wild-type and far2 − cells but not in far1 − cells. Expressing fAR1-YFP in far1 − cells restored folic acid-mediated ERK2 activation. These results indicate that fAR1, but not fAR2, is required for folic acid-induced ERK2 signaling. Thus, our following study focused on fAR1. Previous studies showed that folic acid stimulation induced chemotactic signaling events, including PIP 3 response and actin polymerization. We found that folic acid stimulation induced a clear PIP 3 response and actin polymerization in wild-type cells but failed to trigger PIP 3 production or actin polymerization in far1 − cells, indicating that fAR1 is required for folic acid-induced signaling events. We then used fluorescence-labeled folic acid to measure ligand binding on the surface of wild-type, far1 − and fAR1 overexpressing cells. Previous studies suggested that there may be two types of folic-acid receptors on the cell surface. One type that has a high affinity to methotrexate but does not mediate chemotactic responses; while the other type that has a low affinity to methotrexate mediates chemotaxis. Using an established folic acid binding assay, we found that compared to wild-type cells, far1 − cells exhibited a decreased folic acid binding ability and fAR1-Y/WT cells showed an increased folic acid binding ability in the absence of methotrexate. In the presence of methotrexate, the far1 − cells and fAR1-Y/WT cells displayed more significantly decreased and increased folic acid binding ability compared with wild-type cells, respectively. Furthermore, fAR1-Y, like cAR1, localizes uniformly over the plasma membrane. Taken together, our results indicate that the far1 gene encodes one type of folic acid receptor that mediates chemotactic signaling. fAR1 Mediates Chemotaxis towards Folic Acid Next, we examined the role of fAR1 in folic acid-mediated chemotaxis. We performed EZTAXIScan chemotaxis assays to test the ability of wild-type, far1 − and fAR1-Y/ far1 − cells to crawl towards a linear gradient of folic acid. For all assays, wild-type or mutant cells were placed in the top well of the system and were allowed to migrate towards identical folic-acid gradients established from the bottom wells. Chambers were imaged with bright-field illumination every 30 seconds to monitor cell movement. As expected, wild-type cells migrated towards folic acid ; In contrast, far1 − cells were unable to migrate efficiently towards folic acid. Cell-tracing analysis was performed to quantify cell movement. The resulting cell tracks are shown in Figure 3B, and net path length, directionality and speed, of wild-type, far1 − and fAR1-Y/ far1 − are reported in Figure 3C. far1 − cells displayed significantly reduced movement and decreased directionality. Importantly, all mutant phenotypes were rescued by expressing fAR1-Y in far1 − cells. To further compare the chemotactic behavior of far1 − and fAR1-Y/ far1 − cells under the same conditions, we mixed both cell types and recorded their migration to a micropipette releasing folic acid by fluorescence microscopy. At time 0, there were eight far1 − cells and six fAR1-Y /far1 − cells in the view close to the micropipette. At 20 min, many more fAR1-Y/ far1 − cells migrated from outside the original field of view to coalesce near the micropipette. Quantitative analyses showed that movements of far1 − cells displayed significantly reduced net path length, speed, and directionality compared to the movements of fAR1-Y/ far1 − cells. We also compared the chemotaxis behaviors of wild-type and fAR1-overexpressing cells using a needle chemotaxis assay. No significant difference was found in chemotaxis behavior between these two cell types, suggesting that wild-type cells express a sufficient number of fAR1 receptors to carry out chemotaxis to folic acid. Taken together, our results indicate that fAR1 is required for folic-acid-mediated chemotaxis. Figure 3 fAR1 is specifically required for folic acid-mediated chemotaxis in D.discoideum D. discoideum cells grown rich medium and in bacterial culture are able to respond to folic acid but not cAMP due to the lack of cAMP receptors on the cell surface. Several hours after starvation, cells become chemotactically responsive to extracellular cAMP. First, we measured the level of far1 mRNA in axenic, bacterial culture and development stage using real-time PCR analysis. Compared to the cells grown in axenic medium, the level of far1 mRNA in bacteria cultured cells was about two-fold higher while that of developed cells was about 40% lower, which is consistent with previous reports. Then, we examined chemotaxis of far1 − and fAR1-Y/ far1 − cells to cAMP and folic acid after 6 hours of starvation using the EZ-TAXIScan system. Our analyses showed, as expected, that starved far1 − cells cannot efficiently migrate towards folic acid and the expression of fAR1-Y rescues the migratory defect. However, both far1 − and fAR1-Y/ far1 − cells clearly chemotax to cAMP, indicating that fAR1 is specifically required for folic-acid-mediated chemotaxis. Taken together, our results showed that fAR1 is a chemoattractant receptor that mediates cell migration to folic acid. fAR1 Mediates Phagocytosis of Bacteria The far1 − cells formed small plaques on a K. aerogenes bacterial lawn, suggesting that cells lacking fAR1 receptors could not efficiently ingest bacteria as food. To explore fAR1's cellular function in phagocytosis, we quantitatively measured the internalization of bacteria by wild-type and far1 − cells over the time course of one hour, using flow cytometry analysis. Cells were mixed with pHrodo-labeled K. aerogenes, collected and suspended in a basic buffer to quench pHrodo fluorescence outside of the cells. This was followed by counting of pHrodo positive cells, which were the cells with internalized bacteria. Compared to wild-type cells, far1 − cells were still able to engulf, but significantly defective in bacteria uptake over time. We then examined the growth of cells when nutrient liquid or bacteria was provided as food sources. In liquid medium, both wild-type and far1 − cells showed normal growth curve, indicating that fAR1 is not essential for cell division or pinocytosis. However, when fed with bacteria, far1 − cells did not grow as well as wild-type cells. This growth defect can be rescued by expressing fAR1-Y but not cAR1-YFP. We then imaged internalization of bacteria particles using confocal microscopy. Relative to wild-type and fAR1-Y/ far1 − cells, far1 − and cAR1-Y/ far1 − cells displayed a significant decrease in bacteria uptake, as measured by either bacterial number or pHrodo intensity in a cell. However, we did not detect any defects in phagosome maturation or acidification in far1 − cells. Although the growth of far1 − cells was significantly decreased compared to wild-type cells, the far1 − cells were still able to grow using only bacterial as their sole food source, suggesting that the cells are able to ingest bacteria. To monitor the pH value in phagosomes, we measured the intensity of pHrodo per bacterial particle inside cells, and found that the values of mean intensity per bacterial particle were similar in wild-type, far1 −, cAR1-Y/ far1 − and fAR1-Y/ far1 − cells, suggesting that phagosomal pH values are similar in both wild-type and far1 − cells. In addition, we suggest that there is a correlation between the reduced engulfment of bacteria and the reduced growth in far1 − cells. Taken together, our results indicate that cells lacking fAR1 receptors are defective in the engulfment of bacteria, but not in phagosome maturation and acidification associated with bacteria ingestion. Figure 4 fAR1 mediates phagocytosis of bacteria in D. discoideum fAR1 is not Essential for the Initial Binding between Bacteria and D. discoideum Cells To determine the role of fAR1 in phagocytosis, we first examined the initial binding between bacteria and wild-type and fAR1-null cells. Wild-type and far1 − cells were incubated with fluorescence-labeled K, aerogenes at 4 °C for 15 min, and then imaged using fluorescence microcopy in the presence of 2 mM NaN 3, to inhibit bacterial internalization. Under these conditions, bacteria bound to the surface of both wild-type and far1 − cells and no defects in the bacteria-binding ability of far1 − cells was observed relative to wild-type. The binding ability of each cell lines was also analyzed by flow cytometry. Wild-type and far1 − cells were incubated with fluorescence-labeled bacteria at 4°C to block bacterial internalization. Consistently, no defect in bacteria binding was observed in this assay. Taken together, our results showed that fAR1 is not required for cells to make initial contact with bacteria. Figure 5 Bacterial binding is not impaired in far1 − cells fAR1 Mediates Bacteria-Induced Formation of Phagocytic Cups We next examined the role of fAR1 in the bacteria-induced formation of phagocytic cups. Wild-type cells and far1 − were transformed with an F-actin marker, ΔlimE-GFP, to visualize the actin-driven formation of the phagocytic cup. Fluorescently labeled bacteria were added to a chamber containing wild-type or far1 − cells expressing ΔlimE-GFP, and the interaction process was imaged in real time using a confocal fluorescence microscope. Bacteria that bind to the cell surface induced actin polymerization and became surrounded by a phagocytic cup followed by engulfment in wild-type cells, as previously reported. We found that far1 − cells were still able to bind bacteria, however the binding rarely induced either actin polymerization or formation of phagocytic cups. Thus, the fAR1 receptor plays a role in bacteria-induced localized actin polymerization, following the initial interaction between bacteria and D. discoideum cells. Our results suggest that folic acid on the bacterial surface interact with fAR1 to induce localized chemotactic responses that promote engulfment of bacteria. Figure 6 Bacteria induced phagocytic cup formation in wild-type but not in far1 − cells. Vegetative wild-type and far1 − expressing LimEΔcoil-GFP grown in D3-T medium were harvested, washed with PB buffer and settled in a... Beads Coated with Folic Acid Triggered Localized Chemotactic Responses and Formation of Phagocytic Cups To examine whether the binding of a chemoattractant to its GPCR promotes engulfment, we used latex beads with fluorescently-labeled folic acid crosslinked to the surface. Coated beads were added to chambers containing cells expressing fAR1 or cells lacking fAR1, and imaged. In cells expressing fAR1 receptors, the beads interacted the receptor, induced a localized PIP 3 response or actin polymerization around the beads, and then followed by the engulfment of the beads. In cells lacking fAR1, the beads made contact with cell surface, but did not trigger accumulation of PH-G or ΔlimE-G around the beads, and were not internalized. In addition, beads without folic acid, as controls, did not trigger a PIP 3 response, actin polymerization, or phagocytic cup formation in cells expressing fAR1. Furthermore, when excess soluble folic acid was present, the folic acid coated-beads could no longer effectively trigger PIP 3 response and actin polymerization in the cells around the beads for engulfment. Our results indicate that the binding of immobile folic acid to fAR1 receptor induces localized PIP 3 responses and actin polymerization to form phagocytic cups to promote the engulfment of the beads, a cell process that we have termed chemoattractant-mediated engulfment. Figure 7 Folic acid coated beads induce localized chemotaxis signaling and promoted phagocytosis. Vegetative wild-type and far1 − expressing different protein markers grown in D3-T medium were harvested, washed with PB buffer, and settled in a 4 well chamber... Discussion In this work, we used a phosphoproteomic approach to uncover components involved in the chemoattractant GPCR-mediated signaling network. Specifically, we developed a mass spectrometry -based quantitative phosphoproteomic method to determine global and site-specific phosphorylation changes in D. discoideum cells upon stimulation with a specific chemoattractant. The large data set we generated provides an opportunity to identify signaling components based on dynamic changes in phosphorylation at specific sites in response to folic acid stimulation. It is well known that ligand binding to a GPCR induces phosphorylation on Ser or Thr residues on the C-terminus of the receptor. From our phosphoproteomic date set, we identified two orphan GPCRs as candidates of folic-acid receptors, fAR1 and fAR2. This phosphoproteomic approach for identifying orphan GPCRs can be applied to discovering orphan chemokine GPCRs in mammals and other missing components in any signaling network in which phosphorylation is regulated by a specific factor. Combining this phosphoproteomic approach with other methods, we identified the long-sought-after folic acid receptor that controls D. discoideum chemotaxis towards bacteria as a food source. D. discoideum is a well-established model for studying eukaryotic chemotaxis. The cells respond and migrate to two major chemoattractants, cAMP and folic acid. Chemotaxis towards cAMP is essential for the development of D. discoideum, and chemotaxis towards folic acid is essential for amoebae to seek bacteria as food. The cAMP receptor, cAR1, is the first chemoattractant GPCR to be discovered in eukaryotic cells. However, despite the fact that folic acid was shown to be another chemoattractant for D. discoideum more than forty years ago, identification of a folic acid receptor eluded discovery until now. It has been proposed that a GPCR coupled to the heterotrimeric G-protein consisting of Gα4 and Gβγ mediates chemotaxis towards folic acid. We found that cells lacking the orphan GPCR, fAR1, displayed a developmental phenotype on bacterial lawn similar to of cells lacking Gα4 and Gβγ. In addition, we showed that fAR1 receptors on the cell surface bind to extracellular folic acid, mediate folic acid-induced chemotactic signaling events, and control chemotaxis towards folic acid. Previous studies suggested that there may be two types of folic acid receptors, one type controlling chemotaxis and another type mediating unknown functions in D. discoideum. Our study indicates that fAR1, coupled with Gα4Gβγ, detects folic acid released from bacteria and mediates cell migration towards them, the chemoattractant sources. We discovered a chemoattractant GPCR, fAR1 that also mediates phagocytosis. In macrophages and neutrophils, chemoattractant GPCRs are only recognized to mediate chemotaxis to chase microorganisms, while other receptors, such as Fcγ and C3a receptors, bind microorganisms for engulfment ). Our work using the professional phagocyte D. discoideum demonstrates that a chemoattractant GPCR, can promote bacteria engulfment during phagocytosis. Our results show that the fAR1 is not required for the initial binding between bacteria and D. discoideum cells. Upon contact, bacteria induced the formation of phagocytic cups for engulfment in wild-type but not fAR1-null cells. Using folic acid-coated beads, we showed that immobilized folic acid interacts with fAR1 to trigger localized chemotactic responses such as PIP 3 production and actin polymerization to promote the formation of phagocytic cups for engulfment. Cells lacking fAR1, Gα4 or Gβ subunits are still able to eat bacteria as food; however engulfment and ingestion occurs at a significantly lower rate. Therefore, it appears that cells eat bacteria by both fAR1-independent and fAR1-dependent modes. Future studies will aim to clarify whether the fAR1-independent mode of engulfment is mediated by random actin localization or through unknown factor interaction. We suggest that the fAR1/Gα4Gβγ machinery detects diffusible folic acid to mediate cell migration and immobile folic acid on the bacterial surface to promote bacterial engulfment. Our results support the notion that binding of folic acid to fAR1 activates heterotrimeric G-protein into Gα4-GTP and free Gβγ subunits, which in turn mediate signaling pathways to produce pseudopods for cell migration and engulfment. Thus, we have revealed a cellular process of “chemoattractant-mediated engulfment” in the model organism D. discoideum. Interestingly, in humans, formyl peptide receptors on the surface of neutrophils mediate chemotaxis towards bacteria by detecting N-formylmethionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine, which is released by bacteria. Upon catching the bacteria, neutrophils engulf them. Future studies are needed to determine whether neutrophils also utilize a chemoattractant-mediated engulfment mechanism to promote phagocytosis to subdue bacterial infections. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES ERK2 Activation Assay Vegetative D. discoideum cells were harvested, washed with phosphate buffer and stimulated with 100 μM folic acid. At indicated time intervals after stimulation, 150 μl of the cell suspension was taken out, mixed with 50 μl 4 × sample buffer, and boiled for 3 min. Proteins were separated by SDS–PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, and blotted with polyclonal anti–phospho-p44/p42 MAPK antibody and anti-actin antibodies. PH-GFP and LimEΔcoil-GFP Translocation upon Folic Acid Stimulation Vegetative D. discoideum cells expressing PH CRAC -GFP or LimEΔcoil-GFP were prepared using the same protocol for the ERK2 activation assay. Cells were plated in four well chambers and then imaged with a Zeiss Laser Scanning Microscope 780 with a 60×, 1.3 NA Plan-Neofluar objective lens. Fluorescent frames were acquired every 2 seconds and in 30 frames total. A final concentration of 100 μM folic acid was added to the cells to induce PH CRAC -GFP or LimEΔcoil-GFP translocation from cytosol to plasma membrane. The temporal-spatial intensity changes of PH CRAC -GFP LimEΔcoil-GFP in cells were directly imaged using a confocal microscope. For each cell, a region of interest was drawn at the plasma membrane to measure the fluorescence intensity change over time. The intensity of the GFP signal was normalized to the first frame of each set of cells. Folic Acid Binding Assays Cells were harvested and resuspended in PB at 1×10 8 cells/ml. The suspension was incubated on ice for 15 min before use in the binding assay. 100 μl cell suspension was mixed with 50 μl binding mix containing 500 nM FolateRSense 680 and 0.33 mM 8-azaguanine with or without 5 μM methotrexate. The cells were separated from unbound folic acid by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 15 s through 100 μl silicon oil and the supernatant was aspirated without disturbing the cell pellet. The pellet was dissolved in 150 μl PB and the florescence intensity was measured by EnSpire Multimode Plate Reader. Blanks values were determined in the presence of 50 μM unlabeled folate and subtracted from all data. EZ-TAXIScan Chemotaxis Assay D. discoideum cells were harvested from SM plates, washed with PB, and resuspended. Cell migration was recorded at 30 s intervals at 22 °C for 40 min in the EZ-TAXIScan chamber. Chips used in the chamber were pre-coated with 1 % BSA at 22 °C for 30 min. A stable gradient of folic acid or cAMP as described in Figure 3 was established for the assay. Cell migration analysis was performed with DIAS software. Micropipette Chemotaxis Assay Washed cells were seeded into a one well chamber and allowed to adhere for 20 min. A micropipette filled with 100 μM folic acid was connected with a microinjector to generate a chemoattractant gradient. The micropipette was placed in the same focal plane as the cells and phase contrast and fluorescent frames were acquired with an interval of 30 s for 50 min using a Zeiss Laser Scanning Microscope 510, 40 × 1.3 NA Plan-Neofluar objective lens. Cell migration analysis was performed with DIAS software. Folic Acid Conjugated Beads To label the latex beads with folic acid, 500 μl 1 μm aliphatic amine latex beads were washed with PB three times and re-suspended into 1 ml PB. The beads were then incubated with 24 nmol FolateRSense 680 in the presence of 2 mM 1-ethyl-3- carbodiimide, hydrochloride at 4 °C for 16 hours. After incubation, the coated beads were washed five times with pre-cold PB to remove excess free ligand and crosslinker. The schematic chemical reaction is shown in Supplemental Figure 7A. Phagocytosis Assay and Flow Cytometry K. aerogenes labeled with pHrodo Red were incubated with D. discoideum cells at a 50:1 ratio at 22°C. After incubation, the cells were washed and resuspended in basic buffer. The phagocytes and K. aerogenes were distinguished by forward and side scatter. The appearance of pHrodo in the phagocyte population was monitored as an indicator of K. aerogenes engulfment. The phagocyte cell population characterized by high fluorescence of pHrodo was considered as the cells which engulfed K. aerogenes. Data acquisition and analysis were done using FACSort flow cytometer with Cell Quest software and analyzed using FlowJo. The quantification of engulfed K. aerogenes was analyzed by confocal microscopy and ImageJ. To visualize bead engulfment by D. discoideum cells, vegetative wild-type and far1 − cells expressing different protein markers grown from D3-T medium were harvested, washed with PB buffer and settled in a 4 well chamber for 10 min. A 10 fold excess of beads was added to the D. discoideum cells and the engulfment process was recorded with a Zeiss Laser Scanning Microscope 780 with a 60×, 1.3 NA Plan-Neofluar objective lens. See Supplementary Experimental Procedures for more details. Statistics The statistical significance was assessed using analysis of variance with the two-tailed unpaired Student's t-test. Data are presented as mean ± sd., unless stated otherwise. ​ Highlights Using quantitative phosphoproteomics to de-orphan GPCRs. Discovery of a folic-acid chemoattractant GPCR, fAR1. The fAR1 GPCR mediates cell migration towards folic acid. The fAR1 GPCR mediates engulfment of bacteria. Supplementary Material 1 Click here to view. 2 Click here to view. 3 Click here to view. 4 Click here to view. 5 Click here to view. 6 Click here to view. 7 Click here to view. Acknowledgements We thank D. Hereld, J. Brzostowski and X. Xiang for critical reading; M. Gucek, L. Olano, G. Nardone and C. Hammer for technical support on mass spectrometry analyses; P. van Haastert for suggestion on folic acid binding assay; C. Huang and P. Devreotes for providing plasmids; X. Wen, W. Quan, J. Lu and J. Manzella-Lapeira for help in the chemotaxis analyses; L. Tian, R. Wang and A. Grunfeld for phagocytosis assay. The work is supported by intramural funding from NIAID, NIH. Footnotes Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. Author Contributions: M.P., X.X. and T.J. conceived the idea; M.P. and T.J. designed the study; M.P. and Y.C. carried out MS analyses; M.P. performed experiments; M.P. and T.J analyzed data and wrote the manuscript. Supplementary Information includes seven figures, supplemental experiment procedures and six movies. Article information Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 Feb 22. Published in final edited form as: Dev Cell. 2016 Feb 22; 36: 428–439. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2016.01.012 PMCID: PMC4768320 NIHMSID: NIHMS754272 PMID: 26906738 Miao Pan, 1, * Xuehua Xu, 1 Yong Chen, 2 and Tian Jin 1, * Miao Pan 1 Chemotaxis Signal Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, 20852 Find articles by Miao Pan Xuehua Xu 1 Chemotaxis Signal Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, 20852 Find articles by Xuehua Xu Yong Chen 2 Proteomics Core Facility, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892 Find articles by Yong Chen Tian Jin 1 Chemotaxis Signal Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, 20852 Find articles by Tian Jin 1 Chemotaxis Signal Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, 20852 2 Proteomics Core Facility, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892 * Correspondence to: vog.hin.diain@NIJT or vog.hin@nap.oaim PMC Copyright notice Publisher's Disclaimer The publisher's final edited version of this article is available free at Dev Cell See commentary " A GPCR Handles Bacterial Sensing in Chemotaxis and Phagocytosis " in Dev Cell, volume 36 on page 354. 