 The ubiquitous Gram-negative bacterium Legionella pneumophila parasitizes environ mental amoebae and, upon inhalation, replicates in alveolar macrophages, thus causing a life-threatening pneumonia called “Legionnaires’ disease.” The opportunistic pathogen employs a bi-phasic life cycle, alternating between a replicative, non-virulent phase and a stationary, transmissive/virulent phase. L. pneumophila employs the Lqs system as a major regulator of the growth phase switch. The Lqs system comprises the autoinducer synthase LqsA, the homologous sensor kinases LqsS and LqsT, as well as a prototypic response regulator termed LqsR. These components produce, detect, and respond to the α-hydroxyketone signaling molecule LAI-1. LAI-1-mediated signal transduction through the sensor kinases converges on LqsR, which dimerizes upon phosphorylation. The Lqs system regulates the bacterial growth phase switch, pathogen-host cell interactions, motility, natural competence, filament production, and expression of a chromosomal “fitness island.” Yet, LAI-1 not only mediates bacterial intra-species signaling, but also modulates the motility of eukaryotic cells through the small GTPase Cdc42 and thus promotes inter-kingdom signaling. Taken together, the low molecular weight compound LAI-1 produced by L. pneumophila and sensed by the bacteria as well as by eukaryotic cells plays a major role in pathogen-host cell interactions. Keywords: α-hydroxyketone, amoeba, autoinducer, bacterial pathogenesis, cell–cell communication, Dictyostelium, Legionella, macrophage, small molecule signaling, phospho-transfer, response regulator, sensor kinase, quorum sensing Inter-Bacterial and Inter-Kingdom Small Molecule Signaling Bacteria communicate with each other through small diffusible organic molecules and thus coordinate their group behavior. This phenomenon is termed “quorum sensing” and triggered upon reaching a threshold concentration of the signaling molecule. Quorum sensing is mediated by various chemical classes of small molecules called “autoinducers”. Prominent examples of low molecular weight compounds promoting quorum sensing of Gram-negative bacteria include N -acyl-homoserine lactone autoinducers, diffusible signal factor, autoinducer-2 and its precursor 4,5-dihydroxy-2,3-pentanedione, 2-heptyl-3-hydroxy-4-quinolone, as well as dialkylresorcinol and α-hydroxyketone molecules. The bacterial response to autoinducer classes is multi-faceted and versatile. The same compound can be detected by vastly different bacterial genera, e.g., AI-2 appears to be an almost universal signal. Slightly modified molecules of the same chemical class can trigger distinct responses among different species of the same genus, e.g., AHK derivatives confer signaling specificity among Vibrio species. Also, a number of chemically different quorum sensing molecules co-operate in a single organism, e.g., Vibrio harveyi responds to and integrates the signaling of N --HSL, autoinducer-2, and -3-aminoundec-2-en-4-one. Thus, in a complex environmental niche, such as a mixed-species biofilm, a plethora of chemical “languages” is spoken, and a single bacterial cell needs to selectively respond to distinct “idioms.” Small molecule communication is not restricted to prokaryotes. Rather, reciprocal signaling also occurs between prokaryotes and eukaryotes, either of which can produce the corresponding low molecular weight molecule. This process is termed inter-kingdom signaling. Prominent examples of autoinducers mediating inter-kingdom signaling are bacteria-produced AHLs, which modulate eukaryotic cell migration and chemotaxis, cell death, inflammatory responses, as well as plant development and immunity. Furthermore, AHLs as well as AHKs are chemo-attractants for the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, and AHKs play a role in bacteria-fungi interactions. Host cell-produced inter-kingdom signaling molecules include adrenergic compounds, which are detected by a number of bacterial genera through the QseBC two-component system. Phagocytes such as neutrophils and macrophages, as well as amoebae synthesize and respond to the catecholamines adrenaline and noradrenaline. In turn, these hormones activate macrophages and thus restrict intracellular growth of, e.g., Mycobacterium spp.. In this review, we will highlight recent research on small molecule signaling underlying the intra-species and inter-kingdom signaling of the amoebae-resistant, opportunistic pathogen Legionella pneumophila. Legionella pneumophila : Environmental Niches and Human Infection Legionella pneumophila is a ubiquitous Gram-negative bacterium that colonizes complex aquatic biofilm communities and also forms single species biofilms in rich and minimal artificial media. In the environment, L. pneumophila preferentially parasitizes free-living protozoa, wherein the bacteria naturally replicate. Another possible niche of L. pneumophila is the intestinal tract of nematodes, e.g., C. elegans, which under laboratory conditions can be infected with the pathogen. The bacteria grow best at ambient temperatures with an optimal growth temperature of around 35°C. However, Legionella spp. can persist at temperatures above 60°C in association with thermo-tolerant amoebae such as Acanthamoeba, Naegleria, Hartmannella, and Vahlkampfia spp.. Upon inhalation of Legionella -contaminated aerosols, the opportunistic pathogens reach the lung and replicate in alveolar macrophages, thus causing a severe pneumonia called Legionnaires’ disease, reviewed by. About half of the more than 55 Legionella spp. currently identified, have been associated with human disease; yet the clinically most relevant species are L. pneumophila and Legionella longbeachae. L. pneumophila serogroup 1 causes about 85% of all clinical cases in most parts of the world, while L. longbeachae accounts for about 30% of the reported cases in Australia and New Zealand. Legionnaires’ disease mainly affects elderly or immuno-compromised persons and can spread in outbreaks comprising as many as 450 cases. Since the identification of L. pneumophila 40 years ago, it was believed that the “accidental” pathogen is transmitted to humans only from environmental sources. However, after a recent outbreak of Legionnaires’ disease, the first case of a probable person-to-person transmission has been reported. The genome sequence of this outbreak strain revealed a phylogenetic divergence from most other outbreak-associated L. pneumophila sg1 strains studied. Of note, the strain harbors a mosaic genome carrying eight different horizontally acquired regions, some of which are also found in other L. pneumophila isolates. Legionella pneumophila Replicates Intracellularly in a Distinct Pathogen Vacuole Legionella pneumophila is taken up by phagocytes through macropinocytosis, evades the canonical bactericidal endocytic pathway and instead forms a replication-permissive membrane-bound compartment, the LCV. Using an evolutionarily seemingly conserved mechanism, the nascent LCV avoids fusion with lysosomes, but communicates with the endosomal, secretory, and retrograde vesicle trafficking pathways and finally associates with the endoplasmic reticulum in a tight manner. Legionella -containing vacuole formation is a complex and robust process, which on the pathogen side requires as an essential virulence factor the Icm/Dot T4SS. The Icm/Dot T4SS is a multi-component molecular apparatus that translocates the stunning number of up to 300 different putative “effector” proteins into eukaryotic host cells. The effector proteins subvert crucial cellular processes, such as signal transduction, vesicle trafficking, motility, death pathways, gene expression, and protein production. Some of these effectors target host components implicated in antibacterial defense or membrane dynamics, including the chelator phytate, small GTPases, phosphoinositide lipids, the PI phosphatase OCRL, the retromer complex, microtubules, or the actin cytoskeleton. In summary, the plethora of Icm/Dot-translocated effector proteins subverts the host cell’s physiology in a highly sophisticated and customized manner to ensure intracellular survival and growth of the pathogen. The Bi-Phasic Life Cycle of L. pneumophila Legionella pneumophila employs a bi-partite metabolism, where serine serves as major energy supply, while glycerol and carbohydrates like glucose are mainly fed into anabolic processes. The facultative intracellular pathogen survives and replicates in extracellular as well as intracellular niches. The transfer of the bacteria between different niches is facilitated by a bi-phasic life cycle, comprising a replicative, non-virulent phase and a transmissive, virulent phase. The cycle is controlled by the bacterial growth phase and nutritional conditions, such as amino acid availability or fatty acid biosynthesis activity. In the post-exponential phase L. pneumophila up-regulates virulence, motility, and stress resistance, while in the exponential phase these traits are repressed, and metabolic pathways are up-regulated. The transition from exponential to post-exponential phase upon growth of the bacteria in broth is considered to reflect the transmission from the replicative to the transmissive phase in host cells. Collectively, the transmissive and virulence traits enable L. pneumophila to evade protozoan predators, survive in the environment as motile planktonic cells and re-establish a replicative niche in biofilms, protozoa or – perhaps – nematodes. The master regulator of L. pneumophila ’s bi-phasic life cycle is CsrA, a conserved and essential global activator of replication and repressor of transmission traits. Accordingly, the overproduction of CsrA in L. pneumophila leads to a reduction of flagellation. CsrA is an RNA-binding regulatory protein, which is sequestered by the small non-coding RNAs RsmY and RsmZ, thus relieving the repression of virulence and transmissive traits. Distribution of AHK-Based Quorum Sensing Systems As a major regulator of the growth phase switch L. pneumophila employs the Lqs system, which produces, detects and responds to the AHK molecule LAI-1. The system is encoded by genes arranged in a genomic cluster and an orphan gene. All of these genes are expressed from individual promoters. L. pneumophila but not L. longbeachae harbors the Lqs system, and thus, the system is not conserved among Legionella spp.. L. pneumophila apparently lacks AI-2- and AHL-based sensing circuits, leaving Lqs the only known quorum sensing system of this species. FIGURE 1 LAI-1-mediated intra-species and inter-kingdom signaling of Legionella pneumophila. The amoebae-resistant opportunistic pathogen L. pneumophila colonizes different niches in the environment, including biofilms and protozoa. L. pneumophila employs a bi-phasic... α-Hydroxyketone signaling molecules and the corresponding quorum sensing system have been first identified in Vibrio spp. and termed CAI-1 and CqsAS, respectively,, reviewed in. The system appears to be wide-spread, as homologs of the cqsA and cqsS genes are found not only in members of the family Legionellaceae and Vibrionaceae, but also in the Burkholderiaceae, Chlorobiaceae, and Oxalobacteraceae. Photobacterium angustum indeed produces CqsAS orthologs and employs AHK-dependent quorum sensing. Given its broad distribution, AHK signaling might be commonly used for inter-species and inter-genera crosstalk among environmental bacteria. Functional Characterization of L. pneumophila Lqs System Components Components of the L. pneumophila Lqs system comprise the pyridoxal-5′-phosphate-dependent autoinducer synthase LqsA, the cognate membrane-bound sensor kinase LqsS and its homolog LqsT, as well as the prototypic response regulator LqsR. The hdeD gene also present in the lqs cluster encodes a protein of unknown function. The biochemical characterization of LqsS and LqsT revealed that the putative sensor histidine kinases are indeed autophosphorylated by -ATP at their conserved histidine residues, located in the cytoplasmic C-terminal histidine kinase domain. LqsS and LqsT are both bound by LqsR or phospho-LqsR, and dependent on its conserved receiver domain aspartate, the response regulator abrogated autophosphorylation of the sensor kinases by catalyzing the dephosphorylation of phospho-LqsS or phospho-LqsT. LqsR forms dimers upon phosphorylation at Asp 108 by either acetyl-phosphate or phospho-LqsT. Upon heterologous production in Escherichia coli LqsT is autophosphorylated by ATP, and LqsR prevents phosphorylation of the sensor kinase under these conditions by catalyzing the dephosphorylation of phospho-LqsT. Taken together, phosphorylation signaling through the sensor histidine kinases LqsS and LqsT converges on LqsR, which forms dimers upon phosphorylation. Synthetic LAI-1 inhibits autophosphorylation of LqsS or LqsT by -ATP in a dose-dependent manner. LAI-1 does neither affect the stability of phospho-LqsS or phospho-LqsT, nor the dephosphorylation by LqsR, suggesting that the AHK compound inhibits the kinase reaction. In contrast, the Vibrio cholerae autoinducer CAI-1 promotes the phosphorylation of LqsS. Moreover, synthetic LAI-1 promotes the motility of L. pneumophila in an LqsS/LqsT- and LqsR-dependent manner. Transcriptome analysis of L. pneumophila treated with LAI-1 revealed that the signaling molecule negatively regulates the RNA-binding global regulator crsA and positively regulates a number of genes, including the snRNAs rsmY and rsmZ. In summary, these findings indicate that LAI-1 regulates motility and the switch from the replicative to the transmissive growth phase of L. pneumophila by phosphorylation signaling through LqsS, LqsT and LqsR. Legionella pneumophila Traits Regulated by the Lqs System To assess the function of the lqs genes genetically, the individual genes or the entire lqs gene cluster were deleted from the L. pneumophila chromosome by double homologous recombination. These studies revealed that the Lqs system regulates a number of processes in L. pneumophila, including the entry into replicative growth phase, pathogen-phagocyte interactions, bacterial motility, the formation of extracellular filaments, natural competence for DNA uptake, and the expression of a bona fide genomic “fitness island.” Legionella pneumophila lacking lqsA is only mildly defective for pathogen-host cell interactions, but outcompeted by the parental strain upon co-infection of Acanthamoeba castellanii. Moreover, the Δ lqsA mutant strain shows reduced motility, expression of the flagellin promoter P flaA, and flagellin production. Strikingly, L. pneumophila Δ lqsA takes up external DNA 3–4 orders of magnitude more efficiently, and the expression of the P comEA promoter is up-regulated. The promoter controls the expression of comEA encoding a small periplasmic DNA-binding protein essential for competence. These results revealed that the Lqs system is a major negative regulator of natural competence of L. pneumophila. Legionella pneumophila lacking lqsS is severely defective for intracellular replication, impaired for motility, outcompeted by the parental strain upon co-infection of amoebae and, similar to the Δ lqsA strain, more competent for DNA uptake. L. pneumophila Δ lqsS also sediments slower than wild-type or Δ lqsA mutant bacteria, due to the formation of extracellular filaments. Finally, in the Δ lqsS mutant strain 52 genes located in a 133 kb high plasticity genomic “fitness island” are up-regulated at least two-fold. The fitness island shows a higher G+C content than the L. pneumophila core genome, is located adjacent to the tRNA Thr gene lpg0972 and flanked by putative DNA-mobilizing genes such as integrases, transposases, and phage-like genes. Two regions can be discriminated: region I harbors many unknown genes, some of which encode putative pili components, and region II encodes the subunits of a F o F 1 ATP synthase and several metal ion resistance transporters. The region lpg1008 - lpg1035 has been characterized previously as a 40 kb eﬄux pump genomic island, which is induced upon L. pneumophila infection of macrophages. Taken together, the L. pneumophila 133 kb genomic region fulfills the criteria of a canonical genomic “fitness island”. Legionella pneumophila lacking lqsT is also severely defective for intracellular replication and outcompeted by the parental strain upon co-infection of amoebae, impaired for motility, as well as – similar to the Δ lqsS and Δ lqsA strains – more competent for DNA uptake. However, in contrast to lqsS, lqsT does not regulate the production of extracellular filaments. The lqsT and lqsS genes are divergently expressed in the post-exponential growth phase, and transcriptome studies reveal that 90% of the genes down-regulated in absence of lqsT, are up-regulated in absence of lqsS. Reciprocally regulated genes encode constituents of the 133 kb genomic island or Icm/Dot-translocated effectors. The phenotypes of a mutant strain lacking lqsS and lqsT are partially complemented by either lqsT or lqsS, but are not reversed by overexpression of lqsA, as the single mutants are. This suggests that LqsT and LqsS are the sole LAI-1-responsive sensor kinases in L. pneumophila. Collectively, these results indicate that the Lqs system comprises two partially antagonistic LAI-1-responsive sensor kinases, which regulate distinct pools of genes implicated in various physiological and pathogenic processes of L. pneumophila. Legionella pneumophila lacking lqsR shows a reduced lag phase before initiating growth in broth, and thus, the response regulator LqsR regulates the switch between the transmissive and the replicative phase. The Δ lqsR mutant strain is defective for uptake by and intracellular replication in phagocytes, impaired for motility, outcompeted by the parental strain upon co-infection of amoebae, and more competent for DNA uptake. The virulence phenotypes of Δ lqsR are stronger than those of the other lqs single mutant strains. Yet, L. pneumophila lacking the entire lqs cluster showed even more severe and pleiotropic phenotypes, suggesting that the lqs genes act synergistically. In summary, these studies revealed a unique organization of the L. pneumophila Lqs system comprising two homologous, partially antagonistic LAI-1-responsive sensor kinases. The Lqs system and LAI-1 circuit regulate many distinct features of L. pneumophila, in particular transmissive traits, such as pathogen-host cell interactions and virulence, bacterial motility, natural competence, production of extracellular filaments, and expression of a genomic “fitness island.” Hence, the Lqs system is a major regulator of the bi-phasic life cycle of L. pneumophila. Connection of the Lqs System With Other L. pneumophila Two-Component Systems The production of LqsR is controlled by the stationary phase sigma factor RpoS, and, less stringently, by the response regulator LetA, as well as on a post-transcriptional level probably by CsrA. Thus, the Lqs system represents an element of the stationary growth phase virulence regulatory network of L. pneumophila comprising several TCSs. The network includes the LetAS TCS, which is homologous to Pseudomonas GacAS. Upon entering stationary phase, LetAS regulates L. pneumophila transmission and virulence by promoting motility, contact-dependent cytotoxicity, infectivity, and evasion of lysosomes in macrophages, as well as intracellular replication in A. castellanii. The response regulator LetA, in concert with RpoS, directly up-regulates the snRNAs rsmY and rsmZ, which bind and sequester the global repressor CsrA. FIGURE 2 Two-component systems controlling the bi-phasic life cycle of L. pneumophila. The TCSs LqsRS, LetAS, PmrAB, and CpxRA, as well as the RsmYZ-CsrA regulatory unit are illustrated. Under conditions of nutrient abundance the RNA-binding carbon storage... The PmrAB TCS is a direct regulator of several Icm/Dot-translocated effector proteins and required for motility and intracellular replication of L. pneumophila in protozoa and macrophages. The response regulator PmrA positively regulates metabolic genes including csrA and thus links the TCS with the LetA-RsmYZ-CsrA regulatory cascade. Finally, the CpxRA TCS plays a major role in L. pneumophila virulence gene regulation by controlling the expression of the icmR gene and at least 27 Icm/Dot substrates, as well as type II-secreted virulence factors. CpxR is a dual regulator, which acts as an activator or repressor, and can still self-interact in absence of phosphorylation to repress but not activate target genes. Inter-Kingdom Signaling Through Lai-1 Small signaling molecules promote the communication not only between bacteria but also between prokaryotes and eukaryotes. To test the hypothesis that the Lqs system and LAI-1 affect eukaryotic cells, we used migration of eukaryotic cells as readout. L. pneumophila inhibits the chemotactic migration of amoebae, macrophages, and neutrophils in an Icm/Dot-dependent manner. Rather unexpectedly, however, L. pneumophila lacking lqsA no longer impeded the migration of infected amoebae or macrophages, and the defect was complemented by plasmid-borne lqsA. Interestingly, the overexpression of lqsA in an Icm/Dot deficient Δ icmT mutant strain abolished cell migration, indicating that the overproduction of LqsA and in consequence LAI-1 inhibits cell migration. In agreement with this notion, synthetic LAI-1 dose-dependently inhibited cell migration. That is, LAI-1 reduced the forward migration index but not the velocity, suggesting that the directionality but not speed of the cells was affected. In order to determine host cell factors implicated in LAI-1-dependent cell migration inhibition, a scratch wound healing assay with A549 lung epithelial cells was used, alongside RNA interference. The depletion of any host factor relevant for LAI-1-dependent inter-kingdom signaling will abrogate the effects of synthetic LAI-1. This approach revealed that LAI-1-dependent inhibition of cell migration involves the scaffold protein IQGAP1, the small GTPase Cdc42 and the Cdc42-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor ARHGEF9, but not other modulators of Cdc42, or the small GTPases RhoA, Rac1 or Ran. Furthermore, upon treatment with LAI-1, IQGAP1 redistributed to the cell cortex, and Cdc42 was inactivated. Taken together, the results indicate that LAI-1 modulates migration of eukaryotic cells through a signaling pathway involving IQGAP1, Cdc42, and ARHGEF9. The eukaryotic receptor of L. pneumophila LAI-1 is/are currently not known. Interestingly, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium also modulates the actin cytoskeleton through Cdc42 and IQGAP1. The Salmonella type III-secreted GEF SopE directly activates Cdc42, and bacterial invasion of fibroblasts lacking IQGAP1 was decreased, while Cdc42 and Rac1 activation was abrogated. Effects of Adrenergic Antagonists on L. pneumophila Inter-kingdom communication not only occurs from prokaryotes to eukaryotes but also in a reciprocal manner. A prominent example of the latter is adrenergic signaling mediated by the catecholamines adrenaline and noradrenaline produced by eukaryotic cells. The adrenergic neurotransmitters adrenaline and noradrenaline moderate eukaryotic stress response, but are also agonists of virulence and motility gene expression of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7. Accordingly, α- and β-adrenergic antagonists block the response of EHEC to these host hormones. Bacteria respond to adrenergic compounds through TCSs, in particular QseBC and QseEF. The sensor kinase QseC has been identified as adrenergic receptor in EHEC as well as in uropathogenic Escherichia coli, and EHEC also employs QseE as a receptor. In S. enterica serovar Typhi the responses to adrenergic signaling appear to depend on the CpxRA TCS. The QseBC TCS is wide-spread among bacteria, including Enterobacteriaceae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and L. pneumophila. The genes apparently encoding the QseBC homolog in Legionella spp. have been named either pmrAB, qseBC, or lrpR, depending on the strain or species involved, and adrenergic compounds were assessed for effects on Legionella -phagocyte interactions. Adrenaline and noradrenaline had only mild, if any, effects on L. pneumophila growing in broth or intracellularly in phagocytes. However, the adrenergic receptor antagonists benoxathian, naftopidil, propranolol, and labetalol reduced the growth of L. pneumophila in broth or amoebae, while replication in macrophages was enhanced. Growth restriction was common to several members of the genus Legionella and also observed for Mycobacterium spp. The deletion of L. pneumophila pmrAB had only a minor effect on growth inhibition by adrenergic antagonists, implying a different mode of action and/or the presence of another adrenergic sensing system. Yet, regardless of their bacterial target, adrenergic antagonists might represent potential lead compounds in screens for novel anti-infective compounds against Legionella or Mycobacterium spp. using phagocytes as host cells. Conclusions The causative agent of Legionnaires’ disease, L. pneumophila, is an amoebae-resistant opportunistic pathogen, which employs the AHK molecule LAI-1 for intra-species as well as inter-kingdom communication. Since AHK molecules are wide-spread in nature, environmental bacteria likely employ this class of signals for inter-genera signaling. L. pneumophila produces, detects and responds to LAI-1 through the Lqs system, which comprises the autoinducer synthase LqsA, the homologous sensor kinases LqsS and LqsT, as well as the response regulator LqsR. As part of the stationary phase regulatory network, the Lqs system regulates the growth phase switch, pathogen-host cell interactions, bacterial motility, natural competence, filament production and expression of a chromosomal “fitness island.” The responses of L. pneumophila to LAI-1 might be exploited for anti-virulence drug development, as has been described for Vibrio cholerae using agonist and antagonist derivatives of the corresponding signaling molecule CAI-1. Furthermore, LAI-1 modulates the migration direction of eukaryotic cells and thus mediates inter-kingdom signaling. Adrenergic compounds synthesized by eukaryotic cells might also be sensed by L. pneumophila ; however, the mere fact that the pathogen responds to adrenergic antagonists does not imply that this is the case. Future studies will address the question whether there are other classes of low molecular weight molecules produced and detected by Legionella spp. or by Legionella -infected host cells, and will explore the potential of small molecule signaling to interfere with Legionella virulence or eukaryote processes. Author Contributions RH and HH wrote the manuscript. Conflict of Interest Statement The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. 