 A number of organisms possess several isoforms of protein kinase C but little is known about the significance of any specific isoform during embryogenesis and development. To address this we characterized a PKC ortholog in Dictyostelium discoideum. pkcA expression switches from prestalk in mound to prespore in slug, indicating a dynamic expression pattern. Mutants lacking the catalytic domain of PkcA did not exhibit tip dominance. A striking phenotype of pkcA − was the formation of an aggregate with a central hollow, and aggregates later fragmented to form small mounds, each becoming a fruiting body. Optical density wave patterns of cAMP in the late aggregates showed several cAMP wave generation centers. We attribute these defects in pkcA − to impaired cAMP signaling, altered cell motility and decreased expression of the cell adhesion molecules – CadA and CsaA. pkcA − slugs showed ectopic expression of ecmA in the prespore region. Further, the use of a PKC-specific inhibitor, GF109203X that inhibits the activity of catalytic domain phenocopied pkcA −. Keywords: Dictyostelium, PKC, Morphogenesis, Differentiation, Tip dominance 1. Introduction The protein kinase C family is a major class of phosphorylating enzymes that catalyse the transfer of a phosphate group from ATP to serine/threonine residues in a protein, thus controlling the protein's functional activity. In mammals, ten different PKC isoforms are known. Depending on their regulatory domains and activators, they are classified as conventional, novel or atypical. For their activation, the conventional isoforms depend on both Ca 2+ and diacyl glycerol ; the novel isoforms require Ca 2+ but not DAG, and the atypical isoforms require neither. As a group, PKC isoforms play important roles in regulating cell migration, cell proliferation, differentiation and cell death, depending on their cofactors, substrate specificity, tissue distribution and subcellular localization. During embryonic development, individual PKC isoforms are expressed in distinct patterns. Aberrations in one or more of the PKC isoforms are known to affect cell polarity in Caenorhabditis elegans and to bring about a delay in blastocoel formation in mice. In embryonic stem cells, PKC isoforms have been shown to influence lineage specification and differentiation through PKC/ERK1-2, PKC/GSK3β, JNK/c-Jun, PKC ζ/NF-κB and Wnt signaling pathways. However, isoform-specific PKC knockout mice did not show any defects during early lineage segregation. Overall, and as noted in reviews, PKCs can exert overlapping, different and even opposite biological functions in the same cell-type, making it difficult at this point to interpret and define the roles of individual isoforms. To help refine our understanding of the roles of PKCs in development, we employed a simple model organism, Dictyostelium discoideum that carries a single isoform of a putative PKC-like protein. D. discoideum is a soil-living unicellular eukaryotic amoeba. Growth is characterized by phagocytosis of bacteria, and cells divide by binary fission. When the amoebae are starved, 3′, 5′ cyclic adenosine monophosphate is synthesized and secreted. Alternating pulses of cAMP synthesis and degradation create a relay, leading the amoebae to form a multi-armed, spiraling aggregate, which eventually develops into a migrating slug. In favorable circumstances, the slug culminates into a fruiting body, comprised of a dead stalk supporting a ball of spores. In late 1980s, by using effectors like phorbol myristate and inhibitors like staurosporine, indirect evidence for the presence of PKC-like activity and its involvement in cAMP receptor regulation during Dictyostelium development was reported. Later using crude lysates of Dictyostelium, DAG mediated signaling of PKC involved in chemotaxis and development were demonstrated. However, due to the lack of genetic evidence, the existence of a true PKC in Dictyostelium remains unknown. When the Dictyostelium kinome was documented, three different proteins were identified with the classical C1 domain of PKC. These included DDB_G0288147, p-21 activated kinase-D and ankyrin repeat containing protein, thus indicating DAG mediated signaling in the organism. Our study shows that DDB_G0288147, which we have called pkcA, is a putative PKC ortholog in D. discoideum, and has a highly conserved C1 and kinase domain. We find that, as seen in other organisms, the putative PKC is expressed in a cell-type specific manner and is developmentally regulated. The pkcA mutant that we engineered to lack the catalytic domain showed impaired early development due to altered cAMP signaling, cell motility and cell–cell adhesion. A striking phenotype of pkcA − was the fragmentation of the aggregates into small territories, each forming a slug and a fruiting body. This result implies that PkcA could be involved in tip dominance. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Bioinformatics The FASTA sequence of the putative PKC domain containing protein was retrieved from dictybase.org and used as input for protein architecture analysis by the Simple Modular Architecture Research Tool. Multiple sequence alignment was carried out by employing Multiple Alignment using Fast Fourier Transform and represented using Easy Sequencing in PostScript. A phylogenetic tree was constructed using the neighbor joining method and the BLOSUM 62 scoring matrix of Clustal Ω, and represented using FigTree. Protein sequences were retrieved from UniProt. 2.2. Strains, cell growth and development D. discoideum wild type, Ax2, and mutant cells, pkcA −, were grown in HL5 liquid medium either as a monolayer in Petri dishes or in flasks as suspension cultures at a cell density of 2–3×10 6 cells/ml. G418 and blasticidin were used for selecting transformants with cell-type specific marker constructs and pkcA − respectively. For development, 4×10 5 cells/cm 2 were spread on 1% non-nutrient agar and allowed to develop in a dark, moist chamber. For LacZ staining, the samples were fixed in 0.05% glutaraldehyde, permeabilised with 0.1% NP-40 and stained with X-gal solution 6 ], 5 mM K 4, 1 mg/ml 5-bromo-4-chloro 3-indolyl-β-galactoside). Images were captured using a Nikon SMZ1000 stereo zoom microscope. For generating the pkcA promoter construct, a 962 bp regulatory region found upstream of the translation start site was PCR amplified using gDNA as the template and the primers P1 and P2 and ligated in frame with LacZ in pDdGal-16 employing the restriction enzymes Xba I and Bgl II. The engineered pkcA -LacZ plasmid was confirmed by PCR and restriction digestion analysis. For generating the pkcA knockout construct, a 2249 bp fragment of the pkcA gene, spanning exon 4 was PCR amplified using gDNA as template and the primers, P3 and P4. The amplified DNA was ligated in a TA cloning vector pTZ57R/T to get pMW1. The blasticidin resistance cassette was excised from pLPBLP vector using Sma I and Nde I and ligated into pMW1 by employing Nde I and Ale I restriction sites to get pkcA -KO. To express pkcA in pkcA − cells, the pkcA gene was PCR amplified and placed behind the constitutively active actin 15 promotor to create the plasmid pAct15: pkcA. All PCR was performed using the Expand PCR High Fidelity System as per the manufacturer's directions. The pkcA gene was amplified using the forward oligonucleotide primer 5′-CACCATGCAACCAAATCAATTAAAAAGAC-3′ and the reverse oligonucleotide primer 5′-TTAATCACAAGCACTGGTATTCTCA-3′. Amplification of the full-length region of pkcA was performed on 10 ng genomic DNA with 5 pmol of primers. The resulting PCR product containing the pkcA gene was placed behind the constitutively active actin 15 promoter using the Gateway System, and transformed into pkcA − cells. For transformation, 10 μg of the linear pkcA -KO fragment and other plasmids were electroporated into Ax2 cells and the positive clones were selected on bacterial lawn/liquid culture containing blasticidin and G418 respectively. Marker constructs for ecmA -GFP and pspA- RFP were kind gifts from Christopher Thompson. p ecmAO -LacZ, p ecmB -LacZ, p ecmO -LacZ were procured from Dicty Stock Center, USA. 2.3. Isolation of prespore and prestalk specific cell-types Ax2 cells transformed with ecmA -GFP marker construct were developed on non-nutrient agar for 16 h. Slugs were harvested and mechanically disrupted in KK 2 buffer containing 40 mM EDTA. Cells dissociated from the slugs were resuspended at a density of 1×10 6 cells/ml and sorted in FACS Aria. The isolated cell-types were confirmed by RT-PCR using pspA and ecmA primers. 2.4. Cell–cell adhesion assay Log phase cells were harvested and resuspended at a density of 2×10 7 cells/ml and starved in KK 2 buffer in shaking conditions at 22 °C for 4 h. The cell suspension was diluted to a density of 2.5×10 6 cells/ml and the aggregates were dispersed by vortexing vigorously for 15 s. Aggregates were allowed to reform and at indicated time points, the number of non-aggregating cells including singlets and doublets were scored using a Neubauer chamber. The total number of aggregates was determined by subtracting the number of singlets/doublets from the total number of cells, which was then expressed as a percentage. To study Ca 2+ dependent cell–cell adhesion, the assay was performed in the presence of 10 mM EDTA. 2.5. Western blotting Protein samples were isolated from different developmental stages in sample buffer and protein concentration was estimated using Bradford reagent. Equal amounts of protein were loaded in 10% Tris glycine gel and after electrophoresis, proteins were transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane. Subsequently, the membrane was blocked with 5% BSA and 0.05% Tween-20 in Tris-buffered saline for 1 h at RT. Later, the membrane was incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies anti-CadA or anti-CsaA or anti-actin. To remove unbound primary antibodies several washes were carried out with TBS–Tween-20, and the membrane was incubated with 1:5000 dilution of HRP conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h at RT. Finally, the membrane was treated with SuperSignal West Pico-chemiluminescent substrate and the luminescent signals were captured on an X-ray film. The X-ray film was then developed and scanned. Actin was used as a loading control. Western blotting was carried out thrice and images were quantified using ImageJ and normalized to actin expression levels. 2.6. Stalk-cell induction assay Log phase cells of Ax2/ ecmA -GFP and pkcA − /ecmA- GFP were harvested, washed thrice with stalk buffer ) and incubated in a 24-well plate at 2.5×10 4 cells/cm 2 in stalk buffer supplemented with 5 mM cAMP. After 24 h, cells were washed with stalk buffer to remove cAMP and replaced with the same buffer supplemented with or without differentiation inducing factor-1. At the end of 24 h incubation, the cells were assayed for prestalk ecmA fluorescence and scored for the production of stalk-like cells by phase contrast using an inverted Nikon Eclipse TE2000 microscope. 2.7. cAMP quantification Log phase D. discoideum cells were harvested and plated on 1% non-nutrient agar at a cell density of 5×10 6 cells/cm 2 and were allowed to develop. At the indicated time points, cAMP estimation was carried out using cyclic nucleotide XP Enzymatic ImmunoAssay Kit as per the manufacturer's instructions. 2.8. Semi-quantitative PCR and quantitative reverse transcription PCR Vegetative D. discoideum amoebae were harvested, plated on 1% non-nutrient agar at a density of 5×10 6 cells/cm 2 and at defined time points, RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent. cDNA was synthesized using High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit. qPCR for acaA, pde4, 5′nt and adk was carried out with the Eppendorf Real Time PCR platform using DyNAmo Flash SYBR Green qPCR Kit. qPCR was carried out thrice with three biological replicates and analyzed. Semi-quantitative PCR was performed in an Applied Biosystems 2720 Thermocycler using Taq polymerase. rnlA was used as an internal control and the expression was normalized to the levels of rnlA. 2.9. Visualization of cAMP waves Vegetative cells grown to a density of 2–3×10 6 cells/ml were harvested and 5×10 5 cells/cm 2 were plated on 1% non-nutrient agar. The cells were allowed to develop in dark moist condition. The mounds were filmed on a real-time basis at an interval of 10 s/frame for 45 min using a Nikon CCD camera and documented with NIS-Elements D software. For visualizing the optical density waves of cAMP, image pairs were subtracted using Image J. Five different mounds were analyzed on three independent occasions. 2.10. Under-agarose cAMP chemotaxis The assay was performed according to the established protocol with minor modifications. Vegetative cells were harvested and starved for 1 h at a density of 1×10 7 cells/ml. The cells were pulsed with 30 nM cAMP at 6 min interval for 4 h. Samples of 100 μl of the cell suspension were used for the assay. Cells migrating towards cAMP were recorded every 30 s for 15 min with an inverted Nikon Eclipse TE2000 microscope using NIS-Elements D software. For calculating average velocity, a total of 32 cells from three independent experiments were analyzed. The cells were tracked using ImageJ. 2.11. F-actin polymerization TRITC-phalloidin staining of D. discoideum cells was used for quantifying F-actin polymerization. Cells were pulsed with 30 nM cAMP at 6 min intervals for 4 h at a density of 1×10 8 cells/ml. After diluting to 1×10 7 cells/ml, the cells were shaken at 200 rpm with 3 mM caffeine for 20 min to synchronize cell signaling. Cells were resuspended in phosphate buffer at 3×10 7 cells/ml and stimulated with 100 μM cAMP. 100 μl of cell suspension was taken at 0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 45, 60, 75 and 90 s time points and mixed with actin buffer containing 4% formaldehyde, 0.1% Triton X-100, and 30 nM TRITC-phalloidin. Cells were stained for 1 h and spun down at 14,000 rpm for 10 min. The pellet was extracted overnight with 1 ml of 100% methanol and the fluorescence was measured. 2.12. Statistical analyses Student's t -test was performed to calculate statistical significance using Microsoft Excel 2007 and the graphs were plotted using ORIGIN software. 3. Results 3.1. An ortholog of PKC in D. discoideum To determine whether the PKC domain-containing protein codes for PKC in D. discoideum, the protein sequence was analyzed using the protein architectural analysis tool SMART and aligned with PKCs from other organisms using MAFTT 7. The domain analysis revealed the presence of a C1 domain at the N-terminal region and a C-terminal Ser/Thr kinase domain. The presence of a single C1 domain with a Ser/Thr kinase domain is a signature of a PKC. We retrieved the amino acid sequences of all PKC isoforms from UniProt and aligned the C1 and kinase domains using MAFTT 7. The C1 domain was identified by the presence of HX 12 CX 2 CX N CX 2 CX 4 HX 2 CX 7 C motif. The multiple sequence alignment as represented in Fig. 1 shows that the C1 domain of DDB_G0288147 is highly conserved with an N-terminal region rich in basic residues, suggesting that the protein could be activated by DAG. Fig. 1 Conserved C1 and kinase domains of PkcA. Multiple sequence alignment showing conserved residues of PkcA in D. discoideum aligned with PKC isoforms of different organisms. Conserved regions are highlighted in yellow and conserved residues in red. C1 domain... A kinase domain in a PKC can be identified by the presence of an invariant lysine that configures the enzyme for phosphoryl-transfer, a gatekeeper methionine residue necessary for restricting flexibility to prevent autocatalytic activation, and a tyrosine residue in the activation loop that consists of a stretch of 20–30 highly conserved amino acid residues. The activation loop is critical for maintaining the kinase domain in a closed, stabilized, and catalytically competent state by priming/phosphorylating the tyrosine residue. Interestingly, the multiple sequence alignment indicates K 626 could act as the invariant lysine. The conserved gate keeper residue role might be played by T 673 instead of methionine and the stretch of amino acid DFG 742–744 followed by Y 756 could form the activation loop. With these conserved features identified in the PKC domain containing protein, we named the gene encoding this protein as pkcA. Further, to understand the relationship between D. discoideum PkcA and PKC isoforms from other organisms, we constructed a phylogenetic tree using Clustal Ω which showed that PkcA is most closely related to the atypical and novel PKC isoforms. 3.2. pkcA changes from prestalk to prespore expression To ascertain whether pkcA expression is dynamic in D. discoideum, as in other organisms, we monitored its expression by promoter–reporter studies. A pkcA promoter construct was generated by ligating the regulatory region of pkcA to a construct encoding β-galactosidase. The accumulation of β-galactosidase was visualized by staining with the substrate X-gal. We observed a mosaic expression pattern in the aggregates which later was restricted to the aggregate center. By 12 h, pkcA expression was restricted to the tipped mound. At the first finger stage, the expression increased throughout the elongating tip. Although there is no distinct prestalk and prespore cell-type identity by 8 h of development, it is known that by 12 h, the tip is largely composed of prestalk cells. However, in the slugs, surprisingly, pkcA expression was confined to the prespore region and continued to be expressed in the prespore region in the culminants. This sudden shift in pkcA expression from the prestalk to the prespore region is suggestive of a dynamic expression pattern. We confirmed prespore-specific expression of pkcA in the slugs by semi-quantitative PCR for pkcA in prespore and prestalk enriched populations. To ensure the purity of the prestalk and prespore enriched populations, primers for ecmA and pspA were used as controls. In addition, semi-quantitative PCR suggests developmentally regulated expression of pkcA, with peaks of expression at 4 h and 16 h of development. Fig. 2 Dynamic expression pattern of pkcA. pkcA -LacZ expression at various stages of development. Scale bar—0.2 mm. Semi-quantitative PCR of pkcA using RNA extracted from prespore and prestalk enriched cell type, pkcA expression throughout... 3.3. Aggregates of pkcA − fragment pkcA is a single copy gene in D. discoideum and to understand its role in development, we generated pkcA − cells by targeted gene disruption of the catalytic domain. pkcA − cells were selected using blasticidin, and confirmed by PCR using the primer sets P3–P4, P5–P7, P6–P7 and Southern hybridization. The absence of pkcA transcript in pkcA − cells further confirmed the mutant. To examine whether pkcA − cells showed any developmental defect, we performed a developmental assay with pkcA − cells. Unlike Ax2, pkcA − aggregates spiraled around a central hollow within the single multicellular structure, which then fragmented to form multiple mounds. The mounds continued to develop into slugs that migrated and formed fruiting bodies resembling those of Ax2 but smaller. When a small molecule inhibitor of the catalytic domain of PKC, GF109203X, was used, Ax2 aggregates fragmented into multiple mounds, phenocopying the mutant. Quantification of this phenotype by counting the number of tipped mounds per unit area formed, showed that pkcA − cells and Ax2 cells treated with GF109203X formed over twice as many tips as Ax2 cells at 14 h of development. This suggests that PkcA kinase activity may be required for tip dominance. Complementation of pkcA − with pAct15: pkcA rescued the developmental defects and the phenotype was comparable to Ax2. Fig. 3 Fragmenting of late aggregate in pkcA −. Absence of pkcA expression in pkcA −. Developmental profiling of Ax2, pkcA −, Ax2+10 μM GF109203X and pkcA − /. Scale bar—0.2 mm. Number of tipped... 3.4. pkcA − late aggregates displayed multiple cAMP wave generating centers The periodic synthesis and secretion of cAMP by cells in the aggregation center directs further development in D. discoideum. Detection and amplification of these signals by the surrounding cells, coupled with desensitization of the cAMP producing cells, results in outward propagation of cAMP waves from the aggregation center. cAMP waves guide the cells to move towards a common center and form a mound. The propagating waves can be observed by the differences in the optical density of cells moving in response to cAMP waves. To determine whether the breaking up of late aggregates of pkcA − cells is due to the loss of a dominant signaling center, we visualized cAMP waves by recording development in real time, and then subtracted the image pairs that were 8 frames apart. Unlike Ax2, which had a single wave generating center with spiraling arms moving in the outward direction, pkcA − and Ax2 cells developed in the presence of the inhibitor GF109203X had several wave propagating centers. Each wave propagating center fragmented and progressed to form independent fruiting bodies. The optical density analysis clearly suggests that cAMP wave generation in pkcA − cells is defective. Like Ax2, the complemented strain, pkcA − / had a single cAMP wave generating center. Fig. 4 pkcA − is defective in cAMP relay. cAMP wave generating centers are represented by optical density waves. Wave generating centers are indicated by asterixes. Scale bar—0.2 mm. Bar graph representing the relative change in the expression... Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.05.021. 3.5. pkcA − cells are impaired in cAMP relay The key players involved in cAMP relay are adenylate cyclase A, which synthesizes cAMP, and cAMP phosphodiesterases, which degrade cAMP to AMP. The degradation of cAMP is further driven by the relative levels of 5′ nucleotidase and adenosine kinase, which catalyse the conversion of AMP to adenosine. To investigate whether the regulation of genes involved in cAMP relay is disturbed, we determined the expression levels of these genes at 9 h and 12 h of development by qRT-PCR. Although there was no change in the acaA expression at either 9 h or 12 h, the expression levels of pde4, 5 ′ nt and adk were reduced. There was no significant change in pde4 expression at 9 h but a decrease in expression was observed by 12 h. There was a significant decrease in 5′nt and adk expression at 9 h and 12 h. To ascertain whether the downregulation of genes involved in cAMP degradation in pkcA − cells affected cAMP levels, total intracellular and extracellular cAMP levels at 9 h and 12 h of development were quantified. We observed a significant increase in cAMP levels by 9 h and 12 h, in pkcA − cells compared to Ax2. This suggests that the decreased expression of 5 ′ nt and adk may manifest as an increased level of cAMP. 3.6. pkcA − is defective in chemotaxis and cell–cell adhesion In addition to the influence of the cAMP relay, the integrity of the aggregates is governed by two other major factors: chemotaxis towards cAMP and cell–cell adhesion. To measure cell movement in response to a cAMP gradient, we performed an under-agarose cAMP chemotaxis assay. For this assay, Ax2 and pkcA − cells were allowed to starve on a shaker with pulsing of 30 nM cAMP. This mimics early developmental signaling, making the cells competent for chemotaxis towards cAMP. Cell movement towards cAMP was recorded for 15 min at 30 s intervals, and the average velocity was calculated. In agreement with earlier reports, the velocity of Ax2 cells was 10.04±1.24 μm/min, and interestingly, that of pkcA − cells was 13% higher The chemotaxis defects of pkcA − was restored in the complemented strain pkcA − / with responses similar to Ax2. Fig. 5 cAMP chemotaxis. Average chemotactic velocity of Ax2, pkcA − and pkcA − / in response to cAMP; error bars show the standard deviation. Velocity is calculated by dividing the total displacement of the cells by time. A total of... Changes in cell motility are typically associated with changes in the actin cytoskeleton. Hence, we tested the in vivo polymerization of F-actin in response to cAMP stimulation. In vivo F-actin polymerization studies were carried out by stimulating starved cells with cAMP, followed by fixing and staining the cells with TRITC-phalloidin at different time points. As reported earlier, after 10 s exposure to cAMP, the characteristic increase in F-actin polymerization was observed in Ax2 while in pkcA − cells the increase was about twice that of Ax2 cells. Microscopic examination of cell shape during chemotaxis showed that pkcA − cells often produced bifurcating pseudopods with a deep curvature at the front end, consistent with there being increased F-actin polymerization in pkcA − cells. Similar observation of increased F-actin polymerization has been observed in pirA − strain that leads to the splitting of the front-end pseudopods. This suggests that PkcA could be involved in inhibiting F-actin polymerization and thus pseudopod formation during cAMP chemotaxis. Fig. 6 Actin polymerization. In vivo actin polymerization assay measuring F-actin levels in response to cAMP stimulation. After 10 s exposure to cAMP, actin polymerization in pkcA − increased two-fold compared to Ax2 cells. Level of significance is indicated... Next, the cell–cell adhesion properties of pkcA − cells were examined. Developing amoebae express two major cell–cell adhesion proteins, CadA, expressed 2 h post-starvation, and CsaA expressed during early aggregation. CadA-mediated cell–cell adhesion is Ca 2+ -dependent and is thus EDTA-sensitive, while CsaA is Ca 2+ -independent and EDTA-resistant. The adhesive properties of Ax2 and pkcA − cells were measured after allowing the cells to develop for 4 h in suspension and then mechanically dispersing clumps into single cells. Cells were then allowed to aggregate again in the presence or absence of 10 mM EDTA, and the numbers of singlets and doublets were counted. pkcA − cells showed reduced cell–cell adhesion both in the presence of chelators and in their absence suggesting that cAMP induced expression of both CadA and CsaA is reduced. This reduction in expression was confirmed by Western blot analysis of CadA and CsaA. Taken together, these results indicate the disruption, in pkcA − cells, of two processes required for aggregate integrity, namely chemotaxis towards cAMP and cell–cell adhesion. Fig. 7 Cell adhesion properties of pkcA −.Cell–cell adhesion profiles of starved Ax2 and pkcA − cells shaken in suspension. The assay was carried out thrice with three biological replicates both in the presence and absence of 10 mM EDTA.... 3.7. pkcA − cells possess cell autonomous and non-autonomous defects D. discoideum morphogenesis is a result of the co-ordinated chemotactic movement of the developing cells and the signaling mediated by cell–cell contact. Any defect in these processes could affect differentiation and sorting during multicellular development. To examine whether there were defects in sorting of the cell-types in pkcA − slugs, we transformed Ax2 and pkcA − cells with prestalk and prespore cell-type specific markers and monitored their expression at the slug stage. pkcA − and Ax2 slugs showed the same expression patterns for the prespore marker and one of the prestalk markers. However, in pkcA − slugs the prestalk marker ecmA was observed not only in the prestalk region but also at a lower level in the prespore region while in Ax2 slugs it was confined exclusively to the prestalk region of the slug anterior. Similarly, the expression patterns of the other prestalk markers in pkcA − slugs differed from those in Ax2 slugs. In addition, pkcA − showed early expression of ecmA as observed by semi-quantitative PCR performed with RNA isolated from different stages of development. In pkcA − cells, ecmA expression started as early as 10 h of development, compared to Ax2 cells, which began expression at 12 h of development. This suggests that pkcA − is defective in regulating the temporal and spatial expression of prestalk genes. Fig. 8 Defective ecmA expression in pkcA −. ecmA -GFP expression in Ax2 and pkcA − cells at 16 h of development. Scale bar—0.5 mm. Semi-quantitative PCR for ecmA and pspA of RNA isolated from Ax2 and pkcA − at 10 h, 12 h,... These differentiation defects in pkcA − could either be due to faults in producing the signal or could be an intracellular defect in perceiving or processing the signal by the differentiating cell. To differentiate between the cell autonomous and non-autonomous roles of PkcA in development, chimeras of Ax2 and pkcA − cells were created at different ratios. Remarkably, tip dominance was partially rescued when pkcA − cells were co-developed with 50% Ax2. In chimeras with 50% unlabeled pkcA − and 50% act-15 /GFP expressing Ax2 cells, the unlabeled pkcA − preferentially populate the anterior prestalk region of the slug. When 20% pkcA − marked with ecmA /GFP were reconstituted with 80% unlabeled Ax2 cells, pkcA − were unable to restrict ecmA /GFP expression to the prestalk as the scattered expression could be seen even in the prespore region. Fig. 9 Cell autonomous and non-autonomous defects in pkcA −. Reconstitution of pkcA − with Ax2 cells in different ratios reduced the fragmentation defects of pkcA − aggregates. 50% unlabeled pkcA −, when reconstituted with... To further examine the cell autonomous nature of the differentiation defect of the pkcA − cells, terminal differentiation under monolayer conditions was carried out. Stalk cell differentiation was induced by sequential exposure of cells to cAMP and varying concentrations of DIF-1. Under these conditions, 45–65% of pkcA − / ecmA -GFP cells formed vacuolated stalk cells in the presence of DIF. In contrast, only 20–40% Ax2/ ecmA -GFP cells became vacuolated and formed stalk cells. A 1.5–2.5 fold increase in stalk cell formation was observed in pkcA − / ecmA -GFP with increasing concentrations of DIF. 4. Discussion Phosphatases and kinases control the active and inactive states of a number of proteins involved in signaling. One such transducer is PKC, ubiquitously present in organisms from yeast to metazoans, but absent in plants. The number of PKC isoforms in any given organism varies from one to 10. Yeasts have a single copy of PKC-like protein; nematodes have three isoforms, fruit flies have five, and mammals 10. It is interesting that a lower eukaryote such as D. discoideum encodes a protein with highly conserved PKC C1 and kinase domains. Being a large family with overlapping substrates, it is a challenge to assign specific roles to each PKC isoform. Here, we report the characterization of the pkcA, that it is involved in cAMP relay and cell-type differentiation. pkcA − cells had severe aggregation defects, with aggregates fragmenting into several mounds. The ability of cells to form stable, appropriately sized aggregates depends upon cAMP relay, chemotaxis, cytoskeletal dynamics and cell–cell adhesion. It is reported that when the equilibrium between chemotaxis and cell–cell adhesion factors is disturbed, streams break and reorganize themselves to form individual mounds. We see that pkcA − cells have enhanced chemotactic speed and decreased cell–cell adhesion, most likely due to increased F-actin polymerization and reduced expression of adhesion molecules, respectively. Our experiments thus suggest that the loss of integrity in pkcA − aggregates may be due to defects in chemotaxis towards cAMP and reduced cell–cell adhesion. As demonstrated by qPCR, pkcA − had altered expression of cAMP relay genes- pde4, 5′ nt and adk. This differential expression could manifest in altered cAMP levels in pkcA −. cAMP quantification indeed suggests increased cAMP levels at 9 h and 12 h of development. The strength of cAMP relay is one of the factors that regulate aggregate size. For example, cnrN − cells have excess cAMP that leads to reduced aggregate territory size. Late aggregates of pkcA − had several cAMP signaling centers suggesting a significant role of PkcA in cAMP relay during development. In addition to their morphogenetic defects, pkcA − cells exhibit differentiation defects. pkcA − cells preferentially differentiated into stalk cells in a stalk cell differentiation assay. Moreover, pkcA − cells preferentially sorted to the prestalk regions of chimeric slugs, demonstrating that this is a cell autonomous effect. The reason for this may be found in the aberrant temporal and spatial expression of prestalk genes observed in pkcA − cells. pkcA − cells express ecmA earlier in development than the wildtype. In addition, the expression of ecmA, ecmO and ecmAO is not properly localized in pkcA − slugs. The mislocalization of ecmA expression is not rescued by mixing with Ax2 cells, reinforcing the suggestion that this is a cell autonomous defect. The patterning defects of ecmA, ecmAO, ecmO in pkcA − and the increased prestalk cell type differentiation in monolayer conditions, suggest that PkcA could be involved in transcriptional regulation of prestalk patterning. Interestingly, the cell differentiation defect seen in pkcA − cells may originate during tip formation. Little is known about the mechanism of cell fate decisions involved in tip development. However, the observed pattern of pkcA expression may provide some insight; pkcA is expressed throughout development and switches from the prestalk region in late aggregates, to the prespore region in the slug. Many of the defects associated with loss of PkcA can be phenocopied by the treatment of Ax2 cells with 10 μM GF109203X, a small molecule inhibitor known to block the catalytic domain of PKC. This is consistent with the kinase activity being crucial for PkcA function in these processes. In mammalian systems, PKCs phosphorylate a number of proteins, such as extracellular receptor kinase-1/2, glycogen synthase 3β, nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells, and regulate cellular processes such as developmental cell-fate specification, differentiation, establishment of cell–cell contact during embryo compaction, cell polarity and cell migration. 5. Conclusion We report the characterization of pkcA in Dictyostelium. pkcA is expressed throughout development and switches from prestalk in late aggregates to prespore in the slugs. Our experiments demonstrate the role of PkcA in development and cell-type differentiation. The use of PKC specific inhibitor, GF109203X that inhibits the activity of catalytic domain manifests in a phenotype similar to the loss of pkcA supporting that pkcA could possibly code for a PKC ortholog. Supplementary Material SUpp Fig 2 Click here to view. Supp Fig 1 Click here to view. Supp Fig 3 Click here to view. Supp Fig 4 Click here to view. Supp Tables Click here to view. 