 The complex transition from a single-cell to a multicellular life form during the formation of a fruiting body by the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum is accompanied by a pulsatile collective signaling process that instigates chemotaxis of the constituent cells. Although the cells used for the analysis of this phenomenon are normally genetically identical, it is not clear whether they are equally responsive to the waves of the signaling stimulus, nor is it clear how responses across the population influence collective cell behavior. Here, we found that isogenic Dictyostelium cells displayed differing sensitivities to the chemoattractant cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Furthermore, the resulting signaling responses could be explained by a model in which cells are refractory to further stimulation for 5 to 6 min after the initial input and the signaling output is amplified, with the amplification threshold varying across the cells in the population. This pathway structure could explain intracellular amplification of the chemoattractant gradient during cell migration. The new model predicts that diverse cell responsiveness can facilitate collective cell behavior, specifically due to the presence of a small number of cells in the population with increased responsiveness that aid in propagating the initial cAMP signaling wave across the cell population. INTRODUCTION Changes in environmental conditions, such as nutrient limitation, can trigger complex responses in living cells, including self-organization of individual cells into multicellular ensembles and organisms. Cell-cell communication that takes place during the conversion from individual to collective cell behavior frequently relies on chemotactic responses, as exemplified by the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, which undergo a complex process of slug and fruiting body formation involving the creation of dynamically and spatially complex waves of the chemoattractant cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Individual cells can both respond to and secrete cAMP in an oscillatory fashion, resulting in behaviors characterized by considerable complexity and spatial and temporal variability, even if the population consists of isogenic cells. Several decades of research have revealed many aspects of cell signaling correlated with chemotactic responses in D. discoideum and the similarity of these responses to those displayed by mammalian cells in many physiological and pathological conditions. However, the research into chemotactic cell responses and the associated signaling has for the most part focused on representative cell behavior characteristic of the population average rather than the individual cell responses. It is still therefore largely unknown whether D. discoideum cells exposed to the same, albeit complex and quickly changing external inputs, would react in unison or display diversity in signaling and whether any such diversity would be of functional importance. Furthermore, given simple cAMP stimulation protocols frequently used in the analysis of cell responses, our understanding of the dynamic response regulation remains incomplete, allowing for the existence of many alternative models of dynamics signaling responses that are consistent with the known behavior of this organism. We therefore set out to explore the dynamics and diversity of cell responses to a series of complex, time-varying inputs under well-controlled conditions. RESULTS To conveniently query cell responses to diverse signaling inputs, we developed and used a microfluidic function generator. This device enables controlled, complex perturbations of the cellular microenvironment. In D. discoideum, the first step in activating the multiple signaling pathways involved in chemotaxis is the binding of cAMP to corresponding heterotrimeric guanosine triphosphate–binding protein –coupled receptors on the cell surface. The GPCRs remain uniformly distributed over the cell surface, and receptor occupancy mirrors the concentration of chemoattractant, displaying little amplification. However, various signaling processes downstream of GPCRs, notably activation of PI3K, can undergo transient activation followed by adaptation to persistent spatially homogeneous cAMP stimuli while displaying sharp persistent intracellular activity gradients in the presence of extracellular cAMP gradients, even if the gradients are very shallow. Although numerous studies have shown that cAMP induces PI3K activity, the kinetic response of individual cells to cAMP doses has rarely been measured. In the initial analysis, we stimulated populations of developed D. discoideum cells with a spatially homogeneous step increase in cAMP and measured the resulting time course of PI3K activity, using the phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate –specific biosensor PHcrac- GFP. We specifically monitored the kinetics of the sensor translocation to the plasma membrane in response to cAMP stimuli spanning seven orders of magnitude, from 1 pM to 10 µM at 10°C. Fig. 1 Translocation kinetics of PHcrac-GFP in response to single-step inputs of cAMP of various doses. Population-averaged kinetics of PIP 3 translocation as previously described. To assess the viability and behavior of Dictyostelium cells cultured under continuous flow inside the device, we used time lapse imaging of a field of differentiated cells for a period of time, contrasting the motility exhibited by the cells cultured inside the microfluidic chip to that of the cells in a standard open culture chamber. We found no significant difference in motility between the two culture environments, suggesting that the cells are not compromised by the flow or other properties of the device. Dynamic stimulus generation and response measurement Control channels were filled with water and pressurized with in-house compressed air to 20 psi to prevent air from being forced from the control channel into the test chambers when valves were actuated during normal operation. Valve actuation was controlled by a set of miniature three-way solenoid valves that toggled between 0 and 20 psi. The sequence of valve actuation for the various stimulation profiles was controlled by custom JAVA-implemented programs through a digital input / output computer card. Real-time modulation of fluidic flow rate for linear and parabolic ramp stimulations was achieved by changing the hydraulic pressure by altering the heights of the media reservoirs feeding the inlets and outlets. The media reservoirs were mounted onto a linear slider with a motorized shaft. Slider movement was controlled by custom JAVA programs regulating the motor operation through an EZ 17 stepper driver. After dead-volume priming of the device channels with DB, differentiated cells were introduced into the device at the concentration of 8 million cells/ml. Cells adhered to the glass surface within minutes after perfusion was stopped. The perfusion rate used throughout the whole study was ~250 nl/min. cAMP profile was measured through a surrogate tracer dye, Alexa Fluor 594 hydrazide. Images of living cell responses were observed with a motorized Zeiss Axiovert 200 M epifluorescence microscope equipped with a Lambda DG-5 300-W light source and wavelength switching excitation system and a Cascade 512B charge-coupled device camera and driven by Slidebook. The Semrock filters used to visualize the GFP and the Alexa tracer dye are the following: single fluorescein isothiocyanate band-pass filter 494 ± 20; triple dich 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole /FITC/TXRed; triple DAPI/FITC/TXRed emitter. Temperatures were held at 11°C during imaging by means of a custom-made on-stage incubator to provide stable focus and prevent overheating the cells. Response quantification The custom algorithms for background correction and quantification of the ratio, σ, of the membrane/cytosol GFP fluorescence intensities were implemented in Mathematica as follows. For a single cell, fluorescence intensities were measured along 16 four-pixel-wide lines drawn through the membrane portion and ending at the central portion of the cell. The pixels around the periphery and cytosolic regions were extracted by segmentation and normalized against the local background value. The pixels of each region on the multiple lines for each cell at each time frame were averaged together to produce the membrane and the cytosol signal values. The signaling output was estimated as the ratio of the membrane and the cytosolic fluorescence signal that was normalized to the prestimulation values. The cell responses have no dependence on PHcrac-GFP expression. aLEGI model setup and development The frequently used step stimuli response data shown in Fig. 1 present an initial opportunity to investigate whether the previously published LEGI model can successfully approximate the observed results. Upon comparing the predictions made by the model with the experimental measurements, we found that the model failed to account for the following: switch-like dose response for single cells but graded dose response for the population average and diverse response decline times for the first response phase in single cells responding to the same input. Instead, the LEGI model predicted that each cell should uniformly exhibit a graded change in response to increasing doses of step inputs and nonvariable response decline time. Despite its inability to account for the heterogeneous single-cell behavior, LEGI was able to predict the ensemble average responses observed in all the experiments. We therefore hypothesized that the LEGI model should be modified rather than discarded. Arguably, the simplest assumption needed for model modification was that within the signaling pathway, the LEGI signaling module would be followed downstream by an amplification signaling module, capable of strong amplification of the LEGI module output if this output exceeded a certain threshold value, θ. A similar scheme was earlier proposed by us before on the grounds of the need for gene amplification. We further assumed that the distribution of the values of θ would be uniform across a range of parameters, as discussed below, again aiming to see whether this simple assumption would be consistent with the experimental results. Although the amplification module could be implemented in different ways, we have adopted a simple description based on zero-order ultrasensitivity, with the LEGI output further “filtered” through two coupled saturated reactions. Thus, the overall response is positively regulated by the output from the LEGI module and negatively regulated by a second unknown inhibitor defining the threshold θ. For the same LEGI response, higher values for θ will cause the cells to be classified as nonresponders, whereas in a cell with a low value for θ, the cell’s response would be maximal because of the ultrasensitive nature of the amplifier. Except for the θ values, all other parameters of the model have been assumed to exhibit no cell-to-cell variation. This model has been referred to in the main text as the aLEGI model. It was implemented in Mathematica, and 200 cells were simulated for each condition. The model equations and the assumed parameter values are shown in text S5. Below we discuss how the model was “trained” by initial experimental data to arrive at the assumed model parameters and how its predictions were tested in further experimentation. Experimental dose-response results are consistent with uniform θ population distribution The equations represent the simple embodiment of the aLEGI model discussed above. The dependencies of the exciter a and inhibitor i and stimulation by the input L are assumed to be distinct only in the kinetics of activation and inactivation represented by the corresponding rate constants ρ a and ρ i. These constants are estimated experimentally as described below. The constitutive synthesis constant, k c is introduced so that the baseline response value would be nonzero. Furthermore, we assume that at the steady state, the ratio of the exciter and inhibitor amounts would be equal to unity, which implies that the steady-state amounts of these two components are equal to each other and equal to k c / k d. The normalization of the ratio of the steady states of the exciter and inhibitor to unity does not affect the results other than in defining the steady state of the response element r, which is then normalized to r tot /2. Again, this normalization does not affect the generality of the conclusions other than in defining the steady state of the amplified response, which is forced in the model to be below 20% of the peak response for any of the concentrations of L, therefore preventing amplification of the LEGI output at the steady-state amounts. Overall, therefore, the response element can vary in the simulations between r tot /2 and r tot values, which is expected to lead to amplified responses only given the input stimulation, with the degree of response determined by the particular value of the amplification threshold in a particular cell. The higher the input L, the higher the chances that the corresponding output r can, at least transiently, exceed the threshold for amplification in a given cell. To illustrate this dependence of response amplification on the values of the threshold θ and the input L, we plotted the maximum amplified response value as a function of these two parameters. The average population response to a specific dose is thus a function of the distribution of the values of θ across the cell population, allowing us to examine whether the assumption of a uniform distribution of θ is consistent with the experimental data, and determining in the process the approximate limits of this distribution. We indeed found that the experimental data were well explained by the assumption of the uniform distribution with the values of θ ranging within the interval given in text S5. The lower limit of this interval is determined by the condition stipulated above. The upper limit is determined by the appropriate weighing of the fraction of poorly responsive cells within the population to fit the experimental average dose-response data. The exact value of K m the constant defining the degree of saturation of the ultrasensitive reactions determining the amplifier output, was also not consequential to the outcome of the simulations as long as the conditions of ultrasensitivity were satisfied, thus demanding that this value was low compared to both modified amp θ and unmodified amplifier states. Constraining the kinetic constants The degree of response amplification is not sensitive to the exact values of many of the model parameters and depends primarily on the distribution of the amplification threshold values across the cell population. However, the ability of the model to describe kinetic responses observed experimentally does require further constraining of the model parameters, particularly the characteristic reactions rates ρ i. Within the context of the LEGI model, during observation of a pronounced peak in response, the activation rate of the exciter should exceed the activation rate of the inhibitor. Furthermore, the initial rise in the response is primarily determined by the activation rate of the exciter ρ a allowing one to constrain this rate with experimental data. Likewise, the subsequent fall of the response to the baseline steady-state values is primarily determined by the activation rate of the inhibitor ρ i and thus can also be constrained. To constrain the rates ρ a and ρ i, we therefore contrasted the modeling output with the dynamic average dose-response data shown in Fig. 1. We aimed to reproduce both the kinetics of the responses and the dose response of the response amplitudes. We found that there was a close agreement between model predictions and experimental measurements for the values of the parameters given in text S5 for all the doses analyzed, suggesting an order of magnitude difference in the parameter values. These estimates agreed well with both the LEGI module output and the average output of the aLEGI model, provided that the response rates of the response element r and the amplifier module were faster than either of the rates ρ a and ρ i, which therefore constituted an important additional assumption of the model, and led to the assumed values of parameters ρ r and ρ m shown in text S5. The simple step-like input profile used to obtain the data in Fig. 1 was not sufficient to reveal the rate constants of inactivation of the exciter and inhibitor because the step-like input leads only to activation of these two model species within the context of the LEGI model. Using a different experimental protocol, which was also used to validate the more basic assumption of the LEGI model itself, we therefore tested whether the simplifying assumption was supported by the data. We analyzed cell responses to two pulse-like stimuli of variable durations separated by wash periods of variable periods. The duration of zero input separating two stimulation pulses can allow the cells to “reset” their sensitivity to the input or adapt, which is determined by how fast the exciter and inhibitor species return to their baselines. Furthermore, given sufficient duration of the first pulse, which would allow the adaptive return of the cell response to the baseline, the response to input removal is expected to show no detectable change if the inactivation rate of the exciter is much faster than that of the inhibitor. In fact, the rate of the response decrease after the onset of the zero input defines the exciter inactivation rate, yielding a value similar to the exciter activation rate, thus allowing us to use the same value for both, as shown in text S5. Finally, shorter durations of the initial stimulation might not allow full inhibitor activation, facilitating its inactivation during the adaptive, zero input periods, whereas shorter durations of zero input periods might not allow full inhibitor inactivation, limiting the response during the secondary stimulation pulse. These experiments thus allow the inhibitor activation and inactivation kinetics to be further constrained. We have particularly focused on determining the approximate value of the inhibitor inactivation rate, obtaining the value close to that of the activation rate, allowing us to use the same value for both in the model shown in text S5. The considerations above and the corresponding experiments finalized the model training, with the rest of the analysis using the model to predict the outcomes, in terms of both the response kinetics and the variable fractions of cells responding to a given input. The details are provided in the Results section and the main figure legends. Supplementary Material Suppl Click here to view. Supplimental Movies h Click here to view. Supplimental Movies i Click here to view. Supplimental Movies j Click here to view. Supplimental Movies k Click here to view. Supplimental Movies l Click here to view. Supplimental Movies m Click here to view. Supplimental Movies n Click here to view. Supplimental Movies o Click here to view. Supplimental Movies p Click here to view. Supplimental Movies q Click here to view. Supplimental Movies Click here to view. Supplimental Movies a Click here to view. Supplimental Movies b Click here to view. Supplimental Movies c Click here to view. Supplimental Movies d Click here to view. Supplimental Movies e Click here to view. Supplimental Movies f Click here to view. Supplimental Movies g Click here to view. 