Correction: Lack of Ecological and Life History Context Can Create the Illusion of Social Interactions in Dictyostelium discoideum You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Correction: Lack of Ecological and Life History Context Can Create the Illusion of Social Interactions in Dictyostelium discoideum PLoS Comput Biol. 2018 Jan; 14: e1005850. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List PLoS Comput Biol v.14; 2018 Jan Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay This corrects the article " Lack of Ecological and Life History Context Can Create the Illusion of Social Interactions in Dictyostelium discoideum " in volume 12, e1005246. Correction: Lack of Ecological and Life History Context Can Create the Illusion of Social Interactions in Dictyostelium discoideum The PLOS Computational Biology Staff Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials S1 Text: Figure C. Correlations between non-social traits. Each one of the 31 winning genotypes obtained in S1 Text Fig B is grown clonally. Top row: aggregator-related traits are measured after a growth-starvation sequence with a starvation time of 200 hours. The number of aggregators is related to: A) aggregation rate, B) division rate and C) aggregation time. Bottom row: non-aggregator related traits are measured after 160 hours of starvation, when the genotypes with the lowest aggregation rate have produced 95% of their final number of aggregators. The number of solitary cells is related to D) aggregation rate, E) division rate, and F) number of aggregators. pcbi.1005850.s001.docx GUID: EEED46E9-8A6A-4318-AFA8-C0180070E0B9 There is an error in the second part of Eq 1 in the manuscript. The authors confirm that the errors affect the results in Fig 3 and S1 Text Figure C, but not in any of the other figures of the paper. Below are the details of the affected results: Fig 3 Correlations between non-social traits. The model in the original manuscript is cell size independent and therefore it does not include a tradeoff between cell size and division rate, as it is claimed in the text. For this, the equations need to be modified such that genotypes that produce bigger cells also consume more resources per division event. In the absence of any information on metabolic tradeoffs in slime molds, and given the lack of general trends for microbes, the simplest way to achieve this is to include a factor Q in the resource dynamics that indicates how the resource needed to produce a single consumer cell scales with cell size. We choose Q = c max /c to be equal to 1 for the fastest dividing strain, which produces the smallest cells; Q then increases as the division rate decreases. Thus, all strains consume resources at the same rate c max but some wait longer between cell divisions than others. The corrected resource dynamics in Eqs is R ˙ = − R R 1 / 2 + R ∑ *, c Q c X *, c The inclusion of this additional tradeoff only changes the carrying capacity of the system and does not modify the outcome of the competition among strains; therefore, this correction does not change the results of the evolutionary simulations or of the simulations that involve mixes. S6 Fig does not change either, because it is independent of resource dynamics. The only effects appear in S1, S2 Fig in the final population sizes but not in the observed trends, and in Fig 3 and S1 Text Fig C, which show the correlations between non-social traits for the discrete, respectively the continuous mechanism. Since bigger cells need more resources per division event and since the amount of resources used in the growth period is fixed across genotypes, strains with lower division rate produce smaller populations upon resource exhaustion. For the discrete mechanism, this result leaves the majority of correlations between non-social traits unchanged, except those for genotypes that differ in c but not in α : i.e. slow environment genotypes for which all cells aggregate or fast environment genotypes for which all cells stay solitary. Despite having the same α, due to the cell size–division rate tradeoff, these genotypes differ in the production of aggregating, respectively non-aggregating cells,and these cell numbers correlate positively with c. For the continuous mechanism, prior to the correction, strains with the same aggregation rate γ but higher division rate c produced fewer aggregated cells, since cell production upon resource exhaustion was independent of c and faster dividing non-aggregators had lower survival and were thus less likely to aggregate before dying. However, when the cell size versus division rate tradeoff is included correctly, strains with higher division rates produce more cells upon resource exhaustion, which, given our choice for the functional dependence of the tradeoffs, counters the effect of the tradeoff between division rate and short-term survival in the number of both aggregators and non-aggregators. Consequently, correlations between number of aggregators and c and γ for slow and fast environment genotypes change and they become qualitatively similar to the ones obtained for the discrete mechanism ; 3C with C ; 3D with C ; 3E with C and 3F with C ). The correlation between number of aggregators and aggregation time also switches from positive to negative in slow environment genotypes ). Please view the correct versions of Fig 3 and S1 Text Figure C here: Supporting information S1 Text Figure C. Correlations between non-social traits. Each one of the 31 winning genotypes obtained in S1 Text Fig B is grown clonally. Top row: aggregator-related traits are measured after a growth-starvation sequence with a starvation time of 200 hours. The number of aggregators is related to: A) aggregation rate, B) division rate and C) aggregation time. Bottom row: non-aggregator related traits are measured after 160 hours of starvation, when the genotypes with the lowest aggregation rate have produced 95% of their final number of aggregators. The number of solitary cells is related to D) aggregation rate, E) division rate, and F) number of aggregators. Click here for additional data file. Article information PLoS Comput Biol. 2018 Jan; 14: e1005850. Published online 2018 Jan 23. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005850 PMCID: PMC5779642 PMID: 29360835 The PLOS Computational Biology Staff Copyright © 2018 The PLOS Computational Biology Staff This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. This corrects the article " Lack of Ecological and Life History Context Can Create the Illusion of Social Interactions in Dictyostelium discoideum " in volume 12, e1005246. Articles from PLOS Computational Biology are provided here courtesy of PLOS Reference 1. Martínez-García R, Tarnita CE Lack of Ecological and Life History Context Can Create the Illusion of Social Interactions in Dictyostelium discoideum. PLoS Comput Biol 12 : e1005246 PLoS Comput Biol. 2018 Jan; 14: e1005850. Published online 2018 Jan 23. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005850 Copyright/License Request permission to reuse Copyright © 2018 The PLOS Computational Biology Staff This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. Fig 3 Open in a separate window Correlations between non-social traits. A clonal growth period for each one of the 31 winning genotypes obtained in Fig 2 is integrated to evaluate correlations between the non-social traits included in the model at the onset of starvation. A) Total population versus division rate, c. Number of aggregators versus B) the aggregator to non-aggregator ratio, α ; C) division rate, c. Number of non-aggregators versus D) the number of aggregators; E) the aggregator to non- aggregator ratio; F) the division rate.