 Autocrine proliferation repressor protein A is a protein secreted by Dictyostelium discoideum cells. Although there is very little sequence similarity between AprA and any human protein, AprA has a predicted structural similarity to the human protein dipeptidyl peptidase IV. AprA is a chemorepellent for Dictyostelium cells, and DPPIV is a chemorepellent for neutrophils. This led us to investigate if AprA and DPPIV have additional functional similarities. We find that like AprA, DPPIV is a chemorepellent for, and inhibits the proliferation of, D. discoideum cells, and that AprA binds some DPPIV binding partners such as fibronectin. Conversely, rAprA has DPPIV‐like protease activity. These results indicate a functional similarity between two eukaryotic chemorepellent proteins with very little sequence similarity, and emphasize the usefulness of using a predicted protein structure to search a protein structure database, in addition to searching for proteins with similar sequences. Keywords: AprA, DPPIV, structure similarity, functional similarity, protease, chemorepellent Introduction AprA is a secreted Dictyostelium discoideum protein that inhibits the proliferation of D. discoideum cells. 1, 2 AprA functions in conjunction with another secreted protein called CfaD, which also inhibits the proliferation of D. discoideum cells. 3 Loss of the AprA or CfaD proteins results in cells that proliferate faster and reach a higher density than wild‐type cells. 2, 3 The addition of recombinant AprA or CfaD to wild‐type cells causes a significant reduction in proliferation. 3, 4 In addition to its ability to inhibit D. discoideum cell proliferation, AprA causes chemorepulsion of D. discoideum cells. 1 Cells at the edge of wild‐type colonies move away from the dense colony center while cells at the edge of an aprA − colony form a tight edge with little movement outward. 5 Both wild type and aprA − cells move away from a source of rAprA. 1 DPPIV is a human glycoprotein that can be found in both a transmembrane as well as an extracellular soluble form. 6 The trans membrane form is expressed on some lymphocytes and epithelial cells and has a number of binding partners including adenosine deaminase, fibronectin, and collagen. 7, 8, 9 The soluble form is found in most bodily fluids. 7, 9 Both the membrane and soluble forms have serine protease activity, and cleave proteins or peptides with a proline or alanine at the second position of the N‐terminus. 6 One of the major functions of DPPIV is the cleavage of glucagon‐like peptide‐1, which normally increases the secretion of insulin to promote glucose uptake. 10 DPPIV cleavage of GLP‐1 inhibits this process, and inhibitors of DPPIV are used as treatment for type 2 diabetes. 10 Protein structure prediction can reveal protein function that was not obvious from sequence analysis. Structure prediction can be extremely accurate. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 Structure based classification can help identify related proteins that have low sequence similarities. 17, 18 For instance, lectins, which bind carbohydrates, contain a characteristic structural fold. 18 Although the fold is present in many different protein families with proteins that bind carbohydrates, there is little sequence similarity within the fold. 18 These studies are evidence that structural and functional properties may be comparable even when sequence similarities are lacking. The AprA protein has no significant amino acid sequence similarity to human proteins. We previously found that the predicted structure of AprA has similarity to the crystal structure of DPPIV. 19 AprA causes chemorepulsion of D. discoideum cells, and we observed that DPPIV causes chemorepulsion of human and mouse neutrophils. 1, 19 In this report, we examine whether other functional similarities exist between AprA and DPPIV, and show that AprA has a DPPIV‐like peptidase activity, and that DPPIV can both inhibit the proliferation and induce chemorepulsion of D. discoideum cells. Together, this indicates conserved properties of two eukaryotic chemorepulsion signals with very different amino acid sequences albeit with possibly similar structures. Results Like DPPIV, rAprA has protease activity DPPIV is a serine peptidase, with a characteristic serine protease catalytic triad in the crystal structure, 20, 21 and DPPIV cleaves peptides or proteins with a proline or alanine in the second position at the N‐terminus. 22, 23 The predicted structure of AprA has a similar serine peptidase catalytic triad. 19 To test whether AprA may have a DPPIV‐like protease activity, conditioned media collected from log‐phase wild type or aprA − cells were assayed for DPPIV activity. Wild type conditioned media had significantly more DPPIV‐like protease activity, with a K m of 720 ± 150 µ M and a V max of 20 ± 1 µ M /h, than conditioned media from aprA − cells. 2 ]. The subtracted curve had a K m of 590 ± 480 µ M and a V max of 10 ± 2 µ M /h. This suggests that AprA may have DPPIV‐like activity, or that AprA may regulate something that has DPPIV‐like peptidase activity. Figure 1 AprA and DPPIV have similar structures. The predicted structure of AprA, shown in cyan, is superimposed with the α/β hydrolase domain of DPPIV, shown in green. The catalytic triad of DPPIV Wild‐type or aprA − conditioned media were incubated with various concentrations of H‐Gly‐Pro‐pNA p‐tosylate and the formation of the pNA digestion product... To directly test whether AprA has DPPIV‐like activity, we examined the DPPIV‐like protease activity of recombinant AprA. As glycosylation of DPPIV is required for its peptidase activity, 24 we expressed AprA in, and purified recombinant AprA from, HEK 293 cells and E. coli. After electrophoresis on SDS‐PAGE gels, 293‐rAprA showed a larger apparent molecular mass than bac‐rAprA. Western blots stained with Lens culinaris agglutinin, which detects sequences containing α‐linked mannose or α‐linked d ‐glucose residues, 25 indicated that 293‐rAprA and DPPIV are glycosylated, while bac‐rAprA showed much less glycosylation. The smeared bac‐rAprA band in the middle panel is two bands, which was revealed by a high contrast view. Since there are some glycosylated proteins in E. coli, 26, 27, 28 this may be due either to some glycosylation of the bac‐rAprA, or nonspecific staining by the lectin. The apparently lower level of lectin staining of rDPPIV compared to 293‐rAprA may be due to differences in glycosylation content or composition. Both 293‐rAprA and bac‐rAprA had DPPIV‐like peptidase activity. 2 ]. The 293‐AprA showed a K m of 100 ± 65 µ M and a V max of 9 ± 1 µ M /, while bac‐rAprA, showed a K m of 220 ± 120 µ M and a V max of 4 ± 1 µ M /. Although the K m s were not significantly different, the bac‐rAprA V max was significantly lower than that of 293‐rAprA. Together, these data suggest that AprA has DPPIV‐like enzymatic activity, and that glycosylation of AprA potentiates this activity. Like DPPIV, rAprA can bind fibronectin DPPIV binds to fibronectin and collagen. 7, 9 To determine if AprA also has a similar binding activity, fibronectin, collagen, or 10% serum were coated on plates and the ability of rAprA to bind them was assessed. Bac‐rAprA was able to bind plasma fibronectin. 3 ]. The bac‐rAprA also appeared to weakly bind collagen. Although the anti‐AprA antibodies used in this assay recognize both bac‐rAprA and 293‐rAprA on Western blots, in parallel assays, 293‐rAprA showed no significant binding to fibronectin or collagen. 3 ]. These data suggest that rAprA has some DPPIV‐like binding activity, and that AprA glycosylation is not required for this binding. Figure 3 rAprA binds some of the binding partners of DPPIV. Plates were coated with nothing, bovine serum albumin, serum, plasma fibronectin, collagen I, or collagen IV. After incubation with Bac‐rAprA or 293‐rAprA,... rAprA is unable to chemorepulse human neutrophils DPPIV causes chemorepulsion of human neutrophils. 19 To determine if AprA also causes chemorepulsion of human neutrophils, bac‐rAprA or 293‐rAprA were assayed for their ability to cause chemorepulsion. Neither bac‐rAprA nor 293‐rAprA could cause biased movement of human neutrophils. 4 ]. Neutrophils are the only cell type that we observed DPPIV to have a chemorepellent effect on, 19 and since neutrophils do not proliferate in culture, we were unable to determine if AprA affects neutrophil proliferation. 293‐rAprA could not induce chemorepulsion of D. discoideum cells, 4 ], suggesting that glycosylation is not involved in the chemorepulsion activity of AprA. Figure 4 AprA does not induce chemorepulsion of neutrophils. 1.6 µg/mL of rAprA was added to one side of an Insall chamber, and the movement of neutrophils towards or away from the AprA was measured. 0.3 µg/mL of bac‐rAprA or the... Like AprA, DPPIV can inhibit the proliferation of D. discoideum cells Bac‐rAprA inhibits the proliferation of D. discoideum cells. 4 However, we were unable to detect any significant ability of 293‐rAprA to inhibit D. discoideum proliferation. To determine if recombinant DPPIV affects the proliferation of D. discoideum cells, rDPPIV was added to wild‐type cells. Like bac‐rAprA and rCfaD, 300 ng/mL rDPPIV inhibited the proliferation of D. discoideum cells, 5 ], and this inhibition was observed at rDPPIV concentrations ranging from 1 to 1000 ng/mL. 5 ]. To determine if rDPPIV can inhibit proliferation in the absence of endogenous AprA or CfaD, rDPPIV was added to aprA − or cfaD − cells. rDPPIV was able to inhibit the proliferation of both of these strains. 5 ]. Together, these data indicate that for unknown reasons, 293‐rAprA is unable to affect D. discoideum proliferation, that rDPPIV can inhibit D. discoideum proliferation, and that this inhibition by rDPPIV does not require AprA or CfaD. Figure 5 rDPPIV inhibits the proliferation of D. discoideum cells. Buffer, rDPPIV, rAprA, or rCfaD were added to wild‐type D. discoideum cells and the cell density was measured 18 h later. The inhibition of proliferation was then measured in comparison... Like AprA, rDPPIV can induce chemorepulsion of D. discoideum cells In addition to its ability to inhibit proliferation, AprA causes chemorepulsion of Dictyostelium cells. 1 Like bac‐rAprA, rDPPIV also induced chemorepulsion of D. discoideum cells. 6 ). These data indicate further functional similarities between AprA and DPPIV. Figure 6 rDPPIV induces chemorepulsion of D. discoideum cells. 2000 ng/mL of rDPPIV or bac‐rAprA was added to one side of an Insall chamber. The movement of D. discoideum cells was observed by video‐microscopy and displacement on the x axis was... Discussion The Dictyostelium discoideum protein AprA and the human protein DPPIV are predicted to share structural similarity, but lack any significant sequence similarity. Here we show that AprA and DPPIV also have functional similarity. AprA appears to be responsible for some but not all of the DPPIV‐like enzymatic activity in D. discoideum conditioned media. The residual activity in aprA − CM may be due to nonspecific proteases, since a variety of proteases are secreted by D. discoideum cells. 29, 30 Both bac‐rAprA and 293‐rAprA have DPPIV‐like enzymatic activity, although the 293‐rAprA V max was higher than that of bac‐rAprA, indicating that glycosylation potentiates the enzymatic activity of rAprA. This is partially consistent with observations that glycosylation of DPPIV is required for its enzymatic activity. 24 Recombinant DPPIV has a K m of 170 µ M and a V max of 8 µ M /, using the same substrate we used, 31 indicating that the K m and V max of 293‐rAprA and DPPIV are quite similar. In addition to having a DPPIV‐like protease activity, like DPPIV bac‐rAprA binds fibronectin and weakly to collagen. Conversely, like AprA, DPPIV both inhibits D. discoideum cell proliferation and induces chemorepulsion of D. discoideum cells. Together, these observations indicate that AprA has some functional properties similar to those of DPPIV, and vice versa. Despite having DPPIV‐like protease activity, neither bac‐rAprA nor 293‐rAprA could cause chemorepulsion of human neutrophils. We previously observed that DPPIV protease inhibitors can block the chemorepellent activity of DPPIV on neutrophils. 19 Together, these observations suggest that either the neutrophil chemorepellent domain site of DPPIV is near its protease active site, but is not part of it, that the chemorepellent active site is not near the protease active site, and is disturbed by the protease inhibitor as an allosteric alteration, or that there is a difference in the recognition sites of the AprA and DPPIV proteases that is not revealed by the H‐Gly‐Pro‐pNA p‐tosylate substrate. Alternatively, DPPIV protease activity could be necessary, but not sufficient, for neutrophil chemorepulsion, with additional protein functions required that are not conserved with AprA. Bac‐rAprA inhibits the proliferation of, and induces chemorepulsion of, D. discoideum. Despite having a higher V max than bac‐rAprA, the 293‐rAprA was unable to do either of these things to D. discoideum. These observations indicate that the effects of AprA on D. discoideum cells does not involve its DPPIV‐like enzymatic activity, or that as with AprA and DPPIV, there is a difference in the recognition sites of the bac‐rAprA and 293‐rAprA proteases that is caused by the difference in glycosylation, and that this difference is not revealed by the H‐Gly‐Pro‐pNA p‐tosylate substrate. Alternatively, the glycosylation of 293‐rAprA may prevent binding of 293‐rAprA to other proteins, 293‐rAprA‐induced chemorepulsion, and inhibition of proliferation. D. discoideum produces both N‐ and O‐ linked glycosylations. 32 As such, we expected that a glycosylated rAprA may function more like DPPIV since DPPIV activity is thought to be dependent on its glycosylation. 24 Throughout its developmental life cycle, D. discoideum is dependent on cell–cell adhesion proteins for fruiting body formation and cell fate determination. 33 Indeed, D. discoideum contains proteins with EGF/Laminin repeat domains and domains for cell adhesion/recognition, such as fibronectin and growth factor receptor domains. 33 An additional difference between the two forms of rAprA is their ability to bind fibronectin. The 293‐rAprA, which has higher enzymatic activity, shows no detectable binding. This indicates that the binding of AprA to fibronectin is not dependent on its enzymatic activity. Taken together, our results indicate that AprA and DPPIV have remarkable similarities in their functional properties despite having little sequence similarity, and suggest that the similarities in functional activities do not depend on their similar protease activities. This then suggests the possibility that there is some domain of DPPIV that resembles the receptor–binding site of AprA, and that there may be additional protein regions present on DPPIV but not on AprA that are required to activate the DPPIV receptor. Materials and Methods Cell culture Cells were cultured following Brock et al. 34 in HL5 medium using wild‐type Ax2 cells, aprA − strain DB60T3‐8 2 and cfaD − strain DB27C‐1. 3 Proliferation inhibition and chemorepulsion assays were done as previously described. 35 Recombinant DPPIV and AprA Recombinant DPPIV was purchased from Enzo Life Sciences. Recombinant AprA was expressed in, and purified from, E. coli as previously described. 3 To express recombinant AprA in HEK 293 cells, the DNA encoding the secretion signal sequence of human Serum Amyloid P was amplified by PCR using hSAP‐pcDNA3.1 − 36 as a template and the primers 5′ ATAGGCGCGCCATGAACAAGCCGCTGC‐3′ and 5′ ATTAAGCTTAGCAAAGGCTTCCAGG‐3′. This was digested with Asc I and Hin dIII and ligated into the corresponding sites of pCMV‐AC‐His to generate pCMV6‐SAPSec‐His. PCR was then done using a vegetative Ax2 cDNA library and the primers 5′‐CCCAAGCTTACTCCATTGGATGATTATGTC‐3′ and 5′‐CCGCTCGAGTAAAGTTGCAGTTGAACTAGCACTATCACC‐3′ to generate DNA containing the AprA coding region without the AprA secretion signal. After digestion with Hin dIII and Xho I, the PCR product was ligated into the corresponding sites of pCMV6‐SAPSec‐His to generate pCMV6‐SAP‐AprA‐His. After sequencing to verify the integrity of the insert, the recombinant plasmid was transfected into HEK 293 cells, and recombinant AprA was purified as previously described. 37, 38 Western blots and AprA binding Proteins were electrophoresed on 4–20% tris–glycine gels following the manufacturer's instructions. For Western blots, biotinylated Lens culinaris agglutinin was used following the manufacturer's directions. For rAprA binding, 10% fetal calf serum or 100 µg/mL of bovine collagen I, human collagen IV or human plasma fibronectin in PBS buffer were added to wells of a 96‐well tissue culture plate and incubated overnight at 4°C. Wells were washed with PBST three times and blocked with 4% BSA in PBM for 1 h. Wells were incubated with 10 µg/mL rAprA or 4% BSA in PBST for 1 h. Wells were washed with PBST six times and then incubated with 1.14 µg/mL affinity‐purified rabbit anti‐AprA antibodies 2 for 1 h, then washed six times with PBST and incubated with 1:5000 HRP‐conjugated donkey antirabbit antibody in PBST for 30 min. Bound antibody was then reacted with 100 µL TMB. The reaction was stopped by adding 100 µL of 1 N HCl, and reaction products were detected with a SynergyMx plate reader at 450 nm. Subtracted values were calculated. DPPIV activity assay For enzymatic activity assays, conditioned media from log phase D. discoideum cells were clarified by centrifugation at 3000× g for 4 min. DPPIV‐like enzymatic activity of conditioned media, buffer or rAprA in buffer were measured using pNA substrate for 1 h at room temperature and the reaction product was detected at 410 nm with an Ultrospec 2100 Pro spectrophotometer or a SynergyMx plate reader. Statistics Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 4 software. Statistical significance between two groups was determined by t tests or Mann–Whitney tests, or between multiple groups using 1‐way ANOVA with Dunnett's test. Significance was defined as P < 0.05. 