 Differentiation-inducing factor-1 is an important regulator of cell differentiation and chemotaxis in the development of the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. However, the entire signaling pathways downstream of DIF-1 remain to be elucidated. To characterize DIF-1 and its potential receptor, we synthesized two fluorescent derivatives of DIF-1, boron-dipyrromethene -conjugated DIF-1 and nitrobenzoxadiazole -conjugated DIF-1, and investigated their biological activities and cellular localization. DIF-1-BODIPY and DIF-1 induced stalk cell differentiation in the DIF-deficient strain HM44 in the presence of cyclic adenosine monosphosphate, whereas DIF-1-NBD hardly induced stalk cell differentiation under the same conditions. Microscopic analyses revealed that the biologically active derivative, DIF-1-BODIPY, was incorporated by stalk cells at late stages of differentiation and was localized to mitochondria. The mitochondrial uncouplers carbonyl cyanide m -chlorophenylhydrazone, at 25–50 nM, and dinitrophenol, at 2.5–5 µM, induced partial stalk cell differentiation in HM44 in the presence of cAMP. DIF-1-BODIPY and DIF-1, as well as CCCP and DNP, suppressed chemotaxis in the wild-type strain Ax2 in shallow cAMP gradients. These results suggest that DIF-1-BODIPY and DIF-1 induce stalk cell differentiation and modulate chemotaxis, at least in part, by disturbing mitochondrial activity. KEY WORDS: Dictyostelium discoideum, DIF-1, DIF-2, Mitochondria, Cell differentiation, Chemotaxis Summary: DIF-1 regulates Dictyostelium chemotaxis and differentiation. We synthesized DIF-1-BODIPY, a fluorescent DIF-1 derivative. DIF-1-BODIPY localized to mitochondria, suggesting that DIF-1 functions, at least in part, via mitochondria. INTRODUCTION The vegetative amebae of the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum feed on bacteria. Starvation initiates morphogenesis: cells gather to form a slug-shaped multicellular aggregate and differentiate into two distinct types, which eventually form a fruiting body consisting of spores and a multicellular stalk. Because of the simple pattern of its life cycle, D. discoideum is an excellent model in cell and developmental biology. Cyclic adenosine monosphosphate and the chlorinated polyketides differentiation-inducing factor-1 and differentiation-inducing factor-2 play pivotal roles in the development of D. discoideum. While extracellular cAMP secreted by differentiating cells is essential for both prespore and prestalk cell differentiation, it also acts as a chemoattractant when cells gather to form the multicellular aggregate. Initially, DIF-1 and DIF-2 were identified as inducers of stalk cell differentiation in vitro in the presence of cAMP. The activity of DIF-1 is 2.5 times that of DIF-2 in in vitro assay with strains derived from V12M2, a wild-type strain. Differentiation-inducing factor-3 is the first metabolite produced during the degradation of DIF-1 and has virtually no activity in the induction of stalk cell differentiation in D. discoideum. Fig. 1. Chemical structures of DIF-1 and related compounds. Chemical structures of DIFs, Bu-BODIPY and BODIPY-DIF-3. Molecular weight and CP for each compound are provided in parentheses. Synthetic schemes of DIF-1-BODIPY and DIF-1-NBD. See Materials... DIF-1 might function, at least in part, via increases in cytosolic calcium or proton concentrations. Several transcription factors, such as the basic-leucine zipper transcription factors, DimA and DimB, are involved in DIF-1 signaling. In shallow cAMP gradients, DIF-1 inhibits chemotaxis via the phosphodiesterase GbpB, whereas DIF-2 stimulates chemotaxis via the phosphodiesterase RegA. The mechanisms by which DIFs modulate chemotaxis differ, at least in part, from those they use to induce stalk cell differentiation. Despite the importance of DIF-1 and DIF-2 in D. discoideum development, the entire signaling pathways they activate, including receptors, remain to be identified. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying the effects of DIF-1, we synthesized two fluorescent derivatives of DIF-1, boron-dipyrromethene -conjugated DIF-1 and nitrobenzoxadiazole -conjugated DIF-1, and investigated their localization and function in D. discoideum cells. We show that DIF-1-BODIPY, but not DIF-1-NBD, is bioactive and appears to function similarly to DIF-1: this derivative induces stalk cell formation in vitro in the presence of cAMP in HM44 and suppresses chemotaxis of cells of the wild-type strain Ax2 in shallow cAMP gradients. We also show that DIF-1-BODIPY is undetectable inside the cells during an early stage of development but is localized to intracellular organelles, mainly mitochondria, during a later developmental stage. We examined the effects of DIF-1, DIF-1-BODIPY, and the mitochondrial uncouplers dinitrophenol and carbonyl cyanide m -chlorophenylhydrazone, and the results suggest that DIF-1 induces stalk cell differentiation and modulates chemotaxis, at least in part, via mitochondria. RESULTS Synthesis of fluorescent derivatives of DIF-1 and assay of stalk cell induction The synthetic schemes of DIF-1-BODIPY and DIF-1-NBD are shown in Fig. 1 B,C. We also synthesized the control compound butyl-BODIPY. The effects of DIF-1, DIF-2, and the fluorescent compounds on in vitro stalk cell differentiation in the DIF-deficient strain HM44 are shown in Fig. 2. Even in the presence of cAMP, HM44 cells cannot differentiate into stalk cells in vitro unless exogenous DIF is supplied; therefore, HM44 cells are suitable for the assay of stalk cell induction by DIF-like molecules. As expected, DIF-1 or DIF-2 induced stalk cell formation in HM44 in the presence of cAMP; DIF-1-BODIPY dose-dependently induced stalk cell formation in up to 60%–80% of the cells under the same conditions. By contrast, neither Bu-BODIPY nor DIF-1-NBD induced any stalk cell formation. Fig. 2. Stalk-cell-inducing activities of DIF-1 and related compounds in HM44 cells. Cells were incubated in vitro for 48 h with 5 mM cAMP in the presence of 0.2% DMSO, 2 nM DIF-1 or DIF-2, or the indicated concentrations of DIF-1-BODIPY... Cellular localization of DIF-1-BODIPY during in vitro stalk cell differentiation We next compared the cellular localization of DIF-1-BODIPY and DIF-1-NBD in HM44 cells. After 1-h starvation, cells were ameboid and were hardly stained with DIF-1-BODIPY or DIF-1-NBD, whereas cells fixed with formalin after starvation were stained well with the bioactive derivative DIF-1-BODIPY, but not with the nonbioactive derivative DIF-1-NBD. Fig. 3. Localization of DIF-1-BODIPY and DIF-1-NBD in living and formalin-fixed HM44 cells. Cells were incubated in vitro for 1 h with 5 µM DIF-1-BODIPY or DIF-1-NBD. Cells were incubated in vitro for 1 h with no additives,... We then compared cellular localization of DIF-1-BODIPY and the nonbioactive control compound Bu-BODIPY during in vitro differentiation of HM44 cells. After 1-h starvation, cells were hardly stained with DIF-1-BODIPY. After 20-h incubation with cAMP and DIF-1-BODIPY, cells were still ameboid; some of them had formed aggregates, in which some cells were stained with DIF-1-BODIPY, and there was heterogeneity among the cells. At 28 h, cells had begun to differentiate into stalk cells; one or more autophagic vacuoles had formed in each cell, each cell had formed a cell wall, and many cells were stained with DIF-1-BODIPY to a variable extent. At 48 h, most cells had differentiated into stalk cells and were stained with DIF-1-BODIPY; the signal was stronger in cytoplasmic regions than in autophagic vacuoles. However, cells fixed with formalin were stained with DIF-1-BODIPY at each time point. These observations suggest that DIF-1-BODIPY is unable to penetrate into the cells or is pumped out from the cells during the early phase, but not during later phases, of cell differentiation. By contrast, Bu-BODIPY neither induced stalk cell formation nor was detected in the cells at any time point, even if they were fixed with formalin. Taken together, these results indicate that DIF-1-BODIPY can be used to probe cellular uptake and localization of DIF-1. Fig. 4. Localization of DIF-1-BODIPY and Bu-BODIPY in living and formalin-fixed HM44 cells. Localization of DIF-1-BODIPY and Bu-BODIPY in undifferentiated cells. Cells were incubated in vitro for 1 h with 5 µM DIF-1-BODIPY... Target organelle of DIF-1-BODIPY It is noteworthy that DIF-1, DIF-3 and their derivatives possess anti-tumor activities, and that DIF-3 derivatives are more active than DIF-1 derivatives in suppressing tumor cell growth. We have shown that the fluorescent derivative BODIPY-DIF-3 localizes to mitochondria in mammalian cell lines. We thus compared localization of DIF-1-BODIPY and MitoTracker in HM44 cells. DIF-1-BODIPY co-localized to mitochondria stained with MitoTracker in formalin-fixed cells that had been starved for 1 h or incubated for 21 h with cAMP; in the latter case, most cells had formed small aggregates. By contrast, Bu-BODIPY did not stain any organelles in formalin-fixed cells. These results strongly suggest that DIF-1-BODIPY might function, at least in part, by affecting mitochondrial activity in D. discoideum. Fig. 5. Multi-color imaging of formalin-fixed HM44 cells. Cells were incubated in vitro for 1 h with MitoTracker and fixed with formalin. Cells were then stained for 0.5 h with Hoechst. To determine whether DIF-1 induces stalk cell differentiation by affecting mitochondria in D. discoideum, we examined the effects of CCCP and DNP on stalk cell formation in HM44. As shown in Fig. 6, CCCP or DNP weakly but significantly induced stalk cell formation in the presence of cAMP; at higher concentrations, both uncouplers were toxic to the cells. The stalk-inducing activities of CCCP and DNP did not exceed ∼10% and ∼20%, respectively ; neither CCCP nor DNP showed additive effects with DIF-1 at a low concentration. These results suggest that DIF-1 induces stalk cell differentiation partly by uncoupling mitochondrial activity but also via another pathway. Fig. 6. Effects of CCCP and DNP on stalk cell formation in HM44. Cells were incubated in vitro for 48 h with 5 mM cAMP in the presence of 0.2% DMSO or the indicated concentrations of CCCP, DNP, and/or DIF-1, and the stalk cell population was... Effects of DIF-1-BODIPY on chemotactic cell movement To verify whether DIF-1-BODIPY inhibits chemotaxis or stimulates chemotaxis, we examined its effects on chemotactic movement of Ax2 cells toward cAMP. In shallow cAMP gradients, chemotaxis was suppressed by 10 nM DIF-1 and promoted by 10 nM DIF-2, as previously described. Similar to DIF-1, DIF-1-BODIPY suppressed chemotaxis. Fig. 7. Effects of DIF-1-BODIPY, CCCP, and DNP on chemotaxis toward cAMP. Ax2 and gbpB – cells were starved for 6 h, and cell droplets were placed on phosphate-buffered agar containing 3 mM caffeine plus DIF-1, DIF-2, or DIF-1-BODIPY... To confirm that DIF-1-BODIPY can functionally mimic DIF-1, we next compared their effects on chemotaxis in gbpB – cells. Neither DIF-1 nor DIF-1-BODIPY affected chemotaxis in shallow cAMP gradients, whereas DIF-2 significantly promoted chemotaxis under the same conditions, indicating that DIF-1-BODIPY and DIF-1 exert their effects via a GbpB-dependent pathway. Thus, DIF-1-BODIPY can functionally mimic DIF-1 in the regulation of chemotaxis. Effects of CCCP and DNP on chemotactic cell movement To demonstrate that DIF-1 might function by disturbing mitochondrial activity, we examined the effects of CCCP and DNP on chemotactic cell movement toward cAMP. As expected, CCCP, DNP and DIF-1 significantly suppressed chemotaxis of Ax2 cells in shallow cAMP gradients but hardly affected chemotaxis of gbpB – cells. These results indicate that all three compounds suppress chemotaxis via a GbpB-dependent pathway and that DIF-1 might suppress chemotaxis in shallow cAMP gradients by uncoupling mitochondrial activity. Localization of DIF-1-BODIPY in aggregating Ax2 cells Finally, we localized DIF-1-BODIPY in aggregating Ax2 cells under submerged conditions without exogenous cAMP; under these conditions, cells formed streaming aggregates. After 3-h incubation, we still observed single ameboid cells; living cells were not stained with DIF-1-BODIPY, although formalin-fixed cells were clearly stained. At 15 h, cells formed aggregates, in which a small fraction of the cells was clearly stained with DIF-1-BODIPY; formalin-fixed cells were strongly stained. DISCUSSION Biological activities of DIF-1-BODIPY In this study, we designed and synthesized the fluorescent DIF derivative DIF-1-BODIPY and found that DIF-1-BODIPY induced stalk cell differentiation in the presence of cAMP in the DIF-deficient strain HM44. DIF-1-BODIPY also suppressed chemotaxis in shallow cAMP gradients in Ax2 cells. Although we do not exclude the possibility that DIF-1-BODIPY at several micromolars might affect cellular functions nonspecifically, the present results indicate that DIF-1-BODIPY can mimic the effects of DIF-1 in D. discoideum. Subcellular localization of DIF-1-BODIPY to mitochondria The hydrophobic indices of DIF-1 and DIF-1-BODIPY indicate that both compounds are likely to penetrate the cell membrane. However, we found that DIF-1-BODIPY was absent in cells at early stages of development but gradually penetrated into or was taken up by cells differentiating to stalk cells. DIF-1-BODIPY localized to mitochondria. During early, but not late, stages of development, DIF-1-BODIPY might be pumped out of cells. The molecular size of DIF-1-BODIPY is larger than that of DIF-1 and the hydrophobic indices of the two compounds are different. However, because Bu-BODIPY was not detected in any organelles, 5 ), the mitochondrial localization of DIF-1-BODIPY was not caused by the BODIPY moiety but likely reflects localization of DIF-1. Fig. 8. Proposed scheme for DIF signaling pathways in D. discoideum. Hypothetical receptors for DIF-1 and DIF-2 control cell differentiation and chemotaxis. We assume that DIF-1 has two receptors: DR1-D and DR1-C. The fluorescent DIF-3 derivative BODIPY-DIF-3 penetrates the cell membrane, localizes to mitochondria, and suppresses cell growth in some of the tumor cell lines tested. Bioactive DIF derivatives and the mitochondrial uncoupler CCCP promote oxygen consumption in mitochondria isolated from mouse liver; the anti-tumor activity of DIF derivatives might result, at least in part, from their uncoupling activity in the mitochondria of tumor cells. In D. discoideum, DIF-1 can disturb mitochondrial membrane potential and respiration, suggesting that it might function as an uncoupler, although the effective concentration range of DIF-1 rather exceeded its putative physiological concentrations. However, DIF-1 at 0.1 µM was later shown to affect mitochondrial membrane potential in Ax2 cells and to promote mitochondrial oxygen consumption and induce ATP depletion in an autophagy mutant strain, suggesting that it can act as an uncoupler at physiological concentrations. In the present study, we have shown that the mitochondrial uncouplers CCCP and DNP induce partial stalk differentiation of HM44 cells and that the uncouplers and DIF-1 suppress chemotaxis in Ax2 cells in shallow cAMP gradients. Taken together, these data suggest that DIF-1 might function, at least in part, via mitochondria in D. discoideum. Unexpectedly, however, neither CCCP nor DNP showed an additive effect with 0.4 nM DIF-1 on stalk cell formation. Although the cause of the absence of such effect is unknown, DIF-1 might function via multiple signaling cascades, only one of which may be mimicked by CCCP and DNP; DIF-1 at 0.4 nM might be sufficient to saturate this pathway. Alternatively, as CCCP >50 nM and DNP >5 µM were toxic to the cells, their toxicity might cancel their stalk-inducing activity in the presence of DIF-1. Biological activity and cellular localization of DIF-1-NBD In the present study, we have also synthesized DIF-1-NBD, a fluorescent amide derivative of DIF-1. DIF-1-NBD was expected to be a good probe for DIF-1 because some amide derivatives of DIF-1 are excellent inducers of stalk cell differentiation in HM44 cells, and also because the molecular size of DIF-1-NBD is much smaller than that of DIF-1-BODIPY and its CP value suggests that DIF-1-NBD can penetrate the cell membrane. Unfortunately, however, DIF-1-NBD neither induced stalk cell differentiation nor appeared to localize to any parts of HM44 cells. Although we cannot exclude that the localization of DIF-1-BODIPY in mitochondria reflects its non-specific binding because of its high concentration, the absence of cell staining or activity of DIF-1-NBD and another non-bioactive compound Bu-BODIPY indicates that it is likely that the biological activities and cellular localization of DIF-1-BODIPY reflect those of DIF-1 at nanomolar concentrations. Proposed scheme for DIF-1 function The functions of DIF-1 have been analyzed in many studies. As we have shown here the possible involvement of mitochondria in the effects of DIF-1, we mainly discuss the relationship between DIF signaling and mitochondria. We assume that DR1-D might mediate the induction of stalk cell differentiation by DIF-1. In shallow cAMP gradients, DIF-1 suppresses chemotaxis via a GbpB-dependent pathway, whereas DIF-2 promotes chemotaxis via a RegA-dependent pathway ; we assume here that DIF-1 functions via DR1-C and that DIF-2 functions via DR2-C. DIF-1 is likely to modulate chemotaxis by interfering with mitochondrial activity; if so, mitochondria might be the target organelles of DIF-1 that contain DR1-C. CCCP and DNP induce partial stalk cell differentiation and mitochondria affect intracellular calcium and proton concentrations ; therefore, DIF-1 might induce stalk cell formation, at least in part, by disturbing mitochondrial activity. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell lines and cell culture The D. discoideum DIF-deficient strain HM44 was used for in vitro stalk cell induction assay. The axenic strain Ax2 and the gbpB null strain gbpB – derived from Ax2 were used for chemotaxis assay. These strains were obtained from the National BioResource Project. HM44 cells were grown in association with Klebsiella aerogenes on a modified SM agar plate at 21°C, whereas Ax2 and gbpB – cells were grown axenically at 21°C in HL-5 liquid medium. Growing cells were collected by centrifugation. Reagents DIF-1, DIF-2, and Bu-BODIPY were synthesized as described previously ; they were dissolved in ethanol or dimethyl sulfoxide and stored at −20°C. Amino derivative of DIF-1 was synthesized as described previously. MitoTracker Red CMXRos and BODIPY FL, SE were purchased from Invitrogen. Hoechst 33342 solution, CCCP, and DNP were obtained from Wako Pure Chemical Industries. NBD-F was from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd.. Synthesis of DIF-1-BODIPY As depicted in Fig. 1 B, DIF-1-NH 2 and triethylamine were added to a solution of BODIPY FL, SE in N,N -dimethylformamide at room temperature in the dark. The reaction mixture was stirred for 12 h and then diluted with 0.2 M hydrochloric acid and extracted with ethyl acetate three times. The residue was subjected to recycle preparative high-performance liquid chromotography on a JAIGEL-GS-310 column in chloroform to give DIF-1-BODIPY. Analytical data for DIF-1-BODIPY: 1 H nuclear magnetic resonance δ 10.75–10.92, 7.08, 6.88, 6.30, 6.11, 5.80–5.88, 3.98, 3.28, 3.23, 3.05, 2.66, 2.56, 2.24, 1.67, 1.47, 1.36 ; high resolution fast-atom bombardment mass spectrometry m/z 577.1645 +. Synthesis of DIF-1-NBD DIF-1-NBD was synthesized as follows. To a solution of 2,6-bis-4-methoxybenzoic acid in dichloromethane, 2-ethyl 2-aminoethylcarbamate, O -- N, N, N′, N′ -tetramethyluronium hexafluorophosphate and N, N -diisopropylethylamine were added at room temperature. The reaction mixture was stirred for 1 h, poured into water and extracted with ethyl acetate three times. The combined organic layer was washed with water and brine, dried over sodium sulfate and concentrated in vacuo. The residue was chromatographed over silica gel eluted with hexane–ethyl acetate to give 2-ethyl 2--4-methoxyphenylamido)ethylcarbamate. The latter was stirred with 20% palladium hydroxide on carbon in methanol at room temperature for 2 h under hydrogen atmosphere. After filtration through a celite pad, the filtrate was concentrated in vacuo. The residue was chromatographed over silica gel eluted with hexane–ethyl acetate to afford 2-ethyl 2-ethylcarbamate. To a solution of the latter in N,N -dimethylformamide, chloromethyl methyl ether and potassium carbonate were added at room temperature. The reaction mixture was stirred for 8 h, poured into water, and extracted with ethyl acetate three times. The combined organic layer was washed with water and brine, dried over sodium sulfate, and concentrated in vacuo. The residue was chromatographed over silica gel eluted by hexane-ethyl acetate to give 2-ethyl 2-phenylamido)ethylcarbamate. To a solution of the latter in tetrahydrofuran, 1.0 M tetrabutylammonium fluoride in THF was added at room temperature. The reaction mixture was stirred for 1 h at 50°C, poured into water, and extracted with ethyl acetate three times. The combined organic layer was washed with water and brine, dried over sodium sulfate, and concentrated in vacuo. The residue was chromatographed over silica gel eluted with chloroform–methanol to give N --2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-6-benzamide. To a solution of the latter in THF, NBD-F and N, N -diisopropylethylamine were added at room temperature. The reaction mixture was stirred for 2 h, poured into water, and extracted with ethyl acetate three times. The combined organic layer was washed with water and brine, dried over sodium sulfate and concentrated in vacuo. The residue was chromatographed over silica gel eluted with hexane–ethyl acetate to give 2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-6-- N -ethyl)benzamide. The latter was dissolved in 5% HCl in methanol at room temperature. The solution was stirred for 5 h and concentrated in vacuo. The residue was dissolved in chloroform, and ethanol and sulfuryl chloride were added at room temperature. The reaction mixture was stirred for 2 h and concentrated in vacuo. The residue was chromatographed over silica gel eluted with chloroform–methanol to give DIF-1-NBD. Analytical data for DIF-1-NBD: 1 H NMR δ 11.08, 10.59, 8.61, 6.41, 3.89–3.98, 3.91 ; 13 C NMR δ 169.0, 159.5, 157.6, 144.4, 139.9, 137.5, 131.5, 120.4, 105.1, 103.6, 95.5, 60.8, 42.3, 38.8; HRFABMS m/z 456.0085 +. Low-magnification phase-contrast and fluorescence microscopy Starved HM44 or Ax2 cells were incubated for the indicated times with 1.5 ml of the stalk salt solution [2 mM NaCl, 10 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl 2, 50 µg ml −1 penicillin, 100 µg ml −1 streptomycin sulfate and 10 mM 2-morpholinoethanesulfonic acid-KOH pH 6.2 containing various additives in 35-mm tissue culture dishes. The cells were washed three times with the stalk salt solution and submerged in 1.5 ml of the same solution. The cells were observed at room temperature with a Leica DM IRB fluorescence microscope, and digitized images were analyzed with the Leica Application Suite. Alternatively, cells were incubated for the indicated times with additives and fixed for 15–20 min at room temperature in 2 ml of 3.7% formaldehyde in PBS, washed three times in PBS, stained for 30 min with DIF-1-BODIPY, Bu-BODIPY, or DIF-1-NBD, washed three times with PBS, and observed at room temperature under the same microscope. Multi-color imaging of formalin-fixed cells Starved HM44 cells were incubated at 21°C for 1 h with 1.5 ml of the stalk salt solution containing MitoTracker in 35-mm µ-Dishes. Alternatively, starved HM44 cells were incubated for 20 h with 1.5 ml of the stalk salt solution containing 5 mM cAMP in 35-mm plastic dishes and then for 1 h with the same solution containing MitoTracker. Cells were fixed for 15–20 min at room temperature with 2 ml of 3.7% formaldehyde in PBS, washed three times with PBS, and stained for 30 min with Hoechst 33342 and DIF-1-BODIPY or Bu-BODIPY. Cells were washed three times with PBS, submerged in 1.5 ml of PBS and observed at room temperature with a Keyence BZ-9000 fluorescence microscope equipped with an oil immersion 100× lens and multi-filters that can distinguish up to four fluorescent probes simultaneously. The original photos were deconvoluted using the Keyence BZ analyzer software to reduce ‘haze’. Z-stack sections were collected at 0.4-µm intervals, and the deconvoluted images were compiled into three-dimensional images. All color images are presented in pseudo-colors. In vitro stalk cell induction Starved HM44 cells were differentiated at 21°C in 12-well plates; each well was filled with 0.5 ml of stalk salt solution containing 5 mM cAMP and additives. At 48 h, the percentage of stalk cells among total cells was assessed by using phase-contrast microscopy. Small-population assay of chemotaxis Chemotaxis toward cAMP was assessed by using Ax2 and gbpB – strains in the presence of additives as described previously. Hydrophobic index To estimate the membrane permeability of each compound, its hydrophobic index was calculated by using ChemDraw10.0 software. Statistical analysis Unpaired Welch's t -test was used. P< 0.05 was considered to indicate significant differences. Acknowledgements We thank NBRP Nenkin for providing the strains used in this study. Footnotes Competing interests The authors declare no competing or financial interests. Author contributions Conceptualization: Y.K., H. Kikuchi; Methodology: Y.K., H. Kikuchi, V.H.N., Y.O.; Investigation: Y.K., H. Kuwayama; Resources: H. Kikuchi, V.H.N., Y.O.; Data curation: Y.K.; Writing - original draft: Y.K., H. Kikuchi, H. Kuwayama; Writing - review & editing: Y.K., Y.O.; Supervision: Y.K.; Project administration: Y.K., Y.O.; Funding acquisition: Y.K., H. Kuwayama, Y.O. Funding This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI. Supplementary information Supplementary information available online at Article information Biol Open. 2017 Jun 15; 6: 741–751. Published online 2017 Jun 15. doi: 10.1242/bio.021345 PMCID: PMC5483011 PMID: 28619991 Yuzuru Kubohara, 1, 2, * Haruhisa Kikuchi, 3 Van Hai Nguyen, 3 Hidekazu Kuwayama, 4 and Yoshiteru Oshima 3 Yuzuru Kubohara 1 Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi 371-8512, Japan 2 Laboratory of Health and Life Science, Graduate School of Health and Sports Science, Juntendo University, Inzai, Chiba 270-1695, Japan Find articles by Yuzuru Kubohara Haruhisa Kikuchi 3 Laboratory of Natural Product Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan Find articles by Haruhisa Kikuchi Van Hai Nguyen 3 Laboratory of Natural Product Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan Find articles by Van Hai Nguyen Hidekazu Kuwayama 4 Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8572, Japan Find articles by Hidekazu Kuwayama Yoshiteru Oshima 3 Laboratory of Natural Product Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan Find articles by Yoshiteru Oshima 1 Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi 371-8512, Japan 2 Laboratory of Health and Life Science, Graduate School of Health and Sports Science, Juntendo University, Inzai, Chiba 270-1695, Japan 3 Laboratory of Natural Product Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan 4 Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8572, Japan * Author for correspondence Received 2016 Aug 19; Accepted 2017 Apr 4. Copyright © 2017. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed. Articles from Biology Open are provided here courtesy of Company of Biologists 