 Efficient directed migration requires tight regulation of chemoattractant signal transduction pathways in both space and time, but the mechanisms involved in such regulation are not well understood. Here, we investigated the role of protein kinase A in controlling signaling of the chemoattractant cAMP in Dictyostelium discoideum. We found that cells lacking PKA display severe chemotaxis defects, including impaired directional sensing. Although PKA is an important regulator of developmental gene expression, including the cAMP receptor cAR1, our studies using exogenously expressed cAR1 in cells lacking PKA, cells lacking adenylyl cyclase A and cells treated with the PKA-selective pharmacological inhibitor H89, suggest that PKA controls chemoattractant signal transduction, in part, through the regulation of RasG, Rap1 and TORC2. As these pathways control the ACA-mediated production of intracellular cAMP, they lie upstream of PKA in this chemoattractant signaling network. Consequently, we propose that the PKA-mediated regulation of the upstream RasG, Rap1 and TORC2 signaling pathways is part of a negative feedback mechanism controlling chemoattractant signal transduction during Dictyostelium chemotaxis. KEY WORDS: Chemotaxis, Migration, PKA, Negative feedback, Directional sensing, Chemotactic signaling Highlighted Article: Protein kinase A is necessary for gradient sensing and chemotaxis towards cAMP in Dictyostelium, in part, through the proper spatiotemporal regulation of key upstream chemoattractant signal transduction pathways. INTRODUCTION Chemotaxis, the ability of cells to detect and migrate up chemical gradients, is a conserved cellular behavior that is not only essential to normal human physiology but is also implicated in the onset and progression of diseases. The detection of chemoattractants by cells triggers an intracellular network of signal transduction pathways that coordinately control the ability of cells to interpret the gradient, polarize and move. Moreover, these processes are often coupled to the paracrine release of chemoattractants that relay the original signal to promote group cell migration. In order for cells to efficiently perform chemotaxis, chemoattractant signal transduction pathways are tightly regulated in both space and time, and adapt to persistent stimulation. Adaptation is believed to be necessary for cells to sense and respond to increasing chemoattractant concentrations as they migrate up the gradient. However, very little is understood about the mediators of adaptation and the regulatory mechanisms involved in the spatiotemporal control of chemotactic signaling. In the established chemotaxis experimental model Dictyostelium discoideum, Ras-family GTPases, including RasC, RasG and Rap1, are critical mediators of the chemotactic response to cAMP. Rap1 controls cell–substrate adhesion and cell polarity by promoting remodeling of both actin and myosin, in part, through phosphoinositide 3-kinase, Rac, the serine/threonine kinase Phg2, as well as through the regulation of the Target of Rapamycin Complex 2. RasG activates PI3K, thereby controlling the site of F-actin polymerization and the direction of migration. Tight spatiotemporal regulation of RasG is critical for gradient sensing during chemotaxis. Finally, RasC directly promotes TORC2 activation, thereby modulating F-actin dynamics and controlling cAMP production by adenylyl cyclase A. In addition, we have found that a negative-feedback mechanism promotes adaptation of chemoattractant-stimulated RasC activity. Downstream from RasC, TORC2-activated Akt/protein kinase B and PKB-related PKBR1 phosphorylate the scaffold protein Sca1, which assembles a RasC-activating complex containing the RasC-specific guanine exchange factor Aimless. Phosphorylation of Sca1 by PKB kinases inhibits the localization of the Sca1 complex to the plasma membrane, thereby preventing further RasC activation. Interestingly, phosphorylation of Sca1 by PKB kinases is elevated in cells that lack the PKA catalytic subunit. Since the RasC–TORC2–PKB-kinase pathway controls the ACA-mediated intracellular production of cAMP, this pathway promotes PKA activation in response to extracellular cAMP chemoattractant stimulation. Thus, these previous observations indicate that PKA might regulate the RasC–TORC2–PKB-kinase signaling pathway during chemotaxis through a negative-feedback loop. cAMP in Dictyostelium plays two different and completely separate roles: that of an extracellular chemoattractant and that of an intracellular signaling molecule. Since cAMP is membrane impermeable, the extracellular cAMP acting as chemoattractant for Dictyostelium does not directly activate PKA, it only acts through stimulation of specific seven-transmembrane cAMP chemoattractant receptors. In response to the chemoattractant stimulation, intracellular cAMP is produced by ACA, and part of this cAMP is used to activate PKA and part is used for relaying the chemoattractant signal to neighboring Dictyostelium cells by being actively exported outside of the cells through ABC transporters. The role of PKA in Dictyostelium development and morphogenesis is well characterized, whereas its role in chemotaxis is not understood. PKA is required for the starvation-induced aggregation of Dictyostelium cells, a process driven by chemotaxis, and was found to be involved in controlling the directional extension of pseudopods during migration. In mammalian cells, PKA has been shown to play a central role in actin-based cell migration through the differential regulation of Rac, Rho and Rap1 GTPases, as well as of VASP, PI3K, PAK and LIM kinases, at the leading edge of migrating cells. The present study was undertaken to investigate the role of PKA in controlling chemotactic signaling pathways and directed cell migration in Dictyostelium. We performed a detailed characterization of the effect that the lack of PKA activity in Dictyostelium has on chemotaxis in response to cAMP and on the regulation of known cAMP-induced responses in Dictyostelium. We found that, in cells lacking PKA function, many early cAMP-induced chemotactic responses, including RasG, Rap1, PI3K, TORC2, PKB and PKBR1 activation, are upregulated and fail to be spatially restricted upon exposure to cAMP gradients. Therefore, our results suggest that PKA is necessary for proper spatiotemporal regulation of early chemoattractant signal transduction pathways, which is critical to Dictyostelium chemotaxis. Although this regulatory mechanism might include the PKA-mediated transcriptional control of additional involved proteins, our study suggests that direct control of the signaling pathways by PKA could explain the observed effects. RESULTS pkaC null cells are unable to perform chemotaxis To investigate the role of PKA in Dictyostelium chemotaxis along a cAMP gradient, we started by characterizing the chemotaxis phenotypes of Dictyostelium cells that lacked PKA-C and compared these phenotypes to those of wild-type cells. pkaC null cells are viable and, although they have been shown to lack expression of ACA, pkaC and acaA null cells express key aggregative genes when provided with exogenous cAMP pulses. Hence, in such conditions, the use of pkaC null cells should be informative as to the role of PKA in chemotaxis. Using cells that were responsive to the chemoattractant cAMP, we found that pkaC null cells exhibit severe chemotaxis defects. Developed wild-type cells placed in an exponential cAMP gradient polarize and migrate efficiently, whereas pkaC null cells do not polarize and they extend pseudopods in random directions, often in directions opposite to the gradient. As a consequence, pkaC null cells display poor persistence of movement and completely fail to migrate towards the chemoattractant source, in this case a micropipette filled with 150 μM cAMP. However, the pkaC null cells are motile and display an averaged displacement speed of 4.9±1.4 µm/min compared to 5.8±0.9 µm/min for wild-type cells. To verify that this phenotype is not unique to this pkaC null strain, we tested another strain, in which PKA-C had been independently disrupted by another group. However, we found that these cells are a little heterogeneous and unstable as the phenotypes changed with passages in cell culture. Nevertheless, we found that young HBW1 cells, compared to their control cells, have severe chemotaxis defects and have cAMP-induced responses similar to those of the other pkaC null cells. Fig. 1. The chemotaxis phenotype of pkaC null cells. Morphology of wild-type and pkaC null cells exposed to a cAMP gradient. The direction of the gradient is indicated by the arrow. Scale bar: 10 μm. Traces of representative... Taken together, our analyses suggests that, although pkaC null cells are unable to perform chemotaxis, they do extend protrusions and move. These observations then suggest that PKA is not required for cell motility in Dictyostelium but is essential for the establishment of cell polarity and chemotaxis towards cAMP. pkaC null cells fail to properly localize and temporally regulate F-actin and myosin To explore the underlying causes for the strong chemotaxis defects of pkaC null cells, we first assessed the spatiotemporal dynamics of F-actin in cells using the fluorescent reporter Lifeact-GFP. As previously described, we observe that migrating wild-type cells display cortical F-actin and F-actin-rich pseudopods at the leading edge. Cells lacking PKA also display cortical F-actin, but, consistent with the observed pkaC null chemotaxis phenotype, these cells exhibit many small and randomly localized F-actin-rich protrusions. Lifeact-GFP labeling of F-actin allowed us to observe that these protrusions, although they sometimes produce a pseudopod that correlates with random movement of the cell, often form an endocytic cup or are just retracted. In addition, in cells that were pulsed with cAMP, washed and then left to rest instead of being exposing to a cAMP gradient, we observed that, in contrast to wild-type cells displaying low basal levels of F-actin, most pkaC null cells display elevated basal levels of F-actin enriched within numerous spontaneous protrusions that often look like membrane ruffles rather than pseudopods. Fig. 2. Spatiotemporal dynamics of F-actin and myosin in pkaC null cells. Live imaging of F-actin and Myosin II fluorescent reporters in cells exposed to an exponential gradient of cAMP, and a lower but wider peak at 30-60 s post stimulation associated with pseudopod protrusion. By contrast, pkaC null cells display considerably higher basal F-actin levels and, as a likely consequence, a blunted F-actin polymerization response, with a markedly smaller first peak followed by limited depolymerization and prolonged elevated levels of F-actin. Taken together, these results suggest that F-actin levels are upregulated in resting pkaC null cells and that F-actin is both temporally and spatially misregulated in migrating cells that lack PKA-C. Similarly, we investigated the spatiotemporal profile of myosin II in cells that had been exposed to cAMP using GFP-fused myosin heavy chain A. As reported previously, GFP–MyoII is excluded from the leading edge and localizes to the sides and posterior of migrating wild-type cells. Resting, unstimulated wild-type cells display basal levels of GFP–MyoII at the cell cortex, which rapidly delocalizes to the cytosol upon uniform cAMP stimulation. This delocalization is then followed by an increase in cortical GFP–MyoII, peaking at ∼30-40 s, and a return to basal levels by 60 s post stimulus. In pkaC null cells, we observed some heterogeneity in the spatiotemporal dynamics of GFP–MyoII. On average, however, we found that pkaC null cells that were either unstimulated or had been exposed to a cAMP gradient display relative cortical levels of GFP–MyoII similar to those of wild-type cells, with GFP–MyoII being excluded from extended protrusions and enriched in retracting protrusions. Consistent with the observed random extension of membrane protrusions in migrating pkaC null cells, the cortical localization of GFP–MyoII in these cells was not restricted to the side of the cells that faced the lowest cAMP concentrations but was observed on any side of the cells, changing frequently and displaying no directional bias. In addition, we observed that, upon uniform cAMP stimulation, GFP–MyoII at the cell cortex of pkaC null cells translocates to the cytosol with delayed kinetics compared to those in wild-type cells and then only slowly returns to basal cortical levels. These results suggest that, in addition to F-actin, the timing and localization of myosin II assembly in cells that lack PKA-C are misregulated during chemotaxis. Cells lacking PKA function have elevated PI3K, TORC2, PKB and PKBR1 activity We have previously found that the phosphorylation of Sca1 mediated by PKB kinases is elevated in pkaC null cells. To then investigate the mechanism by which PKA controls cytoskeletal remodeling and chemotaxis, we assessed the kinase activity of PKB and PKBR1 in cells that lacked PKA-C. We observed that the basal levels of PKB and PKBR1 kinase activity are elevated and the cAMP-induced stimulation of PKB and PKBR1 activity is prolonged in pkaC null cells compared to that in wild-type cells. We also observed that in cells lacking ACA, PKB and PKBR1 display similarly elevated basal activity levels and prolonged cAMP-induced activation, although these effects are less pronounced than those observed in pkaC null cells. This finding is not surprising because, although ACA is responsible for most of the chemoattractant-induced cAMP production in Dictyostelium, some cAMP is produced in acaA null cells and, thus, these cells are expected to have residual PKA activity. Consistent with the observed elevated PKB and PKBR1 activity levels in pkaC null cells, these cells also display higher basal phosphorylation levels and extended cAMP-induced phosphorylation of cellular substrates of PKB kinases compared to those found in wild-type cells, reminiscent of the Sca1 phosphorylation profile previously shown in these cells. Thus, these results suggest that PKB and PKBR1 activities are upregulated in cells that lack PKA function. Fig. 3. Activity of chemotactic effectors PKB, PKBR1, PI3K and TORC2 in cells lacking PKA function. cAMP-induced PKB and PKBR1 kinase activity in wild-type and pkaC null cells, and in cells lacking adenylyl cyclase A.... Two upstream pathways co-regulate the activity of PKB and PKBR1 during cAMP chemotaxis in Dictyostelium : the PI3K-dependent pathway that leads to the phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase -mediated phosphorylation of the activation loop in PKB and PKBR1; and the TORC2 pathway leading to phosphorylation of the hydrophobic motif in PKB and PKBR1. We asked whether the elevated activity of PKB and PKBR1 in pkaC null cells results from upregulated PI3K and/or TORC2 activity. To assess PI3K activity, we expressed a fluorescent phosphatidylinositol -trisphosphate reporter comprising the pleckstrin homology domain of the cytosolic regulator of adenylyl cyclase fused to GFP. We observed that PHcrac–GFP mostly localized to the cytosol of resting wild-type cells with occasional enrichment to the plasma membrane of extended protrusions, whereas many unstimulated pkaC null cells displayed membrane-localized PHcrac–GFP at structures corresponding to protrusions, membrane ruffles and endocytic cups. During chemotaxis in response to cAMP, PHcrac–GFP localizes to the front of chemotaxing wild-type cells, as previously described, whereas in pkaC null cells exposed to the cAMP gradient, the PIP 3 reporter localizes randomly around the cell cortex, corresponding to the numerous randomly extended protrusions, reminiscent of the localization of the F-actin reporter Lifeact-GFP described above. As previously reported, uniform cAMP stimulation induces the temporary translocation of PHcrac–GFP from the cytosol to the plasma membrane, peaking at ∼8 s, reflecting PI3K activation and transient PI P 3 accumulation at this site. After peaking at ∼8 s post-cAMP stimulation, the levels of PHcrac–GFP at the membrane of wild-type cells decrease below pre-stimulus levels, consistent with previous observations. In contrast, pkaC null cells display a reduced PHcrac–GFP translocation response, when normalized to their respective basal levels, with a slightly delayed and broader peak that reaches a maximum at ∼10-12 s before returning to pre-stimulus levels. Therefore, these observations indicate that PI P 3 production is misregulated both temporally and spatially in cells that lack PKA. As a measure of TORC2 activity, we assessed the TORC2-mediated phosphorylation of PKB and PKBR1 at their hydrophobic motifs before and upon cAMP stimulation, as previously described. In contrast to wild-type cells in which the TORC2 phosphorylation of PKB and PKBR1 HMs is very transient, peaking at 5-10 s and returning to basal levels by 40 s post-stimulus, pkaC null cells display considerably elevated and extended HM phosphorylation in PKB and PKBR1. Similarly, we observed that the TORC2-mediated phosphorylation of the PKB and PKBR1 HMs is elevated in cells that lacked ACA, as well as in cells that had been treated with the PKA-selective pharmacological inhibitor H89. Hence, these results suggest that loss of PKA function leads to an increased activation of TORC2. Taken together, our observations indicate that the elevated PKB and PKBR1 activity levels in cells that lack PKA function are likely to result from the combination of upregulated PI3K and TORC2 pathways in these cells. Lack of PKA function has different effects on RasC, RasG and Rap1 In Dictyostelium, the Ras protein RasG is the main mediator of PI3K activation in response to cAMP stimulation, RasC is the main activator of TORC2, and Rap1 has been shown to regulate the activity of both PI3K and TORC2 in addition to other Rap1 effectors. To then investigate potential mechanisms underlying the elevated activity levels of TORC2 and PI3K in cells that lack PKA function, we examined the activity of RasC, RasG and Rap1 under such conditions. First, we assessed the activity of Flag-tagged RasC in pkaC null cells and in wild-type cells treated with H89. Interestingly, we observed that cAMP-induced RasC activation is considerably decreased in cells lacking PKA activity. We also found that Sca1 fails to translocate from the cytosol to the plasma membrane in pkaC null cells that had been stimulated with cAMP and that Sca1 translocation is considerably reduced in acaA null cells compared to that in wild-type cells. These observations are consistent with our previous findings that phosphorylation of Sca1 mediated by PKB kinases is elevated in pkaC null cells and that this phosphorylation inhibits the translocation of the Sca1 complex to the plasma membrane and RasC activation. These results show that RasC activity is downregulated in cells that lack PKA function and, therefore, suggest that PKA is necessary for optimal RasC activation. Consequently, this PKA-mediated positive regulation of RasC cannot explain the elevated TORC2 activity observed in pkaC null cells. Fig. 4. RasC pathway activation in cells lacking PKA function. cAMP-induced activation of Flag-tagged RasC expressed in wild-type and pkaC null cells, and in WT cells treated with the PKA pharmacological inhibitor H89 or the vehicle.... In contrast to the decrease in RasC activation observed in cells that lack PKA activity, we found that both RasG and Rap1 display elevated basal activity levels, and elevated and extended cAMP-induced activation, in pkaC null cells compared to those in wild-type cells. To image RasG activity dynamics, we used the Ras activity reporter that comprises the Ras-binding domain of human Raf1 fused to GFP, which binds to RasG and not to RasC. Although Raf1–GFP also binds to the active forms of Dictyostelium RasB and RasD, RasG is believed to be the predominant Ras protein expressed in cAMP-responsive aggregation-stage Dictyostelium cells, and thus Raf1–GFP is believed to be a good reporter of active RasG. Raf1–GFP is mostly found in the cytosol of resting wild-type cells, whereas many resting pkaC null cells display cortex-localized Raf1–GFP – at membrane protrusions, membrane ruffles and endocytic cups – which is similar to the observed localization of both the F-actin and PI P 3 reporters in these cells. Also reminiscent of the observed F-actin and PI P 3 dynamics in pkaC null cells, Raf1–GFP is highly enriched in the randomly extended membrane protrusions of pkaC null cells exposed to a cAMP gradient. Consistent with the profile of the PI P 3 response, which lies downstream from RasG, the Ras activity reporter exhibits a reduced translocation to the cell cortex in pkaC null cells upon uniform cAMP stimulation compared to that in wild-type cells, when normalized to their respective basal levels. Fig. 5. Spatiotemporal dynamics of RasG and Rap1 activities in pkaC null cells. cAMP-induced RasG and Rap1 activation. Active RasG and Rap1 were pulled down with GST–Raf1 and GST–RalGDS, respectively,... To image Rap1 activity dynamics, we used the Rap1 activity reporter comprising the RBD of human RalGDS. In resting cells, although some pkaC null cells are found with slightly more RalGDS–GFP localized to the membrane, for the most part, RalGDS–GFP displays localization patterns more similar to those in wild-type cells. However, RalGDS–GFP is clearly enriched in the randomly extended membrane protrusions of pkaC null cells exposed to a cAMP gradient. In addition, the Rap1 activity reporter displays increased translocation to and prolonged localization at the cell cortex in pkaC null cells in response to uniform cAMP stimulation compared to that in wild-type cells. Therefore, together, our observations suggest that, in contrast to the PKA-dependent positive regulation of RasC, PKA has a negative regulatory effect on RasG and Rap1 activation. pkaC null cells have severe gradient-sensing defects Spatiotemporal regulation of RasG activity is required for directional sensing of cAMP gradients in Dictyostelium. Our findings that pkaC null cells are motile but fail to migrate along a cAMP gradient and that RasG activity is upregulated in the absence of PKA suggest that PKA may be necessary for gradient sensing. To test whether PKA plays a role in cAMP gradient sensing, we assessed the Ras response, using Raf1–GFP, in cells that had been treated with the F-actin inhibitor Latrunculin B. LatB treatment generates cells that are unable to polymerize F-actin and are, thus, paralyzed, symmetrical and spherical. LatB-treated cells can then be used to interrogate cAMP gradient-sensing capabilities in the absence of feedback from the actin cytoskeleton. As previously reported, LatB-treated wild-type cells respond to the cAMP gradient and accumulate Raf1–GFP in the form of a crescent at the cell cortex on the side closest to the chemoattractant source, a cAMP-filled micropipette. Upon repositioning of the micropipette to the opposite side of the cell, Raf1–GFP is quickly delocalized from its previous site and accumulates at the cortex on the side closest to the new position of the micropipette within 10-15 s, reflecting the rapid deactivation and activation of Ras at each site, respectively. In wild-type cells, Raf1–GFP accumulation is highly restricted to the side closest to the cAMP chemoattractant source and never accumulates at the side opposite to the micropipette or the lateral sides, illustrating the highly spatially regulated Ras response. Fig. 6. Gradient sensing in pkaC null cells. Live imaging of Raf1–GFP in cells, treated with 10 μM LatB, upon changes of cAMP gradient orientation. Two examples of pkaC null cells are shown. Data are representative... In contrast to the rapid and restricted accumulation of Raf1–GFP at the cell cortex of LatB-treated wild-type cells upon cAMP gradient sensing, accumulation of the Ras reporter to the cortex of LatB-treated pkaC null cells does not as strongly correlate with the position of the chemoattractant source. In pkaC null cells, accumulation of Raf1–GFP on the side of the cell closest to the chemoattractant does become enriched, but with very slow kinetics compared to that for wild-type cells, and localization of the reporter is not restricted there. Raf1–GFP is often observed to be located at the lateral sides and even sometimes on the opposite side from that facing the micropipette, which is never observed for wild-type cells. In pkaC null cells, the Ras reporter appears to be moving around the cell cortex as if the Ras signal is propagating, reminiscent of the previously reported self-organized waves of PI P 3 that are generated spontaneously on the membrane in the absence of the chemoattractant. These observations suggest that, although pkaC null cells respond to the cAMP gradient, PKA is necessary for cells to properly restrict Ras activation to the side closest to the chemoattractant source, which is likely to underlie the inability of cells that lack PKA to accurately determine the direction of the gradient during the chemotaxis response to cAMP. cAR1 expression in pkaC null cells Our results using the pkaC null cells as well as acaA null cells and the H89 inhibitor suggest a role for PKA in regulating the Ras and Rap1 pathways in response to the cAMP chemoattractant in Dictyostelium. However, it is also possible that some of the observed effects associated with the lack of PKA are indirect and due to its role in controlling gene expression. We determined that, at least, Ras, Rap1, Pia, PKB and PKBR1 are well expressed in pkaC null cells. Interestingly, as previously reported for wild-type cells, the observed regulated decrease in PKB expression in 5.5-h cAMP-pulsed cells indicate that some developmental gene expression is properly conserved in pkaC null cells. By contrast, we failed to detect the expression of the cAMP chemotactic receptor cAR1 by immunoblotting. However, the fact that pkaC null cells respond well to cAMP stimulation, whereas cells lacking cAR1 mostly don't, suggests that some cAR1 is likely to be present in pkaC null cells. In order to test whether the shortage of cAR1 expression in pkaC null cells is responsible for the pkaC null phenotypes, we assessed the ability of exogenously expressed cAR1–GFP to rescue the chemotaxis, RasG, Rap1 and TORC2 activity defects of pkaC null cells. We found that, at similar cAR1–GFP expression levels in carA null and pkaC null cells, cAR1–GFP rescued the ability of carA null cells to undergo chemotaxis and only very partially rescued the chemotactic defects of pkaC null cells. Indeed, some of the cAR1–GFP-expressing pkaC null cells closest to the chemoattractant source did find the way to the tip of the micropipette, albeit inefficiently. Nonetheless, this result suggests that part of the chemotaxis phenotype of pkaC null cells is due to lack of cAR1 expression. Fig. 7. The expression of cAR1 and its role in RasG, Rap1 and TORC2 activation in pkaC null cells. Expression of cAR1, Ras, Rap1, Pia, PKB and PKBR1 in wild-type and pkaC null vegetative cells and in cells pulsed with cAMP... We next assessed the cAMP-induced activation of RasG, Rap1 and TORC2 in carA null cells compared to those in pkaC null cells, and tested the effect of expressing exogenous cAR1–GFP at similar levels in both strains, as controlled by immunoblot and fluorescence measurements. As previously reported, the basal level of Ras activity, as well as that of Rap1 activity, is elevated in carA null cells and, by contrast with the pkaC null cells, the carA null cells fail to respond to a cAMP stimulus by further increasing the activity of RasG and Rap1. In addition, although the cAMP-induced TORC2-mediated phosphorylation of PKB and PKBR1 is elevated and prolonged in pkaC null cells, cAMP stimulation produces minimal TORC2 activation in carA null cells, which is likely to be mediated by the cAMP receptor 3, which is expressed at low levels in aggregation-competent cells. As expected, cAR1–GFP expression in carA null cells rescued the cAMP-induced activation of Ras, Rap1 and TORC2 in this strain. Interestingly, pkaC null cells expressing cAR1–GFP, at levels similar to those rescuing the carA null cell phenotypes, displayed the same elevated and extended cAMP-induced RasG, Rap1 and PKB and PKBR1 phosphorylation responses as in pkaC null cells. Taken together, these observations suggest that some cAR1 is expressed in pkaC null cells; little cAR1 is sufficient to fully activate the RasG, Rap1 and TORC2 pathways, whereas high levels of cAR1 are necessary for chemotaxis; and finally, the lack of cAR1 is not responsible for the observed upregulated signaling pathways in pkaC null cells. DISCUSSION It is widely appreciated that specific kinetics and localization of chemotactic signaling pathways, as well as their adaptation to the chemoattractant signal, are required for the directional response of cells to chemoattractant gradients. However, how chemoattractant signaling is regulated and how signaling pathway dynamics and polarity are achieved is not understood. Our study suggests that PKA is essential to chemotaxis and plays an important role in the control of both the localized activation and adaptation of key cAMP-induced chemotactic signaling pathways in Dictyostelium, involving RasG, Rap1, PI3K, TORC2, PKB and PKBR1, as well as the spatiotemporal regulation of the cytoskeleton. The observed effect of lack of PKA function on chemotaxis is likely to result from a combination of roles in gene regulation and signaling. Indeed, although it is hard to separate these two cellular functions of PKA, our experiments using acaA null cells – which produce a lot less cAMP and, thereby, have little PKA activity – as well as our results with the PKA-selective pharmacological inhibitor H89, strongly suggest that PKA plays a signaling role in controlling the chemotactic pathways in Dictyostelium. Although we found that pkaC null cells lack detectable cAR1 expression, as assessed by immunoblotting, they are responsive to cAMP stimulation, which suggests that some cAR1 is present. Interestingly, vegetative cells, which express little cAR1, also produce a full cAMP-induced TORC2 activation response. This previous observation and our present study suggest that only small amounts of cAR1 are necessary to activate, at least some, cAMP-induced signaling pathways, whereas more cAR1 is necessary for efficient chemotaxis towards cAMP. In fact, the partial rescue of chemotaxis of pkaC null cells by the exogenous expression of cAR1 suggests that lack of cAR1 is partly responsible for the chemotaxis phenotype of these cells. However, we found that lack of cAR1 expression in pkaC null cells is not responsible for the upregulated cAMP signaling pathways in these cells. Fig. 8. Proposed model for the role of PKA in regulating the chemoattractant signal transduction pathways in Dictyostelium. Although PKA controls gene expression during development, including that of cAR1, and this probably explains part of the observed severe... Consistent with a role for cAMP in the spatiotemporal control of signaling pathways, acaA null cells are unable to suppress the formation of lateral pseudopods, leading to directionality defects during chemotaxis. We propose that this intracellular role of ACA and cAMP in Dictyostelium is mediated, in part, by the PKA-dependent regulation of the RasG and Rap1 pathways in space and time during chemotaxis. In addition, as the PI3K, TORC2, PKB and PKBR1 signaling pathways contribute to the cAMP-stimulated activation of ACA and cAMP production and, consequently, to the downstream activation of PKA, we further propose that PKA indirectly controls its own level of activity during chemotaxis in a negative-feedback fashion. This hypothesis is consistent with previous observations that cAMP-stimulated ACA activity fails to adapt in ACA-expressing pkaC null cells and that cells with elevated PKA activity display reduced intracellular levels of cAMP compared to those in wild-type cells. Our analysis of the chemotaxis and cAMP gradient-sensing phenotypes of pkaC null cells suggests that PKA is not necessary for basic cell motility in Dictyostelium but that it is crucial to cAMP chemotaxis and plays a key role in restricting the extent, as well as the site, of chemotactic pathway activation and, thereby, pseudopod protrusion. Our finding that PKA is essential to cAMP chemotaxis is surprising because, although pkaC null cells are unable to aggregate by themselves with or without the ability to produce cAMP, they have been found to co-aggregate with wild-type cells. We propose that, in such cases, cell–cell contacts between pkaC null and wild-type cells may have enabled their co-aggregation. By contrast, the chemotaxis phenotype of pkaC null cells is consistent with the considerable reduction in chemotaxis observed for cells with decreased PKA activity due to the expression of PKA regulatory subunit mutants. Intriguingly, cells that lack the PKA-R, in which PKA-C is constitutively active, also display reduced polarity, reduced directionality, the inability to repress the formation of lateral pseudopods and, consequently, severely impaired chemotaxis to cAMP. However, given the promiscuous nature of PKA, whose specificity is normally tightly regulated through anchoring complexes, careful consideration must be given to the phenotype of cells with constitutive PKA activity. Nonetheless, the similarity of pkaC and pkaR null cell phenotypes could support the idea of an auto-regulatory circuit, which is linked by feedback loops that function to tightly regulate PKA activity during chemotaxis, such as that previously proposed by Soll and colleagues. Disruption of any one component of such a circuit destroys the circuit, and is likely to yield a common phenotype that reflects the role of the circuit. In the case of cAMP–PKA signaling, we propose that the wiring of this circuit allows the coordinated control of directional pseudopod extension and signal relay. The cAMP chemotaxis phenotype of pkaC null cells is also highly reminiscent of cells that lack the RasG GAP DdNF1, which exhibit elevated levels of chemoattractant-induced RasG activity, as well as of cells expressing a constitutively active Rap1 mutant. nfaA null cells display increased phagocytosis and macropinocytosis, are motile but fail to properly sense cAMP gradients, and extend multiple lateral pseudopods leading to severe chemotaxis defects. Rap1 G12V -expressing cells also produce lateral pseudopods during migration, and undergo chemotaxis towards cAMP with little directionality. Consequently, we propose that the elevated and spatially misregulated RasG and Rap1 activities in pkaC null cells underlie the inability of these cells to properly sense gradients, to define a leading front and to migrate along a cAMP gradient. Hence, we suggest that PKA regulates the cAMP gradient-sensing abilities of cells mainly by controlling RasG and Rap1 activation. The PKA-mediated regulation of RasG and Rap1 can explain, at least in part, the effects of PKA on the downstream activation of PI3K, TORC2, PKB and PKBR1, as well as F-actin polymerization and MyoII assembly. Indeed, both RasG and Rap1 mediate PI3K activation, which, in turn, promotes F-actin polymerization, and Rap1 regulates TORC2, as well as MyoII assembly through a parallel pathway involving its effector Phg2. Similar to pkaC null cells, cells with elevated RasG activity display elevated PI3K activity and F-actin dynamics, and cells with elevated Rap1 activity exhibit elevated TORC2 activity and reduced MyoII assembly. Of course, we cannot exclude the possibility that PKA directly regulates PI3K, PKB and PKBR1, F-actin and MyoII, in addition to RasG, Rap1 and TORC2, and that PKA may have additional roles in chemotaxis to cAMP, such as in regulating Rac GTPases and various actin modulators. In addition to the PKA-dependent regulation of Rap1, which is likely to affect downstream TORC2 activity, we propose that TORC2 is also regulated by PKA independently of Rap1. We have recently shown that RasC is essential for TORC2 activation while Rap1 regulates the RasC-mediated TORC2 activity. Since RasC activity in cells that lack PKA is strongly reduced, we propose that the highly elevated TORC2 activity in cells that lack PKA results from the PKA-dependent regulation of both Rap1 and TORC2. In mammalian cells, PKA has been found to associate with mTOR and to mediate inhibition of both mTORC1 and mTORC2 by inducing dissociation of the complexes. However, whether PKA directly phosphorylates mTOR or components of mTOR complexes is unknown. By contrast, the observed PKA-dependent positive regulation of RasC is likely to be indirect and to result from the PKA-dependent inhibition of TORC2, as well as of RasG, Rap1 and PI3K signaling, leading to reduced PKB and PKBR1 activity. This reduced activity of PKB and PKBR1, which normally inhibit the Sca1 complex-mediated RasC activation through a negative-feedback loop, will consequently lead to greater RasC activation. In mammalian cells, including neutrophils, PKA activity has been shown to be enriched at the front of migrating cells and to promote actin cytoskeleton polarization. One of the suggested mechanisms through which PKA controls mammalian cell migration involves its direct phosphorylation of Rap1, thereby controlling Rap1 membrane localization and activity cycle. Whether this is the mechanism through which PKA controls Rap1 activity in Dictyostelium remains to be determined, but this is certainly a possibility. It is also conceivable that PKA targets specific RasG and Rap1 GEFs and/or GAPs, instead of or in addition to directly targeting the GTPases. In any case, our findings highlight a previously unappreciated role of PKA in chemotaxis, through the spatial and temporal regulation of key chemotactic signaling pathways. MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents cAMP sodium salt monohydrate and anti-Flag M2 were from Sigma-Aldrich, and H2B was from Roche-Genentech. Antibodies against phosphorylated p70 S6 kinase, phosphorylated Akt substrates and phosphorylated PKA substrates were from Cell Signaling Technology. A pan-Ras antibody was from Calbiochem – EMD Millipore. H89 and DyLight TM secondary antibodies were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The Living Colors ® GFP monoclonal antibody was purchased from Clontech. Horseradish peroxidase -conjugated secondary antibodies were purchased from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories. The Rap1 and Pia antibodies were custom-made by ProSci Incorporated. Antibodies against PKB and PKBR1, and Lifeact-GFP, GFP–MyoII and PHcrac–GFP constructs were gifts from Rick Firtel and have been previously described. The cAR1 antibody was a generous gift from Peter Devreotes and is described elsewhere. Raf1–GFP and RalGDS–GFP constructs were kindly provided by Arjan Kortholt and have been previously described. GFP–Sca1 has been described previously. Flag-tagged RasC was generated by fusing the Flag tag nucleotide sequence, GATTATAAAGATGATGATGATAAA, in frame at the N-terminus of the RasC sequence and cloned into the extra-chromosomal vector pDM304, obtained through the Dicty Stock Center, deposited by Douwe Veltman. cAR1–GFP was generated by cloning cAR1 into the GFP-containing extra-chromosomal vector pDM323 and was a gift from Chris Janetopoulos. Cell culture and strains used Dictyostelium cells were grown attached to substrate in axenic HL5 medium at 22°C, and transformants were generated by electroporation. Transformed cells were selected in 10 or 20 µg/ml geneticin, or 50 µg/ml hygromycin B, and expression was confirmed by western blotting. Cells were developed by pulsing with 30 nM cAMP every 6 min for 5.5 h in 12 mM Na 2 HPO 4 and KH 2 PO 4 buffer, pH 6.1, at a confluence of 5×10 6 cells/ml for wild-type cells and at 7×10 6 cells/ml for pkaC null cells, which are much smaller, in order to have equivalent densities. The wild-type cells used were AX2 and AX3, depending on the background of mutant used. ScaA null cells are described elsewhere. pkaC null and acaA null cells were obtained from the Dicty Stock Center, where they were deposited by Rick Firtel and Bill Loomis, respectively; both strains are described elsewhere. The HBW1 and HBW2 cells were a kind gift from Robert Kay and have been described previously. The carA null cells were generously provided by Alan Kimmel and have been previously described. Biochemical assays F-actin measurements using phalloidin staining, PKB and PKBR1 kinase assays, and Ras–GTP and Rap1–GTP pulldown assays were performed as previously described. TORC2 activity was assessed by evaluating the TORC2-mediated phosphorylation of PKB and PKBR1, as described previously. Detection of phosphorylated PKB and PKA substrates by western blotting, using the antibodies described above, was performed on whole cell lysates according to the manufacturers’ protocols. For H89 treatments, cells that had been pulsed with cAMP for 5.5 h as described above were treated either with 5% DMSO or 50 µM of DMSO-dissolved H89 for 30 min before cAMP stimulation. Chemotaxis and imaging Assessment of chemotaxis, gradient sensing, global responses of fluorescent reporters to cAMP stimulation, and image acquisition were performed as previously described. Chemotaxis parameters were determined as described previously. Images were acquired using a Marianas spinning disk confocal workstation equipped with an Evolve™ 512 EMCCD camera, and image analysis was performed using the Slidebook software. Analysis of fluorescent reporter translocations between the cytosol and the cell cortex was performed by measuring changes in fluorescence intensities in the cytosol as described previously, normalized to basal levels in each cell. Acknowledgements We thank Rick Firtel, Arjan Kortholt, Peter Devreotes, Alan Kimmel and Chris Janetopoulos, as well as the Dicty Stock Center for providing reagents. Footnotes Competing interests The authors declare no competing or financial interests. Author contributions M.S. and A.R.P. contributed equally to the work; P.G.C. conceptualized and designed the study; M.S., A.R.P., R.R., V.F.T., P.L. and P.G.C. performed and interpreted the experiments; M.S., A.R.P. and P.G.C. prepared the manuscript. Funding M.S. was supported by National Institutes of Health T32 grant GM008804; and P.L. was supported by a U.S. Public Health Service grant GM037830. The work was supported by a Research Scholar Grant 127940-RSG-15-024-01-CSM from the American Cancer Society to P.G.C. Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months. Supplementary information Supplementary information available online at.supplemental Article information J Cell Sci. 2017 May 1; 130: 1545–1558. doi: 10.1242/jcs.177170 PMCID: PMC5450229 PMID: 28302905 Margarethakay Scavello, * Alexandra R. Petlick, * Ramya Ramesh, Valery F. Thompson, Pouya Lotfi, and Pascale G. Charest ‡ Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0088, USA * These authors contributed equally to this work ‡ Author for correspondence Received 2015 Jul 8; Accepted 2017 Mar 6. Copyright © 2017. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd See " Vimentin intermediate filaments control actin stress fiber assembly through GEF-H1 and RhoA " on page e0902. Articles from Journal of Cell Science are provided here courtesy of Company of Biologists 