A GPCR Handles Bacterial Sensing in Chemotaxis and Phagocytosis You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF A GPCR Handles Bacterial Sensing in Chemotaxis and Phagocytosis Dev Cell. 2016 Feb 22; 36: 354–356. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Developmental cell Author Manuscript HHS Public Access A GPCR Handles Bacterial Sensing in Chemotaxis and Phagocytosis Hiroshi Senoo, Hiromi Sesaki, and Miho Iijima Additional article information Summary In this issue of Developmental Cell, Pan et al. identified in cells of the social amoeba Dictyostelium a G protein coupled receptor that recognizes a chemoattractant secreted by bacteria. This work uncovers a mechanism by which a single GPCR mediates pseudopod extension during cell migration and bacterial engulfment. Chemotaxis and phagocytosis are important processes for removing infecting bacteria and clearing dying apoptotic cells in the human body. For example, immune cells such as macrophages, neutrophils and dendritic cells sense, chase, and eat bacteria through directed cell migration toward bacteria and engulfment of bacteria. These two mechanisms involve common processes such as the recognition of bacteria via surface receptors, amplification of intracellular signaling, and reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton to drive pseudopod extension. Chemotaxis receptors are primarily seven transmembrane GPCRs. On the other hand, phagocytosis receptors are mainly Fc- or toll-like receptors. The social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum exhibits robust chemotaxis and phagocytosis and has been used as a model organism to study these processes. Dictyostelium cells respond to two distinct chemoattractants: folic acid, which is released from bacteria, for growth, and cAMP for differentiation upon nutrient deprivation. Four cAMP receptors have been identified, and their signal transduction mechanisms are well characterized. It has been suggested that there are likely two biochemically distinct mechanisms for folic acid recognition. However, the identity of these folic acid receptors has remained elusive thus far. Similar to chemokine receptors in mammalian cells, cAMP receptors are GPCRs and function with Gα2 and Gβ. There is only one Gβ in Dictyostelium, in contrast with five Gβs in humans. It has been long believed that folic acid receptors are also G-protein coupled because both folic acid chemotaxis and bacterial phagocytosis require Gα4 and Gβ. Furthermore, studies have suggested that chemotaxis toward folic acid and cAMP share common downstream signaling components and mechanisms involving Ras GTPase activation and phosphatidylinositol -trisphosphate production regulated by PI3-kinase and PTEN. To better understand these two major chemotactic signaling mechanisms on the molecular level, it is critical to identify missing folic acid receptors. To tackle this key question, a study in this issue of Developmental Cell from Pan et al. took advantage of the fact that many GPCRs are phosphorylated upon ligand binding. These authors compared global profiles of protein phosphorylation in response to the two chemoattractants—folic acid or cAMP—using quantitative mass spectrometry. With this distinct approach, Pan et al. discovered that two orphan GPCRs 1 and 2), out of a total of 55 GPCRs in Dictyostelium cells, were specifically phosphorylated in response to folic acid but not cAMP. Individual gene knockout for these two candidate proteins revealed that the loss of fAR1 decreases cell surface binding of fluorescently labeled folic acids in fAR1 KO Dictyostelium cells. Consistent with its receptor function, fAR1-GFP is located in the cell periphery. Amino acid sequence analysis has revealed that fAR1 belongs to the mammalian GABA B receptor family. Pan et al. demonstrated that fAR1 KO cells are defective in chemotaxis toward folic acid while these KO cells normally move toward cAMP. In addition, fAR1 KO cells are defective in phagocytosis of K. aerogenes as well as latex beads covalently conjugated with folic acids. Live-cell imaging of fAR KO cells suggests that fAR is necessary for pseudopod formation during chemotaxis and phagocytosis: fAR KO cells fail to extend pseudopods toward higher concentrations of folic acid and are also unable to generate protrusion around bacteria or folic acid beads after physical contact with them. It should be noted that these KO cells can maintain an association with the bacteria or beads, suggesting that other proteins in the plasma membrane likely mediate this interaction. In terms of critical downstream events of fAR1-folic acid interactions, Pan et al. found that both PIP3 production and actin polymerization were stimulated by folic acid in a manner dependent on fAR1. Biosensors revealed that these two critical biochemical reactions are located at phagocytic cups during phagocytosis. Since fAR1 appears to not accumulate at the phagocytic cup, it is likely that fAR1 is spatially regulated by local activation rather than receptor enrichment at the cell-bacteria interface. These exciting findings provide evidence for a new mechanism called chemoattractant-mediated engulfment, in which the single GPCR fAR1 couples directed cell migration toward bacteria and subsequent engulfment of bacteria. The identification of the folic receptor by Pan et al. opens up a new avenue in the field of chemotaxis and phagocytosis and stimulates many important questions. For example, if chemotaxis and phagocytosis are accomplished by a signal receptor, can cAMP receptors also mediate phagocytosis? Bacteria that Dictyostelium cells eat do not release cAMP, but experimentally we can coat latex beads with cAMP and test whether Dictyostelium cells engulf them. It is also intriguing to determine how folic acid-induced phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic tail of fAR1 regulates downstream signaling events and/or its receptor function. In addition, other proteins shown to be phosphorylated by folic acid or cAMP stimulation will fuel future studies to better understand the landscape of signal transduction in chemotaxis and phagocytosis. In addition to receptors, the work by Pan et al. paves the way for futures studies to decipher precise function of the Gα subunits, Gα2 and Gα4, in chemoattractant-mediated engulfment. One may ask whether Gα2 and Gα4 activate similar but distinct sets of downstream effectors. Since there is only one Gβ in Dictyostelium, we now have an opportunity to separately dissect signaling pathways for the cAMP receptor-Gα2 mechanism and the folic acid receptor-Gα4 mechanism on the molecular level. Given that Gα4 is necessary for phagocytosis of many other particles such as non-coated beads or yeasts, this G protein subunit most likely couples with other GPCRs in addition to fAR1. We may also be able swap the C-terminal tails between cAMP and folic receptors, which are potential biding regions for Gα subunits, thereby re-wiring chemotactic and phagocytic signaling and cytoskeletal reorganization. Finally, it would also be of great interest to determine if mammalian immune cells use the chemoattractant-mediated engulfment mechanism. Article information Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 Apr 3. Published in final edited form as: Dev Cell. 2016 Feb 22; 36: 354–356. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2016.02.006 PMCID: PMC5378551 NIHMSID: NIHMS853908 PMID: 26906729 Hiroshi Senoo, 1 Hiromi Sesaki, 1 and Miho Iijima 1, * Hiroshi Senoo 1 Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Find articles by Hiroshi Senoo Hiromi Sesaki 1 Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Find articles by Hiromi Sesaki Miho Iijima 1 Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Find articles by Miho Iijima 1 Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine * Correspondence: ude.imhj@amijiim PMC Copyright notice The publisher's final edited version of this article is available free at Dev Cell See the article " Identification of a chemoattractant G-protein-coupled receptor for folic acid that controls both chemotaxis and phagocytosis " in Dev Cell, volume 36 on page 428. 