 Macropinocytosis is a conserved endocytic process used by Dictyostelium amoebae for feeding on liquid medium. To further Dictyostelium as a model for macropinocytosis, we developed a high-throughput flow cytometry assay to measure macropinocytosis, and used it to identify inhibitors and investigate the physiological regulation of macropinocytosis. Dictyostelium has two feeding states: phagocytic and macropinocytic. When cells are switched from phagocytic growth on bacteria to liquid media, the rate of macropinocytosis slowly increases, due to increased size and frequency of macropinosomes. Upregulation is triggered by a minimal medium containing three amino acids plus glucose and likely depends on macropinocytosis itself. The presence of bacteria suppresses macropinocytosis while their product, folate, partially suppresses upregulation of macropinocytosis. Starvation, which initiates development, does not of itself suppress macropinocytosis: this can continue in isolated cells, but is shut down by a conditioned-medium factor or activation of PKA signalling. Thus macropinocytosis is a facultative ability of Dictyostelium cells, regulated by environmental conditions that are identified here. This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper. KEY WORDS: Dictyostelium, Macropinocytosis, Endocytosis, Flow cytometry Highlighted Article: A high-throughput flow cytometry assay is used to examine the regulation of macropinocytosis during transitions between feeding modes and entry into development in Dictyostelium. Macropinocytosis inhibitors are assessed. INTRODUCTION Macropinocytosis, first described in the 1930s, is a process of large-scale, non-specific fluid uptake carried out by a wide variety of cells. Actin-driven protrusions from the plasma membrane form cup-shaped circular ruffles that can be several microns in diameter. When a ruffle closes, it engulfs and delivers extracellular material to the cell interior in macropinosomes. Macropinosomes proceed through the endocytic system where their contents can be broken down by digestive enzymes and useful metabolites extracted. In the immune system, dendritic cells and macrophages use macropinocytosis to sample environmental antigens for presentation to B and T cells. Certain bacteria and viruses can utilise macropinocytosis to invade host cells, while other bacteria stimulate macropinocytosis to promote toxin internalisation. Prions and neurodegenerative protein deposits also exploit macropinocytosis to invade new host cells. Tumour cells can maintain a high rate of macropinocytosis, with Ras-activated cancer cells obtaining a substantial part of their nutrition in this way. Considering its widespread importance, the basic biology of macropinocytosis is poorly understood. It has been studied most intensively in tissue culture cells, particularly macrophages, although genetic screens have also been performed in Caenorhabditis elegans and Dictyostelium discoideum. Dictyostelium in particular has great potential as a model because of the high constitutive rate of macropinocytosis maintained by cells in the right circumstances, and because the evolutionary distance from mammalian cells should allow conserved core features to be discerned. The high rate of macropinocytosis by standard axenic strains of Dictyostelium used in the laboratory is due to deletion of the RasGAP NF1. This mutation allows cells to grow in nutrient-containing media without a bacterial food source. Wild isolates also perform macropinocytosis, although the rate of fluid uptake is too low to allow growth in the standard media used with laboratory-adapted axenic strains. These strains can, however, grow in medium supplemented with additional nutrients. Axenic strains form frequent large macropinosomes, which shrink and concentrate their contents once they have been internalised by the cell. The macropinocytic cups are organised around intense patches of active Ras, Rac and plasmanylinositol -trisphosphate, with SCAR/WAVE and WASP localised to their periphery. SCAR/WAVE and WASP activate the Arp2/3 complex to polymerise actin and form the walls of the macropinocytic cup, which is also known as a crown or circular ruffle. The base of the cup appears to be supported by actin polymerisation driven by a Ras-activated formin. The rate of fluid uptake through macropinocytosis by axenic cells is regulated by environmental factors, principally whether the nutrient source for the cells is growth media or bacteria, and their developmental state. Macropinocytosis is additionally affected by the stage of the cell cycle and the concentration of bacterial peptone in the medium, as well as the incubation temperature and the pH. For certain mutants, fluid uptake is dependent upon whether cells are attached to a surface or in shaking suspension. Fluid uptake by standard axenic strains of Dictyostelium, such as Ax2, is almost entirely due to macropinocytosis and can be accurately measured by following the uptake of fluorescent dextran as a fluid-phase marker. We have developed a high-throughput assay to measure macropinocytosis in Dictyostelium, identified useful inhibitors and sought to better understand how macropinocytosis is physiologically regulated during the switch between macropinocytic and phagocytic feeding and the growth-to-development transition. RESULTS Measurement of uptake by high-throughput flow cytometry Macropinocytosis accounts for more than 90% of fluid uptake by axenic strains of Dictyostelium, and can therefore be followed by measuring fluid uptake. However, existing methods based on processing individual cell pellets after uptake of fluorescent dextran are relatively low throughput. We therefore developed a high-throughput assay that used flow cytometry to measure TRITC–dextran uptake. The assay is performed in 96-well plates and, after loading with TRITC–dextran, the cells are washed in situ by ‘dunk-banging’ and detached using sodium azide, which also prevents exocytosis of internalised dextran. Plates are analysed by flow cytometry using a high-throughput sampling attachment to load the flow cytometer, and subsequent analysis is performed with Flowjo, which easily distinguishes Dictyostelium cells from beads and bacteria, but not yeast. An advantage of flow cytometry is that the fluorescence of internalised TRITC–dextran, a pH-insensitive fluid-phase marker, can be determined for single cells. The accumulation of TRITC–dextran proceeds in a uniform fashion across the population over time, with an extended lagging edge of cells with lower uptake. The median fluid internalisation over time by Ax2 cells is quantified in Fig. 1 E, while a comparison of uptake rates with previous work is shown in Fig. 1 F. Fig. 1. Fluid uptake measurement by high-throughput flow cytometry. Sodium azide causes efficient detachment of cells in 96-well plates. Attached cells were incubated with sodium azide for 5 min and the proportion remaining attached was measured through... Controls show the efficiency of the wash step, that the Ax2 cells take up similar volumes of liquid whether in suspension or attached to a surface, and demonstrate the range of cell numbers that can be accommodated per well. The assay is calibrated in terms of volume taken up per cell by reference to measurements of uptake by the same cell population undertaken using a fluorimeter and standardised over time by using Flow-Set fluorosphere calibration beads. Phagocytosis of beads and bacteria, as well as membrane uptake, can also be measured in our high-throughput assay. However, as the cells are not shaken, larger beads in particular will settle during the assay, increasing their local concentration and making comparisons between differently sized particles problematic. In addition, all particles tended to make cells detach, limiting the concentration that can be used, and giving uptake rates that are sub-maximal. Because of these limitations, particle assays are most suited to making comparisons in standardised conditions, and not for measuring maximal rates. These problems can be circumvented by performing the uptake in shaken suspension, followed by analysis by flow cytometry, but at the cost of throughput. We standardly use dextran of 155,000 Da for the uptake assays, but since cells may show selectivity in uptake or trafficking of differently sized dextrans, we also tested smaller and larger dextrans, which had similar sensitivity to actin and PIP3 inhibitors, consistent with uptake by the same mechanism. Effect of inhibitors on macropinocytosis Inhibitors are powerful tools for acutely interfering with biological processes, but relatively few that affect macropinocytosis are currently known. We therefore tested a number of inhibitors affecting both the cytoskeleton and cellular signalling. These were added to Ax2 cells growing in HL5 medium at the start of the uptake assay along with the TRITC–dextran. The internalised fluorescence was measured 1 h later. A number of inhibitors were without effect, although whether this was due to lack of inhibitor uptake, target interaction or the target not functioning in macropinocytosis is unknown. Table 1. Effect of inhibitors on macropinocytosis As macropinocytosis is an actin-dependent process, we first tested inhibitors of actin dynamics. Latrunculin B efficiently inhibited macropinocytosis at standard concentrations, as expected from its profound effects on the actin cytoskeleton, as did cytochalasin A, as previously reported. Inhibitors of the Arp2/3 complex, WASP and formins were all potent inhibitors of macropinocytosis, consistent with the localisation of the target proteins to macropinosomes, and genetics showing macropinocytosis defects in WASP − and ForG − mutants and the axenic growth defect of an ArpB mutant. The microtubule inhibitors nocodazole and thiabendazole both partially inhibited fluid uptake, indicating a role for microtubules – most likely in macropinosome trafficking. The myosin II inhibitor blebbistatin had no effect on macropinocytosis up to 100 µM, in contrast to previously published data, which used higher concentrations that precipitated in our conditions. Macropinosomes are organised around active Rac, Ras and PIP3-containing patches. Accordingly, the phosphoinositide 3-kinase inhibitor LY294002 inhibited fluid uptake, as did TGX221, which targets the mammalian p110β PI3K isoform, whereas inhibitors targeting the p110α and p110γ isoforms did not. We found the Rac inhibitor EHT1864 is a potent inhibitor of fluid uptake. Rapamycin, a TORC1 specific inhibitor, did not affect fluid uptake when applied acutely, as found previously, although it does prevent proliferation. It has been suggested that mTORC1 has functions that are not inhibited by rapamycin but which can be inhibited by more-potent mTor inhibitors. We therefore tried alternative Tor inhibitors and observed an inhibition of macropinocytosis in cells treated with torin 1, but not palomid 529 or PP242. Whether this is due to greater inhibition of TORC1, inhibition of TORC2, or both is not clear – TORC2 has previously been described as having no function in Dictyostelium macropinocytosis ; however, we see a reduction in macropinocytosis when TORC2 components are knocked out in the Ax2 strain used here. The nearest to diagnostic inhibitors for macropinocytosis in mammalian cells are amiloride and EIPA, which block the plasma membrane Na + /H + exchanger, thus affecting sub-membranous pH. Although Dictyostelium possesses two Na + /H + exchangers, it is not known whether they are sensitive to these drugs and we find that the drugs do not affect macropinocytosis. The removal of extracellular Ca 2+ by means of EGTA inhibits constitutive macropinocytosis in immune cells, but had no effect on macropinocytosis by Dictyostelium incubated in a Ca 2+ -free medium indicating that extracellular Ca 2+ is not required. Indeed, high extracellular Ca 2+ concentrations can inhibit Dictyostelium macropinocytosis. These results support previous genetic studies showing that macropinocytosis depends on PI3K, Rac and actin dynamics controlled through SCAR/WAVE, WASP and formins. On the other hand, regulation through extracellular Ca 2+ is not part of a conserved core mechanism of macropinocytosis across species, while roles for the Na + /H + exchanger and Tor have not been confirmed for Dictyostelium in this work. Slow switching between feeding strategies Ax2 cells grown on bacteria have a low rate of macropinocytosis, which increases greatly when they are switched to HL5 growth medium. A similar, although much reduced, increase is seen in wild-type NC4 cells in media enriched with protein. We confirmed the upregulation of macropinocytosis in Ax2 cells switched from growth on bacteria to growth on HL5 medium. It is slow, taking ∼10 h, similar to what is seen for Ax3 cells, and involves both an increased rate of macropinosome formation and increased macropinosome size. A 50% increase in diameter, as seen here, would lead to an ∼3.4-fold increase in macropinosome volume. Fig. 2. Cells adapt to growth on liquid media by increasing their rates of fluid uptake and macropinocytosis. Macropinocytosis increases when cells grown on bacteria are transferred to liquid medium. Fluid uptake was either measured immediately after harvesting... Wild-type DdB cells with an intact NF1 gene only marginally upregulate macropinocytosis in HL5 medium. However, if DdB cells are switched to HL5 medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, in which they can proliferate, they substantially upregulate macropinocytosis, although not as much as Ax2 cells. The increased fluid uptake by DdB cells in this case appears to be due only to an increased rate of macropinosome formation, with no detectable increase in size. Thus, the macropinocytic rate of wild-type cells is also controlled by the availability of environmental nutrients, as in Ax2 cells. The ability of Dictyostelium cells to ingest large particles, such as yeast, and large volumes of fluid are linked, since both depend on the loss of NF1. Fig. S3A shows the same linkage exists at a physiological level: axenically adapted Ax2 cells phagocytose 2 μm beads better than the same cells grown on bacteria. Phagocytosis of smaller 1.75 μm beads is similar between the conditions, while cells grown on bacteria are better at phagocytosis of 1.5 μm beads. Bead uptake by DdB cells, with an intact NF1 gene, is largely unaltered by the nutritional history of the cell, consistent with the unaltered macropinosome size of DdB cells observed in Fig. 2 F. Similar trends are apparent when uptake is performed in shaken suspension: axenically adapted Ax2 cells phagocytose yeast better than Ax2 cells grown on bacteria, while DdB is essentially unable to phagocytose yeast in any condition. Similarly, axenically adapted Ax2 cells are relatively better at taking up larger 2 µm beads than bacterially grown cells. The macropinocytic and phagocytic states are not mutually exclusive, as we found that Ax2 cells fully adapted to HL5 medium maintain a relatively high rate of phagocytosis of bacteria. We therefore asked what happens when Ax2 cells are presented with both bacteria and liquid medium for food. In this case, irrespective of whether the cells had been grown on bacteria or HL5, they adopted a low rate of macropinocytosis. These results show that Dictyostelium has two basic feeding modes: the preferred mode is phagocytosis, which is seen with cells growing on bacteria. Cells in nutrient-containing media without bacteria adopt a second mode where macropinocytosis is upregulated, although the potential for phagocytosis of bacteria is retained. A minimal set of soluble nutrients can stimulate the upregulation of macropinocytosis Ax2 cells do not sustainably increase their rate of macropinocytosis when they are switched from bacteria to KK 2 MC buffer, but require HL5 medium, or some components of it, to do so. To identify such stimulatory components, we first showed that HL5 medium could be replaced by the defined medium SIH and then dissected this defined medium to find the active components. Leaving out blocks of components showed that vitamins and micro-minerals are not necessary for macropinocytic upregulation and that the effect is accounted for by amino acids and glucose alone. Testing amino acids individually showed that only arginine, lysine and glutamate induce macropinocytosis upregulation at the tested concentrations. Consistent with this, removal of just these three amino acids from SIH severely impairs the ability of cells to upregulate macropinocytosis, which is restored when the amino acids are returned to the medium. Testing different sugars showed that only glucose and other metabolisable sugars that can support cell growth permit macropinocytosis upregulation. Fig. 3. Macropinocytosis upregulation can be induced by a minimal medium containing glucose, arginine, lysine and glutamate. The defined medium SIH efficiently induces upregulation of macropinocytosis in cells transferred from bacteria. Fluid uptake in the... Based on these results, a simplified medium for macropinocytosis upregulation, simple upregulation medium was devised, consisting of KK 2 MC buffer plus 55 mM glucose, 4 mM arginine, 3.7 mM glutamate and 8.5 mM lysine at pH 6.5. SUM induces nearly the same level of macropinocytosis as complete SIH, with faster upregulation kinetics. Although cells remain healthy in SUM for several days, it does not support long-term growth. SUM has very low background fluorescence, and we have found it very useful for microscopy, particularly for cells with weakly expressed markers, such as cells with fluorescent tags knocked-in to an endogenous gene. Cells can be grown rapidly on bacteria before transfer to SUM a few hours prior to microscopy, during which time macropinocytosis is greatly upregulated. These results show that macropinocytosis upregulation can be induced by only a handful of the components present in defined medium, while the requirement for the sugar to be metabolisable hints that sugars may be sensed through their effects on metabolism, rather than by dedicated receptors. Macropinocytosis is required for efficient upregulation of macropinocytosis We envisioned that nutrients that cause macropinocytosis upregulation might either be sensed by dedicated receptors, such as those for glutamate, or indirectly through their effect on metabolism, or a combination of both. Since nutrients obtained by macropinocytosis can only be utilised after internalisation, this second route implies that macropinocytic upregulation would depend on fluid uptake by macropinocytosis itself. To test this idea, we used inhibitors to block macropinocytosis during upregulation. As this experiment requires prolonged inhibitor treatment, we first tested how well cells recover from the inhibitors. Ax2 cells growing in HL5 medium recover quite well from prolonged treatment with LY294002 and TGX221, CK666, EHT1864 and torin 1. Prolonged incubation with other inhibitors was too deleterious to make them useful for these experiments. We next used the inhibitors to determine to what extent upregulation of macropinocytosis depends on macropinocytosis, also making a correction for the relatively small deleterious effects of long-term exposure of cells to the inhibitors. Although these inhibitors affect macropinocytosis through different targets, they all inhibit upregulation of macropinocytosis in a dose-dependent manner. The effect remains even after correcting for the long-term effects of the inhibitors. Upregulation is not completely abolished by the inhibitors, reflecting their incomplete inhibition of macropinocytosis. Thus, these results suggest that the upregulation of macropinocytosis in nutrient-containing media is at least partially dependent on delivery of nutrients into the cell through macropinocytosis. Fig. 4. Evidence that macropinocytosis upregulation depends on macropinocytosis. To test whether macropinocytosis upregulation depends on macropinocytosis, inhibitors with differing targets were used to inhibit macropinocytosis during the upregulation... We considered the possibility that the ingested nutrients delivered by macropinocytosis might be detected through the TORC1 complex, similar to the situation in other organisms. Although rapamycin does not inhibit macropinocytosis acutely, it does somewhat inhibit upregulation, with extremely mild effects on control cells. Torin 1 has a stronger effect on upregulation, but as it is less specific, some of this might be due to inhibition of the TORC2 complex. In summary, these results suggest that nutrients causing cells to increase their rate of macropinocytosis are detected in the macropinocytic pathway, possibly by TORC1. Sensing of bacteria Bacteria have two distinct effects on the regulation of macropinocytosis. They inhibit upregulation of macropinocytosis in cells that are transferred into HL5 medium after being previously grown on bacteria, and promote downregulation of macropinocytosis by cells transferred from HL5 medium to KK 2 MC buffer where it otherwise would remain high. Fig. 5. Long-term regulation of macropinocytosis by bacteria and their product, folate. Bacteria inhibit the upregulation of macropinocytosis in cells transferred to HL5 medium. Ax2 cells transferred from bacteria to HL5 upregulate... Bacteria can be sensed through their release of folate, which is a chemoattractant for Dictyostelium and acts through the G-protein-coupled receptor fAR1. We found that folate inhibits the upregulation of macropinocytosis when cells are transferred from bacteria to HL5 medium, but has no effect when cells are transferred from HL5 medium to KK 2 MC buffer. fAR1-null cells are essentially blind to this inhibitory effect of folate, as are mutants of the Gβ and Gα4, subunits of the cognate heterotrimeric G-protein for fAR1, and ErkB, the downstream MAP kinase. Thus, bacteria can exert some, but clearly not all, of their effects on feeding behaviour through canonical folate signalling. Developmental regulation of macropinocytosis Development in Dictyostelium is triggered by starvation and, over the first 8–10 h, the cells undertake chemotaxis towards cyclic AMP causing them to aggregate. Macropinocytosis is downregulated during this period, and it was therefore surprising that macropinocytosis continues at a high rate for at least 24 h in cells starved by incubation in KK 2 MC buffer. However, compared to standard developmental conditions, these cells were starved at low density, likely causing attenuation of developmental signalling. This suggests that the downregulation of macropinocytosis during development requires a developmental signal in addition to starvation. Fig. 6 A confirms that macropinocytosis is strongly downregulated by starving Ax2 cells at high density in shaking suspension and pulsed with cyclic AMP to mimic developmental signalling. By 5 h of development, fluid uptake is negligible. Similar results were obtained when developing cells on non-nutrient agar. Similarly, if the cell density in 96-well plates is increased from 5000 to 50,000 cells per well, the cells form visible aggregates and also downregulate their macropinocytosis. Fig. 6. Macropinocytosis is downregulated by developmental signalling that likely acts through PKA. Macropinocytosis is downregulated during development. Ax2 cells grown in HL5 were washed free of nutrients and allowed to develop in... Later in development, tight aggregates form, which could distort uptake assays by restricting access of dextran to internal cells. However, the main decline in macropinocytosis occurs before this stage and we see no evidence for two populations of cells in the flow cytometry results, suggesting that restricted access to internal cells does not significantly affect our results, at least in the first 6 h of development. We tested the effects of known developmental signals on macropinocytosis using cells starving at low cell density. As shown in Table S3, the developmental signals cyclic AMP, ATP, adenosine and the polyketides DIF-1, DIF-2 and MPBD were without effect, as was the high-cell density signal polyphosphate. However, conditioned medium prepared by shaking starving cells at high density for 8 h was effective at inhibiting macropinocytosis, with the active component being heat-labile and retained by a 30 kDa cut-off membrane and, therefore, likely to be protein. Most likely this signal is one of the known proteins controlling early developmental events in Dictyostelium, but unfortunately these were unavailable for testing. To gain insight into how developmental signals suppress macropinocytosis, we examined possible signal transduction routes, focussing on cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase, which is a crucial mediator of both early and late events in development. PKA can be directly activated by using the membrane-permeable analogue of cyclic-AMP, 8-bromo-cyclic-AMP, and we found that this, unlike cyclic AMP, causes up to a 50% downregulation of macropinocytosis in starving cells at low density. High concentrations are required, but these are comparable to those used previously. The involvement of PKA is strongly supported by mutants with elevated intracellular cyclic AMP levels, due to defective breakdown. The hybrid cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase RegA is activated by a His/Asp phospho-relay in which RdeA is the essential phosphate carrier protein. Elimination of either protein results in strong downregulation of macropinocytosis in starving cells at low density. Conversely, eliminating PKA activity by mutation of the catalytic subunit results in cells where macropinocytosis remains high for at least 24 h after starvation, even when they are at high cell density or treated with CM. Combined, these results strongly argue that macropinocytosis is downregulated in starving cells because of PKA activation. These results are also relevant to the interpretation of recent work showing that pkaC− cells have a strong defect in chemotaxis towards cyclic AMP. DISCUSSION The great majority of fluid uptake by axenic Dictyostelium cells is by macropinocytosis, rather than, for instance, by clathrin-mediated endocytosis. This has been shown through morphometry, the sensitivity of fluid uptake to mutations and inhibitors specifically expected to affect macropinocytosis, such as those affecting PI3K and the RasGAP NF1, and finally by the lack of correlation between the uptake of membrane and fluid in various situations, indicating that they are largely separate processes. In this context, the reduced fluid uptake seen in clathrin heavy chain mutants is likely an indirect effect, perhaps due to perturbed processing of macropinosomes. The various lines of evidence suggest that macropinocytosis accounts for more than 90% of fluid uptake by axenic cells fully adapted to growth on liquid medium. This high rate of macropinocytosis allows fluid uptake to be used as a measure of macropinocytosis, which is an enormous advantage over assays based on counting macropinosomes visualised by microscopy. We have adapted the previous macropinocytosis assays based on bulk fluid uptake to flow cytometry and 96-well plates, thus giving high-throughput and single-cell resolution. A screen of inhibitors provides new tools for acute inhibition of macropinocytosis and further supports the involvement of PI3K, Rac, WASP, formins and the Arp2/3 complex, as expected from genetic and subcellular localisation studies. Macropinocytosis in Dictyostelium occurs at a high rate in conditions where the cells can proliferate in liquid medium. However, it is under physiological control, with cells slowly transitioning between high and low macropinocytic states according to whether bacteria or soluble nutrients are available. In these transitions, the frequency of macropinosome formation is altered: in axenic cells, where the active Ras patches are unconstrained by NF1, macropinosome size is additionally increased. Wild-type cells with an intact NF1 gene also transition between low and high macropinocytic states according to the nutrients available, showing that this regulation is not just a feature of axenic strains. The presence of a high macropinocytic state in wild-type cells suggests there are ecological circumstances where macropinocytosis is used for feeding, though these are yet to be defined. Ax2 cells in the low macropinocytic state can sense bacteria through their secretion of folic acid, inhibiting macropinocytic upregulation accordingly. However, due to the relatively modest effects of folate, and the fact that it does not induce downregulation of macropinocytosis, it seems certain that other sensory pathways also play a prominent role. It has recently been reported that certain bacteria secrete cyclic AMP, which functions as a chemoattractant for vegetative Dictyostelium ; however, cyclic AMP did not affect the upregulation or downregulation of macropinocytosis. Four nutrients are largely responsible for inducing macropinocytosis upregulation in Ax2 cells: arginine, glutamate, lysine and a metabolisable sugar. None of the other amino acids appears effective individually, and even in combination they have only a modest effect. Arginine and lysine are essential amino acids, but glutamate is not. Dictyostelium has several receptors similar to metabotropic glutamate receptors, but it seems likely that the major route for nutrient sensing is intracellular, with nutrients delivered by macropinocytosis. In mammalian cells, free amino acids obtained by macropinocytosis are sensed by activation of mTORC1 at the lysosome, with one effect being inhibition of autophagy. In Dictyostelium, autophagy is induced within minutes of withdrawing arginine and lysine, a step which is necessary to survive prolonged amino acid starvation. Taken together, what is known about mTORC1 and Dictyostelium autophagy alongside our results suggests that Dictyostelium TORC1 may sense arginine and lysine to upregulate macropinocytosis. Our attempts to test this idea using Tor inhibitors are not definitive, but it remains an attractive possibility. As only metabolisable sugars induce upregulation of macropinocytosis, it is probable that the sensing of these is through a general metabolic readout, such as the ratio of ATP to ADP and AMP. Increased levels of AMP and ADP, as occurs in nutrient-poor conditions, activate AMP-kinase. Overexpression of a constitutively active AMP-kinase α subunit in Dictyostelium inhibits growth but does not affect macropinocytosis, similar to what we observe in low-density starvation conditions. Although an attractive possibility, it remains to be determined whether AMP-kinase has any function in upregulation of macropinocytosis. Our results show that the cessation of macropinocytosis during early development requires a developmental signal that most likely acts through PKA. Macropinocytosis does not cease immediately when cells are starved, but decreases over several hours and so may occur at reduced levels in cells used for studying chemotaxis to cyclic AMP. This can be a confounding influence since macropinocytosis uses the same actin machinery as pseudopods and thus impairs chemotaxis. In particular, we found that macropinocytosis continues at a high rate in mutants of the PKA catalytic subunit, possibly accounting for the strong chemotactic defect of these strains. Continued macropinocytosis could also confound studies on other strains with early developmental defects. Many of the molecular components required for macropinocytosis are the same in both Dictyostelium and mammalian cells, such as actin, Arp2/3, PI3K, SCAR/WAVE, WASP, Rac and Ras proteins. This suggests that macropinocytosis may have first arisen in simple protists as a way of feeding in the absence of bacterial prey. In mammalian cells, there are additional levels of regulation, some of which are cell type specific and others that are more generic. Dictyostelium with its high intrinsic rate of macropinocytosis in axenic strains, high-throughput assays, and the recent development of transformation techniques that allow easy manipulation of non-axenic strains – and thus of mutants defective in macropinocytosis – is now an excellent model for establishing the conserved core elements of macropinocytosis. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture and materials Cells were cultivated at 22°C. HL5, SIH and SM media were from Formedium. Unless otherwise specified, cells were grown on Klebsiella aerogenes lawns on SM plates and harvested for experiments from the feeding front, washing three times with KK 2 by centrifugation to remove the bacteria. Cells were also grown in tissue culture plates with Ka as a food source. In this case, Ka was added to KK 2 MC buffer to 2 optical density units at 600 nm units from a 100 OD 600nm stock. Cells were grown axenically in HL5 in conical flasks with shaking at 180 rpm. Media derived from SIH, including SUM, were made in KK 2 MC pH 6.5. Conditioned medium was made by washing axenically grown Ax2 cells free of HL5, resuspending them to 10 7 cells ml −1 in KK 2 MC and incubating for 8 h, with 180 rpm shaking, before removing the cells by centrifugation. Strains are listed in Table S4. For transformation, cells were harvested from bacteria, resuspended in H40 buffer, mixed with 500 ng vector for a PIP3 reporter, electroporated in ice-cold 2 mm cuvettes using a square wave protocol, and then transferred to 2 ml KK 2 MC+ Ka in a six-well plate to recover for 5 h, before G418 selection was added to 10 μg ml −1. Chemicals were from Sigma unless otherwise indicated. Polyphosphate was from both Spectrum and Merck. Uptake measurements by fluorimetry The method used was based on that from Rivero and Maniak, 2006. Cells at 1×10 7 ml −1 were shaken at 180 rpm in HL5 with 0.5 mg ml −1 TRITC–dextran and at each time point triplicate 0.8 ml samples were centrifugally washed once in ice-cold KK 2 and resuspended to 1 ml. Fluorescence was measured in a fluorimeter. Background ‘0 minute’ fluorescence was subtracted and uptake volume was calculated from standard curves for TRITC–dextran diluted in buffer. Cells loaded in this way were also analysed by flow cytometry to compare the methods. To measure yeast uptake, cells were resuspended to 5×10 6 cells ml −1 in KK 2 MC in a 5 ml conical flask and shaken at 180 rpm at 22°C. TRITC-labelled yeast were added to 10 7 particles ml −1. At 0 and 60 min, duplicate 200 μl samples were added to 20 μl of Trypan Blue quench solution on ice, shaken for 3 min at 2000 rpm, spun down and washed twice with ice-cold KK 2 +10 mM EDTA. The final pellet was resuspended to 1 ml and the fluorescence compared to a standard curve to give the number of yeast per cell. Uptake measurements by flow cytometry For high-throughput assays, 50 μl of medium with 10 5 cells ml −1 was incubated in flat-bottom, 96-well plates at 22°C for the indicated time. Then 50 μl of 1 mg ml −1 TRITC–dextran in the same medium was added for a final concentration of 0.5 mg ml −1. After 1 h, unless otherwise stated, the medium was thrown off, and the cells washed by ‘dunk-banging’ before 100 μl KK 2 MC containing 5 mM sodium azide was added to each well to detach the cells and stop exocytosis. Cells were analysed by flow cytometry using the high-throughput sampling attachment, which pipetted them up and down twice, before analysing 65 μl per sample at 3 μl s −1. FlowJo software calculated the median fluorescence of cells in each well. The mean was then taken of all biological replicates. To determine volumes taken up, the same population of cells was analysed by both fluorimetry and flow cytometry. The LSR-II flow cytometer was calibrated through all subsequent experiments by using FlowSet fluorospheres calibration beads. We also used this method to measure uptake of membrane using 10 μM FM1-43, phagocytosis of bacteria using 1×10 8 particles ml −1 Texas Red E. coli bioparticles, or beads of different sizes. Bead uptake in shaking suspension was measured by using cells at 2×10 6 cells ml −1 in KK 2 MC with 4×10 8 beads ml −1. After shaking at 180 rpm for 20 min, samples were diluted into ice-cold KK 2 +5 mM NaN 3, spun down, washed once, then resuspended and filtered into tubes for flow cytometry. The number of particles internalised per cell were calculated as described. Beads larger than 2 μm were taken up very poorly, so were not used. For time courses, start times were staggered so that all incubations ended concurrently. When inhibitors were used acutely, they were added with the fluorescent medium to the final indicated concentration. Polyketides were synthesised as described. To initiate development, axenically growing cells were washed twice, resuspended to 10 7 cells ml −1 in KK 2 MC and shaken at 180 rpm for 1 h before delivering pulses of KK 2 MC containing cyclic AMP to give a concentration of 100 nM every 6 min using a Watson Marlow 505Di pump. At the indicated times 5×10 4 cells were diluted into dextran-containing KK 2 MC in 24-well plates for 1 h, after which they were washed in situ using ice-cold KK 2 +10 mM EDTA and detached with KK 2 MC+5 mM sodium azide. 100 μl was transferred to duplicate wells in a 96-well plate for flow cytometry analysis. Development on non-nutrient agar plates was initiated by settling 1.5 ml of washed, axenically growing cells at 2.5×10 7 cells ml −1 in KK 2 MC onto fresh 1.8% KK 2 MC agar in 6-cm plates. After 15 min settling, the medium was aspirated off, and the plates kept on wet tissues at 22°C. At the indicated times, cells were harvested, resuspended in KK 2 MC and 10 5 cells inoculated into KK 2 MC in a six-well plate with 0.5 mg ml −1 TRITC-dextran for 1 h. Cells were then washed in situ and resuspended in KK 2 +10 mM EDTA before analysis by low-throughput flow cytometry. The zero hour time point was for cells taken immediately after washing. Macropinosome formation rate and diameter The rate of macropinosome formation was determined in KK 2 MC by loading cells in a two-well microscope slide with 2 mg ml −1 FITC–dextran for 1 min, then washing and fixing with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min. Fixed cells were washed five times and stored in PBS at 4°C for imaging. Z -stacks with 0.1 μm steps were taken using a Zeiss 700 series microscope with 2× averaging to reduce noise. Maximum intensity projections were made using FIJI and FITC-positive endosomes counted by eye. The mean of at least eight cells on a given day was taken as one data point. To measure macropinosome diameter at closure, cells in KK 2 MC expressing a PIP3 reporter were filmed in their central section at 1 frame per second for 5 min on a Zeiss 700 series microscope. The maximum diameter of macropinosomes at closure was measured by using the FIJI measure tool. Note that this method will underestimate the diameter of macropinosomes not lying fully within the optical section. Supplementary Material Supplementary information: Click here to view. Acknowledgements We thank the rest of the Kay laboratory for their assistance in moulding this project, particularly Peggy Paschke. Clelia Amato and Robert Insall alerted us to the Rac inhibitor. Jason King provided valuable feedback on the macropinosome formation experiments. Miao Pan and Tian Jin kindly sent us the fAR1 − strain. The MRC-LMB flow cytometry facility maintained the flow cytometers and provided technical support. Footnotes Competing interests The authors declare no competing or financial interests. Author contributions Conceptualization: T.W., R.R.K.; Methodology: T.W.; Validation: T.W.; Investigation: T.W.; Resources: R.R.K.; Writing - original draft: T.W.; Writing - review & editing: T.W., R.R.K.; Visualization: T.W.; Supervision: R.R.K.; Project administration: R.R.K.; Funding acquisition: R.R.K. Funding We thank the Medical Research Council UK for core funding to R.K. Deposited in PMC for release after 6 months. Supplementary information Supplementary information available online at Article information J Cell Sci. 2018 Mar 15; 131: jcs213736. doi: 10.1242/jcs.213736 PMCID: PMC5897714 PMID: 29440238 Thomas D. Williams * and Robert R. Kay * MRC-Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK * Authors for correspondence Received 2017 Dec 1; Accepted 2018 Feb 5. Copyright © 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd See the referenced article in volume 131 on page e0601. Articles from Journal of Cell Science are provided here courtesy of Company of Biologists 