 The capacity of living cells to sense their population density and to migrate accordingly is essential for the regulation of many physiological processes. However, the mechanisms used to achieve such functions are poorly known. Here, based on the analysis of multiple trajectories of vegetative Dictyostelium discoideum cells, we investigate such a system extensively. We show that the cells secrete a high-molecular-weight quorum-sensing factor in their medium. This extracellular signal induces, in turn, a reduction of the cell movements, in particular, through the downregulation of a mode of motility with high persistence time. This response appears independent of cAMP and involves a G-protein-dependent pathway. Using a mathematical analysis of the cells' response function, we evidence a negative feedback on the QSF secretion, which unveils a powerful generic mechanism for the cells to detect when they exceed a density threshold. Altogether, our results provide a comprehensive and dynamical view of this system enabling cells in a scattered population to adapt their motion to their neighbours without physical contact. Keywords: cell motility, quorum sensing, random motion, collective behaviour, density sensing, cell–cell interactions 1. Introduction The ability of individuals to sense the presence of other members in a group is crucial for them to achieve most of their functions. In particular, it is of great interest for them not only to detect their immediate neighbours, but also to gain information about overall properties of the population such as its density. Of course this is true at the scale of metre-sized animals, including human beings, but cells also need this capacity. To achieve this function, they have developed quorum-sensing systems. These consist of secreted diffusible molecules whose concentration in the extracellular medium reflects the cell density, together with a corresponding detection system at the level of single cells. Most of the known quorum-sensing factors act to regulate the cell proliferation not only in bacteria, fungi and amoeba, but also in higher eukaryotes. Such mechanisms could be at stake, e.g. in tumour dormancy or fibrosis diseases. The use of QS systems has been well described in the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, especially during the transition from the unicellular to the multicellular phase and the induction of development. In the vegetative, unicellular, phase, during which the cell population exhibits logistic growth, the secreted protein AprA, which also serves as an endogenous chemorepellant, has been shown to inhibit proliferation at high cell densities. We demonstrated previously that vegetative D. discoideum cells possess another density-sensing system that controls cell motility rather than cell growth. In multicellular organisms, motility is involved not only in immune response, embryonic development and neural plasticity, but also in cancer invasion and metastasis. Unicellular organisms also take advantage of this active mobility to search for food or to spread in their environment. In all these situations, adapting their motion to the collective context can be an asset for the cells, for instance to ensure efficient spreading of the colony or conversely to prevent the population from getting too scattered. We have shown previously that vegetative D. discoideum cells are able to collectively regulate their motility with high sensitivity in cell density. More precisely, they make modifications in their medium, which induce an overall decrease of the motility of single cells in the population. Despite a high heterogeneity between individual cells, the observation of numerous cell trajectories evidenced a particularly marked effect on the displacements over long durations. Hypothesizing that the communication stems from the constant secretion of a QSF, an empirical relationship was found between the concentration of this unknown factor and the cells' effective diffusion constant, which measures the random motility of single cells. Here, we further characterized the functioning of this density-sensing system. First, we confirmed that the effect of medium conditioning on motility is a generic and robust phenomenon in vegetative Dictyostelium cells that affects both the short-term cell speed and its mode of migration. Then we demonstrated that the effect indeed relies on a secreted molecule of high-molecular weight and provided some clues about its chemical nature. We next made a quantitative analysis of the cellular response to QSF concentration: we retrieved the exponentially decaying shape of the motility–concentration relation found previously, with a saturation of the effect at a low-motility plateau. Yet, we also showed that the secretion is under a negative regulation loop, which could provide the cells with a very efficient density-sensing capacity. Last, we examined possible molecular players of the response to QSF. This revealed a role for the G-protein subunit G α 4 and the arrestin proteins AdcB and AdcC, suggesting that a G-protein coupled receptor is also involved. 2. Material and methods 2.1. Cell culture We mainly used D. discoideum standard strain AX2. The cells were grown at 22.5°C on cell-culture-treated Petri dishes in glucose-containing HL5 medium. In these conditions, the doubling time was around 9 h. Before each experiment, the cells were detached and diluted to the seeding density of 5.7 × 10 3 ml −1. All the mutant strains were handled in the same way, except that they could differ in their doubling time. 2.2. Conditioned medium To prepare medium containing QSF activity, cells were put in culture on a 10 cm Petri dish at a density 3 × 10 3 cells ml −1 in 10 ml of HL5 medium, and allowed to grow for 48 h. Then, the medium was collected, filtered through a 0.2 μm-porous membrane and kept at 4°C until used, as the activity proved stable in these conditions. Hereafter, we refer to this medium as ‘conditioned medium’ as opposed to untreated fresh medium. 2.3. Sample preparation and video microscopy A glass slide was first cleaned with ethanol. Six home-made circular plastic wells were glued onto the slide using silicon joint and the device was sterilized under UV light for. Then, 4000 cells were transferred into the wells in 700 μl of medium and allowed to adhere at 22.5°C. After, the medium was changed to experimental medium. The cells were imaged using a slightly defocused bright-field microscope at 4 × magnification and a wide-field Andor Zyla sCMOS camera. A time-lapse movie was recorded for using MicroManager software with a 60 s time-interval, while the temperature was kept constant at 22.5°C. 2.4. Characterization of the cell trajectories 2.4.1. Image processing The cells' positions were retrieved using home-made ImageJ macros based on the ‘Find Maxima’ built-in function. The individual trajectories were then reconstructed with a squared-displacement minimization algorithm and the data analysed using home-made programs in Matlab. Figure 1. The cell motility is decreased by medium conditioning. Examples of, randomly picked up, trajectories of cells in fresh ) and conditioned ) media. MSD as a function of time for cells in FM... 2.4.2. Diffusion constant In the absence of external signals, the trajectory of a cell crawling on a surface is usually well described by a correlated random walk, which implies that several constants are necessary to fully characterize the motion. Over short durations, the movement is almost ballistic, with a linear increase of the displacement in time x − x = v Δ t where v is the cell speed. Over long durations, the transport is diffusive and the mean-squared displacement grows linearly in time as MSD = 〈Δ x 2 〉 = 4 D Δ t. The proportionality coefficient D is akin to a diffusion constant and hence we refer to it as the cells' ‘effective diffusion constant’. The effective diffusion constant was computed from the MSD as D = 〈MSD/〉 averaging over the trajectories of at least with and where the MSD of a single trajectory was computed as the sliding average of ∥ x − x ∥ 2 over all times t of the trajectory. 2.4.3. Quorum-sensing factor activity We call the ‘relative diffusion constant’ the ratio R = D / D FM with D FM the diffusion constant in FM, and we define the ‘QSF activity’ as: 2.1 where R ref is taken from a reference: when studying the response of a cell line, R comes from the studied strain in FM and CM while the reference R ref is measured with AX2 cells; when testing the degree of QSF activity contained in a medium, R = D / D FM and R ref = D CM / D FM, yielding the alternative definition 2.2 Thanks to the robustness of the ratio R, the activity A is well adapted to quantify the amount of cellular response to CM with low sensitivity to inter-experiment or inter-strain variations of the motility. It can take values between 0 and 1. In some cases, a value outside this interval was obtained, possibly due to measurement imprecision or to insufficiently conditioned reference CM. 2.4.4. Velocity autocorrelation The transition between the ballistic and the diffusive regimes is quantified by the velocity direction autocorrelation function C = 〈 u. u 〉, which measures the memory, kept after a time lag Δ t, of the direction of motion exhibited at time t. In the simplest models of correlated random motion, run-and-tumble particles, Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process), the VDACF decreases exponentially as with a characteristic time τ called the persistence time, and the full expression of the MSD at all times is given by the Fürth formula: 2.3 In the above models, the single exponential decay comes from a single white noise: scalar Gaussian white noise in the direction of motion for ABPs, scalar flat white noise at Poisson distributed time intervals for RTPs and vectorial Gaussian white noise in the acceleration for an OU process. Although this very simple situation may be encountered in cell trajectories, deviations of various kinds have been described lately. Theoretically speaking, they are related to the way noise is introduced in the equations of motion. One interesting special case is when the VDACF is not a single exponential, but the sum of two exponential functions: 2.4 Generally, ϕ 1 + ϕ 2 = 1 with 0 < ϕ 1,2 < 1. The special case with ϕ 2 < 0 exists in a model applied to epithelial cells. In this model, the cell velocity follows an OU process whose noise is correlated by itself coming from another OU process. The other situation, with two decaying exponential functions, may arise from two distinct populations of cells, from a memory effect in an extended OU-like model or from bimodal motion, where cells alternate between two modes of migration with different persistence times. 2.5. Ultrafiltration Ultrafiltration units with various cut-offs were first rinsed by centrifuging pure water through the membrane. The medium to be analysed was then centrifuged at 6000 g until the supernatant reached a tenth of its initial volume, and both the concentrated supernatant and filtrate fractions were collected in plastic tubes. For experiments, filtrate and supernatant were assembled so that the species concentrated in the supernatant recovered their initial concentration. Both FM and CM were separated in the filtrate and supernatant, respectively, denoted FM f and FM s for FM and CM f and CM s for CM. The supernatant: filtrate mixes were made either with fractions from the same medium for ‘reconstituted’ FM and CM, or from distinct media. 2.6. Biochemical treatments 2.6.1. Phenol–chloroform extraction FM and CM were concentrated 20 times using a 30 kDa ultrafiltration unit. The obtained fractions were split in two. The test fraction was subjected to phenol–chloroform extraction by mixing with a 1:1 phenol–chloroform mixture. The aqueous phase was collected and subjected to two additional extractions following the same protocol but with chloroform alone to remove the excess phenol from the aqueous phase. Finally, 1 ml of all four obtained fractions was diluted in 13 ml of deionized water and concentrated with 3 kDa ultrafiltration units to a final volume of 500 μl. The fractions were, therefore, concentrated approximately 40 times with respect to the initial FM and CM. They were all added to FM in a 1:39 volume proportion for the motility experiment. 2.6.2. Proteinase K + heat FM and CM were incubated with 10 μg ml −1 proteinase K at 37°C for 2 h, then at 65°C for 20 min to inactivate the protease. Cell motility was also measured in control FM and CM and in FM and CM only subjected to heat in the absence of proteinase K. 2.6.3. Proteinase K + filtration FM and CM were incubated with 10 μg ml −1 proteinase K at 37°C for 2 h; then they were concentrated approximately 30 times by centrifugation at 6000 g through a 30 kDa MWCO membrane to eliminate the proteinase K from the supernatant, which was subsequently diluted in FM f in the same proportion as it was concentrated. Cell motility was also measured in control FM and CM and in FM and CM only subjected to heat, concentration and dilution in the absence of proteinase K. 2.6.4. Anion-exchange resin One millilitre of suspended resin was added to 6–10 ml of FM or CM and vortexed to ensure proper mixing. The mix was centrifuged at 1000 g for 1 min and the supernatant collected, before a second decantation to completely eliminate the resin. The resulting media were used directly in parallel with non-treated FM and CM. As this treatment increased the motion even in FM due to medium depletion in anionic species, in a second experiment, the following mixes were used in a 1:1 volume ratio : — FM a +FM, a control to check that adding 50% of full FM restores the normal motility ; — FM+CM, a control to check that the QSF activity is fully conserved at 50% dilution; — FM a +CM, a control to check that with 50% dilution of the QSF and 50% less anions the QSF activity remains close to 1; — last, the test medium, FM+CM a to check anion-depleted CM in the presence of anions from FM. 2.6.5. Cation-exchange resin The protocol was the same as for anion-exchange resin but with Sephadex-CM C-50 resin. 2.7. Statistics Unless stated otherwise, for any observable X, hereafter 〈 X 〉 denotes the average of X over the trajectories of an experiment while denotes the average over the experiments. We used Spearman's rank correlation coefficient ρ s with a permutation test to estimate the correlations in figure 2. All the analysis was performed using Matlab's Statistical Toolbox. Figure 2. Random motion with two relaxation times. VDACFs of AX2 cells in FM and CM, and best mono-exponential and bi-exponential fits. In both plots, the error bars show... 3. Results 3.1. Medium conditioning consistently reduces cell motility The random nature of vegetative D. discoideum motility gives rise to diffusive motion over long durations. The effective diffusion constant D is thus particularly adapted to quantify amoebal motility. Using this quantity, Golé et al. evidenced that culture medium conditioned by DH1 cells harbours properties responsible for a reduction in cell motility. Here we confirm this result with the AX2 cell line. To that end, we studied the trajectories obtained from all the reference experiments with AX2 cells in either FM or CM. This represents a data set of 156 independent experiments comprising approximately 25 000 trajectories in total for each condition, each single cell being tracked for 90–100 min at a interval. Given the low seeding density and the relatively short experimental time, the cells are assumed to interact neither by contact nor by secreted signals over the course of one experiment. This is confirmed by the fact that despite the relative dispersion of cell densities over the experiments—most of the values of N, the number of cells in the field of view, ranges from 100 to 300 —there is no correlation between N and cell motility. As in our previous work with DH1 cells, we find that the MSDs in FM are larger than in medium conditioned by cells in culture. The corresponding asymptotic slopes yield the effective diffusion constants, with high values D FM in FM and low values D CM in CM. In long-term experiments, when the cell motility is measured over several hours, the progressive conditioning of the medium with time induces a progressive decrease of D FM, while in already conditioned medium, D CM remains approximately constant. This suggests that the conditioning of the medium brings the cells from a high-motility state at D FM to a low-motility state at D CM. Of note, the medium conditioning does not affect cell growth. Interestingly, despite a noticeable inter-experiment variability of the basal cell motility, D FM and D CM exhibit a strong linear correlation. We define the emergent proportionality coefficient as the ratio R = D FM / D CM. This ratio keeps very consistent values R = 0.34 ± 0.08. To test the generality of the phenomenon, we quantified the motility of various laboratory strains of Dictyostelium in parallel with AX2. Again, despite big differences in intrinsic motility, all cell lines exposed to the same CM exhibit a similar response in terms of R. This shows that the regulation of the cell motility due to medium conditioning is a robust mechanism, and the ratio R is a robust feature of this mechanism. 3.2. In depth characterization of cell trajectories: medium conditioning favours a state of low persistence time To understand which aspects of cell motion were affected by the medium conditioning, we analysed the properties of single trajectories in more detail. The plot of shows that these trajectories fall into the class of correlated random walks. However, a close analysis of the shape of reveals a divergence from the Fürth formula. This is confirmed by computing the VDACF. Indeed, data are well fitted only by the sum of two exponential functions as in equation, revealing the presence of more than one single relaxation time in the directional dynamics. Varying τ 1 and τ 2 systematically and fitting the two remaining parameters ϕ 1 and ϕ 2 for both FM and CM conditions, we find an optimum for the fit quality at and, in good agreement with previous measurements. As a consequence, it seems reasonable to set and in all subsequent measurements. In this framework, measuring the best fitting values of ϕ 1 and ϕ 2 allows to estimate the relative weights of both relaxation modes in the directional correlation, even without a detailed model for the motion. In particular, despite a noticeable inter-experiment variability, ϕ 2 is strikingly larger in FM than in CM, which translates into a higher proportion of small turn angles in the trajectories of cells in FM than in CM. It should be noticed that in our measurements, ϕ 1 + ϕ 2 < 1, meaning that there is a third, even faster, ‘mode 0’ in the correlation with weight ϕ 0 = 1 −, which is at least partly due to noise on the position detection, and whose study is outside the scope of the present paper. Assuming the speed fluctuations are not correlated to the fluctuations in direction and the displacements due to mode 0 are negligible, one finds by integrating the VDACF : 3.1 which accounts quite correctly for the available data. To sum up, the motility of the cell over longer durations of the cells quantified by D is well described as a combination of three parameters: the speed v and the relative weights ϕ 1 and ϕ 2 of modes with persistence and, respectively. We next used this set of parameters and their correlations to quantify the effect of CM on cell motion. Whether the QSF regulates cell speed or persistence is an important question because these two aspects of cell movement rely on partially distinct molecular mechanisms, even though they have been shown to be strongly coupled in some cases. Thus, we analysed the effect of CM on 〈 v 〉, ϕ 1 and ϕ 2. However, none of the parameters can account alone for the change of D between FM and CM, and they all look partly correlated to these changes. Thus, we asked whether each of the constants varied rather due to the aforementioned inter-experiment variability or to the medium conditioning itself. To that end, we used Spearman's rank correlation coefficient ρ s to estimate the correlation of a given constant X with D for all available values. Then we also measured the correlation of the values measured either only in FM— ρ FM s —or only in CM— ρ CM s —and we studied the ratios ρ FM s / ρ all s and ρ CM s / ρ all s. A ratio close to 1 indicates that the data are almost as correlated in the subgroups as in the whole set, meaning that their relation relies not only on the presence of CM but also on other exogenous parameters. A small ratio is a sign that the correlation is mainly due to regulation by the medium conditioning. We found that v is highly correlated to D but that almost all the correlation is kept in the subgroups, showing that v is mostly affected by exogenous parameters. ϕ 1 shows a reduced correlation with D, but at least 50% is kept inside the subgroups. Conversely, while it shows similar values to ϕ 1 when all the data are considered, ϕ 2 has a much reduced correlation with D in both subgroups. This suggests that most of the changes in ϕ 2 and the related changes in D result from the regulation by the medium conditioning. Thus, in addition to changes in the short-term cellular dynamics witnessed by v and ϕ 1, the medium conditioning seems to induce an important change in the mode of motion of the cells: it reduces the amount of persistent portions in the trajectories by a factor of 3. Table 1. Table of Spearman's rank correlation coefficients ρ s of 〈 v 〉, D comp = 〈 v 2 〉, ϕ 1 and ϕ 2 with D. The asterisks denote significance: * p < 0.001, **... 3.3. Medium conditioning relies on a secreted quorum-sensing factor of high-molecular weight We next examined the origin of medium conditioning and its dynamics. The effect of CM on cell motility was attributed to a modication of the medium by the cells. Yet, whether it relied on the secretion of a factor as first suspected or the depletion of some constituent of the medium remained unclear. To clarify this point, we conducted ultrafiltration experiments, aiming at separating the molecules of low- and high-molecular sizes in both FM and CM. First, using a 3 kDa cut-off, we separated a supernatant fraction containing the large molecules concentrated 10 times and a filtrate containing the small molecules. Hereafter, we use the ‘QSF activity’ A defined in equations – as a fast and efficient readout to characterize the presence or amount of conditioning. We observed that a mix of supernatant from CM, diluted 10 times to restore initial concentrations of species, with filtrate from FM conserved the QSF activity, while it is absent from the reverse cocktail. This suggests that QSF activity is carried either by a large secreted molecule present in the CM supernatant fraction, or conversely that it is due to the depletion of large molecules present in FM. To rule out the latter hypothesis, CM supernatant was added into complete FM to restore depleted molecules except for the small secreted ones. Introduction of CM s in full FM induced a nearly maximal inhibition of motility compared with the mix FM s :FM indicating that QSF is likely to be a secreted molecule. Figure 3. Ultrafiltration experiments show that the QSF is a large secreted molecule. Principle of the ultrafiltration and blend of the various fractions. QSF activity for different test media. Both FM and CM have been separated in... To further characterize this molecule, we varied the molecular weight cut-off. We found that QSF activity is transferred from the supernatant to the filtrate at a cut-off around 50 kDa. This latter value would correspond to the size of a globular molecule but should be re-interpreted at about 10 kDa in the case of a linear polymer. Of note, a small but noticeable part of the activity is lost when the small molecules of CM are replaced by those of FM. Moreover, CM filtrate alone yields reduced motility as compared to the FM filtrate. This suggests that small molecules may also play a role in this system. However, adding FM supernatant in the CM filtrate rescues the motility of native FM, showing that this role is limited. The CM was also subjected to various biochemical treatments to characterize the molecular properties of the QSF. We observed that QSF activity is depleted by phenol–chloroform extraction, whereas it is robust to treatment with both cation-exchange and anion-exchange resins, as well as with proteinase K and moderate heat. This suggests that the QSF is not heavily charged at experimental pH, and also that it does not exhibit easily accessible peptide chain so that the broad spectrum protease does not cleave it. Thus, we expect the QSF to be a secreted molecule with a molecular weight around 50 kDa if globular, or smaller in the case of a linear chain. It could be a large carbohydrate polymer or even a lipid aggregate, but it could also contain a protein part, provided it is protected for instance by large glycans. 3.4. The secretion of the quorum-sensing factor is under negative control and provides a potentially very efficient density-sensing system In a previous study, the cells were assumed to secrete QSF at a constant rate α, which enabled computation of a putative QSF concentration c up to a factor α. The response function obtained this way was correctly fitted by the following empirical relationship: 3.2 We wanted to test this hypothesis of constant α. The simple evolution equation for the concentration c can be written, where refers to unknown parameters controlling α, and n is the cell density. Note that we included no self-degradation term as we observed that QSF activity was stable in CM that was several months old. To retrieve α, the issue is to first determine the response function D while making no assumption regarding the concentration: consider two conditioned media with respective concentrations c 1 and c 2. For each of them, a dilution scale is made in FM so that the dilution factor f is the volume fraction of the CM. Then D is computed for the two dilution scales, as a function of the dilution factor f. One should obtain two independent relations D 1 and D 2 with similar shapes. Adjusting c 1 and c 2 so that D 1 = D and D 2 = D fall on the same master curve finally yields the ratio c 1 / c 2. We applied this reasoning to the QSF. To that end, we prepared a collection of media with different levels of conditioning, as follows. Several culture dishes containing fresh HL5 medium were seeded with AX2 cells at an initial density n 0 = 3 × 10 3. The time of seeding was considered t = 0. At various times t = T i, a culture dish was picked, and the medium—conditioned for T i —was collected and filtered. Therefore, at each time T i corresponds one ‘medium i ’ containing QSF at a concentration c. Figure 4. The QSF secretion is under negative feedback. Principle of the experiment: cell cultures are started at t = 0 in several dishes with a given cell density n 0. Then the medium is taken at various times t = T i, so that it contains QSF at concentration... In a second step, the activity characteristic of each medium was built as follows. The medium i was mixed with FM so that the volume fraction of medium i was f, and the motility was measured in each medium mix with values of f varying from 0 to 1, as well as in a reference FM and CM, common to all experiments. We computed the QSF activity as in equation and checked that it verified the relationship through 3.3 We then collapsed all the A curves by fitting c, which allowed us to retrieve all concentrations c —in units of c 0, like all the parameters in the following. Looking at the points from the condition n 0 = 3 × 10 3 ml −1, the concentration clearly saturates at a maximum value, which we define as c = c m. This means that the secretion rate decreases over time as the cell number keeps increasing—the growth remains exponential at all times, with a doubling time t 2 = 8.5 ± 0.3 h. To compute the secretion rate, we assumed it constant between two subsequent times T i and T i +1 with value α i. Knowing that the cell density evolved as, the increase in concentration is given by 3.4 We estimated α and then made the approximation α ) = α i to obtain the α relation. Given the obtained values, we considered the case of a linear relation α = α 0 with α 0 / c 0 = 1.7 × 10 −6 ml h −1 and c m = 8 c 0, which is the simplest compatible model. Then we solved the differential equation of the QSF concentration 3.5 3.6 using this simple form for α and the cells' exponential growth. The solution for c is written as: 3.7 This analytic expression represents the experimental data very well. In particular, repeating the experiment with two different initial cell densities n 0, this formula fits remarkably the experimental points although all the parameters except c m / c 0 were measured independently using the n 0 = 3 × 10 3 ml −1 data only. Thus, while the empirical response function found by Gole et al. seems to describe the cellular response well, the secretion is under negative regulation, which was not accounted for before. Note that the latter effect can only be noticed with specially designed experiments. Indeed, simply measuring D without making dilutions would yield values in the plateau of low motility at all c ≥ 5 c 0 without any clue whether c ∼ 5 c 0 or c ≫ c 0. More remarkably, when n is large enough compared to n 0, expression reduces to 3.8 with n * = c m ln 2/ α 0 t 2 meaning that in this situation the QSF concentration depends only on the current cell density and not on the culture's past history. More precisely, c switches from 0 to c m rapidly around n = n * = 3.7 × 10 5 ml −1, a density that corresponds roughly to 30% confluence in two-dimensional culture conditions. 3.5. The response to the quorum-sensing factor involves G-protein and arrestins but not the cAMP pathway We next tried to determine actors involved in QSF sensing or downstream signalling cascades. The genome of Dictyostelium encodes a large number of heterotrimeric G-protein coupled receptors that could be involved in QSF detection or the subsequent response. To test this hypothesis, we analysed the motility in FM and CM of mutant cell lines disrupted for G-protein subunits. While Gβ1, Gα2, Gα5 and Gα8 null cells showed a normal QSF response, we found that Gα4 null cells exhibit a reduced response to the CM. By looking closely to the raw mean D values and to the probability distribution functions, the motility of Gα4 null cells appears notably different from that of the parental JH8 cells in CM, suggesting that the deletion of G α 4 possibly impairs the detection of the QSF signal or the activation of downstream signalling cascades. Figure 5. The QSF response signalling pathway. QSF activity of different strains disrupted for heterotrimeric G-proteins or arrestin family members, tested for their behaviour in FM or CM media. The activity was computed... We also studied mutants disrupted for two members of the arrestin family, the proteins AdcB and AdcC. Arrestins are known to interact with GPCRs and, in particular, to prevent their coupling to heterotrimeric G-proteins, thereby modulating G-protein-dependent signalling downstream of the receptors. We found that QSF activity is suppressed in the adcB/adcC double null strain, while it is only partially suppressed in adcC null cells and not in adcB null cells. To be more specific, we compared the motility of all the mutants to that of the parental strain KAX3 in both FM and CM. All strains exhibit the same motility in CM, but the motility in FM is reduced in the mutants—only slightly for adcB and adcC null cells, but dramatically for adcB/adcC double null cells, with values as low as in CM. These results suggest that active AdcC, and AdcB to a lesser extent, are necessary to set the cells in their high-motility state. The presence of QSF might inhibit this activity of AdcB/C so that the cells exist in the low-motility state. Alternatively, the QSF response could involve other intermediates, overtaking the AdcB/C signal to reduce the cell motility. So far, the only known target of AdcB/C is the GPCR cAR1. However, it is very likely that these proteins also regulate other receptors of this family. Though cAR1 is poorly expressed in our experimental conditions, we nonetheless tested a possible contribution of a cAMP-dependent pathway in QSF response. Indeed, cAMP is central to the regulation of starved D. discoideum motility, whether it be as an extracellular chemoattractant or a cytoplasmic messenger. Adding cAMP or 8-Br-cAMP at various doses either in FM or CM did not change the motility of our vegetative cells, suggesting that cAMP-dependent pathways do not play a key role in the QSF response. The inositol-phosphate pathway does not seem to be involved in the QSF activity either, as two different plc null strains responded normally to the presence of QSF. Lastly, we also tested the possible contribution of the secreted protein AprA, which is a chemorepellent for vegetative D. discoideum cells and which we therefore suspected at first to be the QSF. Neither AprA nor the kinase QkgA, necessary for AprA's repellent activity, seem to play a role in the QSF effect. 4. Discussion Vegetative D. discoideum cells are able to condition their medium in a way that, in turn, reduces their motility as quantified by the population-averaged diffusion constant D. We showed that this effect largely relies on the production of a large QSF molecule in the external medium. This molecule has a molecular weight of about 10–50 kDa and it is robust to treatment with proteinase K, moderate heat, anion and cation-exchange resins while it is depleted by phenol–chloroform extraction. It suggests that the QSF is either a polymer or an aggregate of neutral molecules such as carbohydrates, or also possibly that it contains a protein domain decorated by large sugars. Progress in the purification of the QSF from CM together with mass spectroscopy analyses should provide a better insight into the precise nature of this molecule. The QSF response is dramatically reduced in Gα 4 null cells, suggesting that the QSF binds to a G-protein-coupled receptor that induces a response cascade through a G-protein. Our analysis also revealed a role for the arrestin-related proteins AdcB/C as actors in the high-motility phase. Whether AdcB/C activity is modulated by QSF and whether these well-characterized regulators of GPCR signalling and trafficking are involved in the G α 4-dependent pathway triggered by the QSF are important points that will deserve further investigation. We looked further into the possible signalling pathways, but neither the cAMP, inositol-phosphate nor AprA pathway seems to play a central role here. We confirmed that the motility follows the QSF concentration through a nonlinear response function. By studying the QSF activity in dilution scales of media conditioned for various periods of time, we could indirectly measure the QSF concentration. We found that the secretion is itself under negative control. Using a secretion rate that decreases linearly with the concentration, we could analytically compute the concentration at all times and fit the experimental data very satisfactorily. The existence of a sharp transition around n = n * suggests that the QSF could provide the cells with a very efficient density sensing system, with good sensitivity around n *. We can reasonably guess that apart from motility, the QSF acts on other cellular functions. Interestingly, the value n * = 3.7 × 10 5 ml −1 calculated with our fitting parameters corresponds to approximately 30% confluence in two-dimensional culture. This ability to detect the transition past n * could thus be used by the cells to adapt their behaviour to a situation where the density becomes high, but still before the end of exponential growth. Note that in this part of our work, we used the motility to indirectly estimate the level of cell–cell interactions. It constitutes a step forward in the exploitation of cell motility as a tool to witness the presence of a cellular reaction to a stimuli. The quantitative characterization of the cell trajectories showed that although diffusive at long durations, the dynamics was not well described at shorter durations by a random walk with simple exponential correlation, but rather that there are two timescales in the relaxation of the direction of motion. In this context, three different phenomena could lead to a decrease of D : a decrease in the speed v, a decrease in one of the persistence times or a decrease in the time spent in high-persistence mode. While the former would originate in changes in actin dynamics and adhesion turnover, the latter two would be related to the maintenance of cell polarity. We found that both the speed and proportion of high-persistence mode were decreased in the presence of QSF, while the persistence times remained constant. It suggests that these times are inherent properties of the cells while the latter can adapt their protrusion–retraction activity and their switch frequencies between two modes of motility according to their environment. We noted that beyond the QSF regulation, the cell diffusion constant continuously varied together with the cell speed due to exogenous parameters. By contrast, the changes in D due to a regulation of the highly persistent mode of motion were only correlated to the presence of QSF. It suggests that this mode of high persistence is specifically used by the cells to react to signals from neighbouring cells. Interestingly, in a previous work, we have shown that this same mode of high persistence with could also be modulated by cell–cell contact: therefore, it appears to be a generic and fundamental element of the collective regulation of cell motility, at least in the case of D. discoideum. At the collective level, QSF-assisted regulation of the motility could provide the cells in a scattered population with a tool for efficient collective exploration of the environment: while isolated cells may each cover a large area thanks to their high motility, such unnecessary movements can be avoided when cells are close enough to each other. In the case of Dictyostelium, this ability would be related to the optimal exploitation of nutrient resources. However, many conserved properties of motility have been first described in D. discoideum before being observed in higher organisms, and especially in leukocytes. It is a stimulating perspective to imagine that in multicellular organisms, cell types that are dispersed in a tissue could possess a similar communication system, for instance allowing immune cells to efficiently ‘scan’ the tissues. Beyond its effect on motility, we have characterized a form of linear negative feedback on the secretion of the QSF, which is a very simple way to finely detect cell densities above a given threshold. This could actually be a very generic mechanism that various cell populations could use to adapt their behaviour relative to some critical density or density range. Acknowledgements The AX2, KAX3 and DH1 cells were provided by P. Cosson, R. Firtel and W. Loomis labs, respectively. The aprA − and qkgA − cells were a gift from R. Gomer. All other mutant cell lines, with the exception of arrestin mutants, were provided by the Dicty Stock Center. J.d.A. has been partially supported by the Fondation ARC pour la Recherche sur le Cancer and by the Programme d'Avenir Lyon-Saint Étienne. J.d.A., C.R. and J.P.R. belong to the CNRS consortium CellTiss and to the LIA ELyTLab. Article information J R Soc Interface. 2018 Mar; 15: 20180006. Published online 2018 Mar 21. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2018.0006 PMCID: PMC5908535 PMID: 29563247 Joseph d'Alessandro, 1, † Lauriane Mas, 2 Laurence Aubry, 2 Jean-Paul Rieu, 1 Charlotte Rivière, 1 and Christophe Anjard 1 Joseph d'Alessandro 1 University Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, 69622, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Joseph d'Alessandro Lauriane Mas 2 University Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Inserm, BIG-BGE, 38000 Grenoble, France Find articles by Lauriane Mas Laurence Aubry 2 University Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Inserm, BIG-BGE, 38000 Grenoble, France Find articles by Laurence Aubry Jean-Paul Rieu 1 University Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, 69622, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Jean-Paul Rieu Charlotte Rivière 1 University Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, 69622, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Charlotte Rivière Christophe Anjard 1 University Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, 69622, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Christophe Anjard 1 University Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, 69622, Villeurbanne, France 2 University Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Inserm, BIG-BGE, 38000 Grenoble, France e-mail: rf.mji@ordnasselad.hpesoj e-mail: rf.1noyl-vinu@drajna.ehpotsirhc † Present address: Institut Jacques Monod, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR 7592 and Université Paris Diderot, 75013 Paris, France. Electronic supplementary material is available online at. Received 2018 Jan 4; Accepted 2018 Feb 22. Copyright © 2017 The Author Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved. Articles from Journal of the Royal Society Interface are provided here courtesy of The Royal Society 