 Autophagy is a eukaryotic catabolic process also participating in cell-autonomous defence. Infected host cells generate double-membrane autophagosomes that mature in autolysosomes to engulf, kill and digest cytoplasmic pathogens. However, several bacteria subvert autophagy and benefit from its machinery and functions. Monitoring infection stages by genetics, pharmacology and microscopy, we demonstrate that the ESX-1 secretion system of Mycobacterium marinum, a close relative to M. tuberculosis, upregulates the transcription of autophagy genes, and stimulates autophagosome formation and recruitment to the mycobacteria-containing vacuole in the host model organism Dictyostelium. Antagonistically, ESX-1 is also essential to block the autophagic flux and deplete the MCV of proteolytic activity. Activators of the TORC1 complex localize to the MCV in an ESX-1-dependent manner, suggesting an important role in the manipulation of autophagy by mycobacteria. Our findings suggest that the infection by M. marinum activates an autophagic response that is simultaneously repressed and exploited by the bacterium to support its survival inside the MCV. Author summary One of the cell-autonomous defence pathways against intracellular pathogens is autophagy, an ancestral eukaryotic process surprisingly conserved throughout evolution. Recent studies have highlighted contradictory roles for autophagy during mycobacterial infection. Whereas some studies revealed a role for autophagy to control intracellular bacterial growth, others brought evidence that mycobacteria somehow inhibit autophagic killing. Here, we demonstrate for the first time that Mycobacterium marinum induces both an early autophagic response and its simultaneous repression by blocking the autophagic digestion. This antagonistic manipulation of autophagy is dependent on a functional ESX-1-secretion system, which secretes the membrane-damaging factor ESAT-6, proposed to participate in the perforation of the M. marinum- containing vacuole. We show here that these membrane damages activate the formation of autophagosomes and their recruitment to the MCV. However, M. marinum also utilizes its ESX-1 secretion system to avoid killing inside autolysosomes by blocking the autophagic flux. In addition, we bring evidence that this manipulation of autophagy is orchestrated via the regulation of TORC1, the major eukaryotic kinase complex controlling nutrient-sensing and cell metabolism. Introduction Autophagy is one of the most ancestral and important catabolic pathways in eukaryotes. Under stresses such as oxidative stress, nutrient starvation, accumulation of toxic protein aggregates or DNA and organelles damage, cells turn on a complex machinery to maintain their homeostasis. One of the main protein complexes regulating autophagy is TORC1, which comprises the serine/threonine kinase TOR that coordinates cell growth and metabolism. Under optimal conditions, TORC1 suppresses autophagy, while promoting growth via increased ribosome biogenesis and protein translation. However, upon stress, TORC1 activity is repressed and autophagy generates nutrients and energy to maintain essential activities. When TORC1 is inhibited, the Atg1/ULK1 kinase complex activates and promotes the recruitment of Atg8/LC3 and Atg18/WIPI-2 to autophagosome formation sites. Atg8 is lipidated and incorporated into both the external and internal sides of the phagophore membrane, facilitating its expansion and engulfment of cytoplasmic material into a double-membrane vesicle termed autophagosome. After fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes, the sequestered material is digested and recycled into new macromolecules. As a degradation pathway, autophagy can also operate as an innate immune response against intracellular pathogens, specifically coined "xenophagy". The pathogen or the damaged cellular components activate autophagy, causing the capture and digestion of the invader. Nevertheless, some microbes exploit the autophagic machinery to their own benefit, such as Francisella tularensis or Staphylococcus aureus, which use autophagy to support their intracellular growth. Mycobacterium tuberculosis, a major threat to human health and causative agent of tuberculosis, survives in host cells by arresting phagosome maturation. M. tuberculosis can escape into the host cytosol by damaging the membrane of its containing compartment. Autophagy, shown to be induced by M. tuberculosis infection, controls mycobacterial growth in host cells. However, these bacteria also harbour several lipidic and proteinic virulence factors such as lipoarabinomannan, PDIMs, Eis, Rv3242c, Rv3167c, SapM, PhoP and the type VII secretion system ESX-1, to inhibit killing by autophagy. The role of the ESX-1 secretion system in the regulation of autophagy has also been studied during Mycobacterium marinum infection. M. marinum is a close relative of M. tuberculosis that naturally infects fish and frogs and produces skin lesions in humans. Its conserved ESX-1 secretion system is essential for its escape from the mycobacteria-containing vacuole and induction of an autophagic response in the host. However, whether M. marinum ESX-1 is also involved in the inhibition of the autophagic flux, as described for M. tuberculosis, remains unexplored. Here, by using D. discoideum / M. marinum as a model system to study mycobacterial infections, we demonstrate for the first time that M. marinum induces both an early autophagic response and its simultaneous repression by blocking the autophagic flux. This antagonistic manipulation of autophagy is dependent on its ESX-1-secretion system. Free-living D. discoideum is a biochemically and genetically tractable amoeba that phagocytoses bacteria and yeasts for food. It possesses a simplified and well-conserved cell-intrinsic immune system, making this professional phagocyte a powerful model to study host cell responses during bacterial infection. Most mammalian autophagy genes are conserved in D. discoideum, permitting the use of this amoeba to uncover the mechanisms of xenophagy against a variety of pathogens. For instance, we have shown that after escape to the cytosol M. marinum recruits the autophagic machinery to egress from D. discoideum in non-lytic manner. Here, we reveal the kinetics of the D. discoideum xenophagic response to M. marinum and show that these virulent mycobacteria induce autophagy at the level of gene transcription, autophagosome formation and recruitment to the MCV, while blocking the autophagic flux in an ESX-1- and TORC1-dependent manner. Results M. marinum induces an early autophagic response in D. discoideum Autophagy is highly dynamic in D. discoideum, as evidenced by the rapid flow of GFP-Atg8 + autophagosomes from formation to degradation, and the fusion events, which occur in 1–3 min. Thus, the average number of autophagosomes at steady state can be as low as one. Under autophagy-inducing conditions, such as nutrient starvation, mechanical stress and rapamycin treatment, Atg8 associates with nascent autophagosomes, resulting in an increase in the number of GFP-Atg8 puncta. To investigate whether M. marinum induced a similar response, we infected GFP-Atg8-expressing D. discoideum cells with wild type bacteria. By live microscopy, we detected a three-fold increase in the number of GFP-Atg8 structures 1.5 hours post-infection. This three-fold increase was confirmed using GFP-Atg18, a marker specific for omegasomes and expanding phagophores. Fig 1 M. marinum induces an early autophagic response in D. discoideum. Notably, recruitment of GFP-Atg8 to the bacteria fell in distinct patterns that we defined as dots, patches and compartments. Double-membrane structures were observed by EM of the MCV, likely corresponding to those detected by fluorescence microscopy. This heterogeneity in GFP-Atg8 + patterns next to the MCV might reflect temporal stages in a rapid series of events during phagophore elongation around the MCV and/or MCV-autophagosome fusion. In addition, immunofluorescence staining showed co-localization of the autophagy markers ubiquitin and p62 with Atg8 at the site of recruitment to bacteria, suggesting that the classic autophagic machinery was activated early after infection. The accumulation of autophagosomes during infection might be indicative of either increased induction or decreased degradation, since an impairment of autolysosomal function would also lead to the accumulation of autophagy proteins and compartments. A change in the mRNA levels of autophagy genes may correlate with the change in autophagic activity. Therefore, we measured the transcription levels of autophagy genes at various stages of infection. The expression of the two D. discoideum atg8 genes, of atg1 and p62 was significantly upregulated early after infection. Autophagy induction restricts M. marinum proliferation To determine the impact of autophagy induction during infection, we treated infected cells with the autophagy inducer drug AR-12/OSU-03012. After validating that AR-12 induced the formation of autophagosomes, and was neither cytotoxic for D. discoideum nor for M. marinum, we quantified the recruitment of GFP-Atg8 to M. marinum after drug treatment. We did not observe a significant difference in its overall recruitment, but the number of patches increased by 20% when compared to dots, suggesting enhanced phagophore elongation around the bacteria. Formation of GFP-Atg8 vacuoles around the bacteria did not increase though, suggesting that the xenophagic flow was somehow arrested. In addition, treatment with AR-12 lead to a decrease in bacterial load, as measured using lux -expressing M. marinum, suggesting that artificial induction of autophagy can restrict M. marinum survival and/or proliferation. The decrease in bacterial load resulting from artificial induction of autophagy was confirmed with other inducers such as the TOR kinase inhibitors AZD8055 and PI-103. Fig 2 Artificial induction of autophagy restricts M. marinum proliferation. The autophagic machinery is required to maintain the MCV In D. discoideum, disruption of atg1, the homolog of the mammalian ULK1 kinase, leads to a complete block in the canonical pathway. To confirm a negative effect of autophagy on the proliferation of M. marinum, we infected wt and atg1 - cells with lux -expressing bacteria. As predicted, the bacterial load was significantly higher in the atg1 mutants, visible from 24 hpi. This increase was also observed during infection of atg8 knock out cells, but not of cells lacking the selective autophagy adaptor p62, because of potential redundancy with other Ub-binding xenophagy adaptors. Importantly, treatment with AR-12 had no effect on bacterial load in atg1 - cells, confirming the autophagy-dependent effect of this drug. Fig 3 Autophagy is necessary for the maintenance of the MCV. We have previously shown that M. marinum grows inside a vacuole with features of post-lysosomes in D. discoideum, and escapes into the cytosol after about 24 hpi. In addition, we show here that autophagic structures accumulate around bacteria. We therefore wondered whether autophagy provides membranes to maintain the integrity of the MCV, as previously suggested for other bacteria. Surprisingly, EM monitoring of infected atg1 - cells revealed that M. marinum was released into the cytosol as early as 1 hpi. Cytosolic, but not vacuolar M. marinum becomes ubiquitinated in both macrophages and D. discoideum. Staining for p80, an endosomal copper transporter enriched at the MCV, also distinguishes between bacteria inside a phagosomal compartment, and cytosolic bacteria. Consistent with our EM data, we detected a striking increase in the level of ubiquitinated M. marinum in atg8 - and atg1 - cells, which was complemented by expression of Atg1-GFP. 3D ). Taken together, these results suggest that autophagy is necessary for the establishment and/or maintenance/repair of the MCV, preventing early escape of mycobacteria to the cytosol. M. marinum induces autophagosome formation in an ESX-1-dependent manner Both M. tuberculosis and M. marinum possess a genomic locus, RD1/ESX-1, that encodes a type VII system necessary for secretion of the virulence factor ESAT-6, proposed to participate in the disruption of membranes in mammalian cells as well as in the rupture of the MCV in D. discoideum. Because membrane damage caused by various bacteria induces autophagy, we hypothesize that ESAT-6 might also be responsible for the recruitment of the autophagic machinery to early MCVs. Monitoring GFP-Atg8 and GFP-Ub during the first stages of infection revealed a considerable decrease of their recruitment to the ΔRD1 bacteria, from 60% to 20% and from 40% to 20%, respectively. Infection of atg1 - cells with either M. marinum ΔRD1 or ΔCE, a strain with a knock out restricted to ESAT-6 and its chaperone CFP-10, also showed reduced bacteria ubiquitination at 6–7 hpi, suggesting that secretion of ESAT-6 is thus required for cytosolic escape and subsequent ubiquitination of mycobacteria in D. discoideum. Complementation of the ΔRD1 strain with the M. tuberculosis -derived RD1-2F9 cosmid restored ubiquitination to wt levels. Fig 4 The early autophagic response caused by M. marinum infection is dependent on ESX-1. In addition, we measured intracellular proliferation of lux -expressing M. marinum wt and ΔRD1 strains. Deletion of the RD1 locus severely reduced the M. marinum load in both wt and atg1 - cells, suggesting that the growth advantage of wt bacteria in atg1 - D. discoideum strictly depends on their capacity to escape to the cytosol. Moreover, the upregulation of autophagy genes early after infection was also strictly dependent on a functional ESX-1 secretion system. We also observed the reduction in fluorescence intensity of the cytosolic GFP-Atg8 fraction in cells infected with M. marinum wt but not with ΔRD1, indicating that the activity of the RD1 locus induces autophagosome formation and the consequent translocation of cytosolic GFP-Atg8 to membranes. Therefore, we suggest that the damages produced by ESAT-6 to the MCV membrane lead to an early induction of the autophagic response, which somehow limits damage and contributes to retain bacteria in the MCV. M. marinum blocks the autophagic flux in D. discoideum Because M. marinum induces the formation of autophagosomes and xenophagy represses bacteria growth, the expected bacterial fate would be degradation in autolysosomes. However, intracellular mycobacteria not only survive but proliferate. One plausible explanation is that M. marinum avoids xenophagy by blocking the autophagic flux, as already suggested by the lack of effect of AR-12 on the frequency of GFP-Atg8 + compartments fully enclosing bacteria. We first mapped the endocytic and autophagic features of the MCVs containing M. marinum. At 7 hpi, only 30% of the MCVs were decorated by Rab11, a recycling endosome GTPase involved in phagophore elongation and autophagosome maturation, while 80% of the compartments recruited Rab7, a late endosomal protein necessary for the transition from autophagosomes to autolysosomes. In addition, 40–50% of the MCVs were positive for markers of acidic compartments such as VatB, a peripheral subunit of the vacuolar H + -ATPase, and LysoSensor Green. We did not observe any significant difference in these characteristics between the wt and the ΔRD1 MCVs, even though there is no overall proliferation of the latter mutant bacteria. In sharp contrast, staining with DQ-BSA revealed that only the M. marinum ΔRD1 MCV had lysosomal-like degradative capacity. Together, these data indicate that, at the time points studied here, M. marinum wt actually resides in a compartment with features of late endosomes, and suggest that a functional ESX-1 is necessary to block either fusion of the MCV with lysosomes or the activity of lysosomal enzymes. Fig 5 Expression of ESX-1 is essential to devoid the MCV of proteolytic activity. To test the hypothesis of M. marinum blocking the autophagic flux in an ESX-1-dependent manner, we measured the flux using an improved protocol tailored to the specific infection conditions. Infection with M. marinum wt but not ΔRD1 led to a general increase in the number of cytoplasmic GFP-Atg8 + structures, but treatment with a protease inhibitor cocktail, which impairs lysosomal function but does not alter the amount of cytosolic GFP-Atg8, resulted in the accumulation of such structures in both infected and non-infected cells. However, this accumulation was less apparent in cells infected with M. marinum wt compared to ΔRD1 or to uninfected cells. Despite the increased numbers of GFP-Atg8 puncta, by immunoblot, the free GFP signal was reduced in cells infected with both wt and ΔRD1 bacteria at 1.5 and 7 hpi. Both the induction and the blockade of the autophagic flux can lead to a decrease in the free GFP signal in western blot, but because the ratio in GFP-Atg8 puncta between cells treated with PI and not treated was lower for an infection with M. marinum wt, we conclude that only M. marinum wt blocks the autophagic flux. Nevertheless, this ratio was not equal to one, suggesting again the parallel induction of autophagosome formation by M. marinum wt. The ESX-1-dependent blockade of the autophagic flux as well as the induction of autophagy by M. marinum were confirmed by treatment with the vacuolar H + -ATPase inhibitor concanamycin B. Fig 6 The autophagic flux is blocked during wt M. marinum infection. The hypothesis that M. marinum wt blocks the autophagic flux is supported by the presence of membrane tubules or lamella projecting from the MCV, which appear more prominent after PI treatment. These resemble the proto-lysosomal tubules generated during autophagic lysosomal reformation or omegasomes. The accumulation of undigested membranes and cytoplasmic material inside the MCV, observed by EM even after treatment with AR-12, also supports the view of a block induced by M. marinum. The requirement for a functional ESX-1 secretion system for both induction of autophagosomes and blockade of the autophagic flux was confirmed by the fact that PI treatment only increased the accumulation of GFP-Atg8 around wt but not ΔRD1 bacteria. In addition, we observed ΔRD1 bacteria completely surrounded by a GFP-Atg8 + vacuole only after PI treatment, while it did not change the percentage of M. marinum wt inside such structures. This indicates that killing and degradation of M. marinum ΔRD1 by autophagy is more prominent than for M. marinum wt, and that ESX-1 is essential to block the flux. Altogether, our data suggest that, in D. discoideum, M. marinum induces the formation of autophagosomes while it blocks the autophagic flux in an ESX-1-dependent manner. The early autophagic response induced by M. marinum might depend on TORC1 The main inhibitor of autophagy is TOR, a highly-conserved kinase that associates with Raptor, Lst8 and Deptor to form the TORC1 complex. Some pathogenic bacteria manipulate the autophagic defence response in host cells via regulation of TORC1 activity. Therefore, we investigated whether M. marinum also controls autophagy in D. discoideum by impacting on TORC1. Fig 7 The early autophagic response, but not the flux blockade induced by M. marinum depends on TORC1. As a readout for TORC1 activity, we monitored the phosphorylation of conserved sites in Raptor and in the TOR substrate 4E-BP1 during infection. At 1.5 hpi, TORC1 activity was decreased, since both p-Raptor and p-4E-BP1 were significantly reduced. This inhibition of TORC1 activity was transient, and at 7 hpi the phosphorylation levels of both proteins returned to control levels. Antibodies against mammalian 4E-BP1 or Raptor did not detect the endogenous proteins in D. discoideum, but we confirmed by monitoring the level of GFP-Raptor that the inhibition of TORC1 activity was due to the decrease in p-Raptor and not to its degradation. For unknown reasons, the results obtained during infection with the ΔRD1 bacteria were very variable, impeding a definite conclusion on whether the ESX-1 system was responsible for the regulation of TORC1 during M. marinum infection. In mammalian cells, TORC1 translocates from the cytosol to membranes of late endosomes and lysosomes upon activation by amino acids, while it always resides at the vacuolar membrane in yeasts. Since the MCV in D. discoideum possesses characteristics of late endosomes, we monitored whether TORC1 was also located on bacteria compartment. Recruitment of GFP fusions of Lst8 and Raptor to the MCV was observed at 1.5 hpi. We also detected recruitment of the lipid-anchored membrane proteins Lamtor1 and Rheb, which activate TORC1 when amino acid levels are high. However, unlike TORC1 activity, the recruitment of all these proteins to the MCV did not significantly change between 1.5 and 7 hpi, indicating that recruitment is probably independent of TORC1 activity. Nevertheless, we detected a significant decrease in the recruitment of Lamtor1, Rheb and Lst8 to the M. marinum ΔRD1 MCV at 7 hpi, suggesting that the features of the bacterial compartment diverge during infection depending on the functionality of the ESX-1 system. We conclude that, early after infection of D. discoideum, M. marinum induces autophagosome formation presumably via downregulation of TORC1, which might be dependent on the activity of the ESX-1 secretion system. However, this downregulation is not associated with changes in the localization of TORC1, which remains associated with the MCV at all times. Discussion In recent years, the professional phagocyte D. discoideum has become a powerful model to study host-pathogen interactions at the cellular level. The functional conservation of the autophagy pathway between D. discoideum and mammalian cells, in addition to its genetic tractability, make this amoeba an excellent model system to uncover the mechanisms of xenophagy. In this study, we validate the infection model D. discoideum - M. marinum as a robust system to uncover the complex manipulation of autophagy by mycobacteria. It was previously shown that M. marinum recruits LC3/Atg8 in murine macrophages and zebrafish embryos. In D. discoideum, we detected not only an increase in the number of Atg8 + and Atg18 + structures, but the recruitment of those structures and other autophagy markers like Ub and p62 to the MCV early after infection. This recruitment is likely due to an early induction of autophagosome formation, since the activity of the main autophagy inhibitor, TORC1, decreased at 1.5 hpi, the transcription of some of the genes involved in nucleation and elongation of the isolation membrane, the two major steps in autophagosome formation, were upregulated at the beginning of the infection, and translocation of GFP-Atg8 from the cytosol to autophagosomal membranes can also be observed from 1.5 hpi. With time during infection, the autophagy induction driven by M. marinum diminished, as confirmed by the decrease in the transcription of autophagy genes, the total number of GFP-Atg8 structures per cell, and the recruitment of those GFP-Atg8 + and GFP-Ub + structures to the MCV. Intriguingly, at 24 hpi transcription of autophagy genes was no longer upregulated, even though the recruitment of Atg8 to the bacteria raised back to the initial level. We have recently shown that M. marinum recruits the autophagic machinery during its ejection from D. discoideum, a process that enables the non-lytic cell-to-cell transmission of the bacterium after 24 hpi. Our results suggest that, later in the infection, M. marinum benefits from pre-formed autophagosomes for its ejection from the host cell. Surprisingly, at early stages only 5–10% of the co-localization events between bacteria and Atg8 corresponded to closed compartments, suggesting that only a few mycobacteria are captured in autophagosomes. Autophagy is reported to play both negative and positive roles during infection. When it acts as a cell-autonomous defence response, it leads to bacterial killing, but it can also support replication of pathogens such as S. aureus or Brucella abortus. Despite inducing an early autophagic response, M. marinum not only survives but proliferates inside D. discoideum. This points to a complex interface between D. discoideum and M. marinum in which autophagy plays both a negative and a positive role. We suggest that overall autophagy restricts bacterial load, as revealed by the unrestricted proliferation in atg1 - and atg8 - cells. This loss of control of the mycobacteria replication can only be due to autophagic deficiency and not to the lack of an inflammatory response, as previously suggested to occur in mice, since D. discoideum lacks a canonical inflammation pathway. However, in these mutant cells, the bacteria escape precociously to the cytosol due to a compromised integrity of the MCV, indicating a contribution of autophagy to the maintenance/repair of damaged MCV membranes early during infection. A similar cyto-protective role of autophagy in repairing membrane damages caused by Salmonella has been suggested. In addition, a role of the ESX-1 secretion system in the induction of autophagy in animal cells has been reported. Here, we suggest that M. marinum uses the same membrane damage-dependent mechanism to subvert autophagy in the ancient phagocyte D. discoideum. Note that in wt D. discoideum the capacity of autophagy to maintain the integrity of the MCV is likely overwhelmed at later stages of infection by M. marinum, leading to ESX-1-dependent cytosol escape. In any case, a massive physiological or pharmacological induction of autophagy can overcome such positive effects, leading to restriction of mycobacterial load, as we also observed in D. discoideum after treatment with AR-12, AZD8055 and PI-103. Our observations of autophagosomes associated with the MCV and of regions of double membrane at the periphery of the MCV suggest an additional or alternative role for autophagy in supplying the MCV with membranes. The formation of MCV with features of autophagic membranes was completely dependent on a functional ESX-1 secretion system, since deletion of the RD1 locus tremendously reduced the recruitment of Atg8 and Ub to the damaged MCV and abolished the upregulation of autophagy genes. We confirmed that the decrease in the percentage of cells with GFP-Atg8 + bacteria observed during infection with M. marinum ΔRD1 was not due to a lower bacterial load, since quantifying the percentage of mutant bacteria positive for GFP-Atg8 showed a similar reduction. In addition, the attenuation of M. marinum ΔRD1 observed in wt D. discoideum was not epistatically reversed by a knock out of the autophagy pathway, likely indicating that xenophagy mainly limits cytosolic bacteria burden. To impede its killing by xenophagy, M. marinum must somehow block the autophagic flux. We show here that, in D. discoideum as in macrophages, M. marinum resides in a compartment with late endosomal features but devoid of lysosomal properties. A role for ESX-1 in flux blockade has been proposed for M. tuberculosis. Here, we demonstrate for the first time that M. marinum escapes from lysosomes and also blocks the autophagic flux in an ESX-1-dependent manner. The membrane perforations caused by the ESX-1 secretion system might alter the content or properties of the MCV, preventing its fusion with lysosomes, as previously shown for the action of Listeryolisin O from Listeria monocytogenes. Actually, M. marinum ΔRD1 does not induce autophagosome formation or recruitment nor blocks the autophagic flux. However, the decrease in cytosolic GFP-Atg8 fluorescence at 1.5 hpi, the decrease in free GFP and the increase of bacteria inside autophagosomes after PI treatment when D. discoideum is infected with M. marinum ΔRD1 suggest that it might undergo enhanced autophagic clearance. Altogether, our data indicate that M. marinum utilizes the ESX-1 secretion system to block the autophagic flux in D. discoideum and to tailor the composition of the MCV. Little is known about the role of TOR during mycobacterial infections. Mycobacterial lipids and ESAT-6 stimulate TOR signalling, but the kinetics of TOR activity and autophagy during infection have not been studied. Here, we show that early after infection, M. marinum inhibits TORC1 activity, which is reactivated at 7 hpi. TORC1 reactivation might contribute to the block of autophagic flux. In agreement with this, at 8 hpi, the MCV was full of cytoplasmic material, and membrane tubules or lamella extended from the compartment. ALR involves the autophagy-dependent reactivation of TOR after inhibition by stress, and consists in the formation of proto-lysosomal tubules from autolysosomes that finally mature into functional lysosomes. On the other hand, these membrane extensions or lamella also resemble omegasomes arising from the compartment containing M. marinum, which is supported by the localization of GFP-Atg18 at the MCV. This suggests the MCV as a site for autophagosome formation, but more experiments will be necessary to confirm the origin of those membrane tubules/lamella at the MCV. In conclusion, we propose that the membrane damages caused by the M. marinum ESX-1 secretion system activate an early cell-autonomous defence response in D. discoideum, which is accompanied by the transient inhibition of TORC1 activity. However, M. marinum avoids killing inside induced autolysosomes by blocking the autophagic flux, likely as a consequence of the membrane perforations. The autophagic flux blockade results in the accumulation of membranes and cytoplasmic material in the MCV, which might somehow support bacterial survival within the niche. Fig 8 Model of the D. discoideum autophagic response during M. marinum infection. Materials and methods Dictyostelium strains and culture The D. discoideum strains used for this work are listed in S1 Table. Cells were axenically grown at 22°C in HL5c medium supplemented with 100 U mL −1 of penicillin and 100 μg mL −1 of streptomycin. To generate the p62 knockout strain, p62 was amplified with the primers p62F10 and p62R10 from genomic DNA of DH1 and ligated into pGEM-T-Easy. The Bs-resistance cassette flanked by SmaI sites from plasmid pLPBLP was inserted into pGEM-T-p62, previously digested with Eco RV and Bcl I and blunted. Plasmids and primers to generate the D. discoideum GFP-tagged proteins Atg8, Atg18, Atg1, Ub, p62, Rab11c, Rab7a, VatB, Lamtor1, Rheb, Lst8 and Raptor are listed in S1 and S2 Tables. Plasmids were transfected into D. discoideum by electroporation and selected with the relevant antibiotic. Hygromycin and G418 were used at a concentration of 50 and 5 μg mL −1, respectively. Mycobacteria strains and culture Mycobacteria, listed in S1 Table, were cultured in 7H9 supplemented with 10% OADC, 0.2% glycerol and 0.05% Tween80 at 32°C in shaking culture at 150 r.p.m. To minimize bacterial aggregation, Erlenmeyer flasks containing 5 mm glass beads were used. Cultures were grown until OD 600 of 1. M. marinum ΔRD1 was complemented with the RD1-2F9 cosmid by integration into the chromosomal attB site. Bacteria growth measurements Growth of luminescent bacteria was measured as described previously. Briefly, 1.0 × 10 5 luxABCDE -expressing M. marinum were plated on a non-treated, white F96 MicroWell plate containing 7H9-OADC medium and covered with a gas permeable moisture barrier seal. Luminescence was measured for 30–70 h with 1 to 3 h intervals with a Synergy Mx Monochromator-Based Multi-Mode Microplate Reader. The temperature was kept constant at 32°C. For intracellular growth measurements, dilutions between 0.5 and 2.0 × 10 5 of infected cells were plated as described above with HL5c medium containing 10 μM of amikacin to avoid extracellular growth of mycobacteria. Luminescence was also measured for 30–70 h with 1 h intervals at a constant temperature of 25°C. Cell cytotoxicity assay Cell cytotoxicity was determined as the percentage of reduction of the signal from alamarBlue reagent, as indicated by the manufacturer. Briefly, 2.0 × 10 5 cells were cultured on a 96-well plate with HL5c containing DMSO or AR-12 for 4 h at 21°C. After washing with phosphate buffer, cells were cultured in the dark with 10% alamarBlue reagent for an additional 4 h. Finally, fluorescence at 595 nm was measured and normalized to 1. Antibodies, reagents, immunoblot and immunofluorescence microscopy As readouts of TORC1 activity, the rabbit polyclonal antibody anti-p-Raptor and the rabbit pAb anti-p-4E-BP1, which recognise the conserved phosphorylated sites in D. discoideum, were used. A rabbit pAb was raised against full-length recombinant Atg8; anti-p80 was purchased from the Geneva Antibody Facility ; the anti-Ub monoclonal antibody was from Enzo Life Sciences; rabbit anti-Abp1 pAb was previously described ; mAb and pAb anti-GFP were from Abmart and MBL, respectively; rat mAb anti-RFP was from ChromoTek; rabbit Goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit IgG coupled to Alexa488 or Alexa594 or to HRP were used as secondary antibodies. To stain live bacteria, 10 μM Vibrant DyeCycle Ruby Stain was added to the infection sample 30 min before imaging. To stain acidic compartments, 1 μM LysoSensor Green DND-189, a pH-dependent probe which fluorescence intensity increases upon acidification, was added to the infected cells. After 10 min incubation, excess dye was washed away and cells were imaged for a maximum of 30 min. To stain compartments with proteolytic activity, 50 μg/mL DQ Green BSA, which releases fluorescent protein fragments upon dequenching of the self-quenched, BSA-associated Bodipy dye by proteolysis, was added to the infection sample one hour before imaging. To measure the autophagic flux, the cOmplete EDTA-free PI cocktail from Roche and CMB were used. To assess inhibition of the lysosomal function, before treatment with PI and CMB cells were incubated overnight in the dark with 4 mg/mL TRITC-Dextran and 0.4 mg/mL FITC-Dextran. To prepare lysates for immunoblotting, the cOmplete, ULTRA Tablets, Mini, EASYpack PI cocktail from Roche were used. PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail was also from Roche. AR-12, AZD8055 and PI-103 were purchased from Selleckchem. For immunoblotting of samples to monitor the autophagic flux and TORC1 activity, 3.6 × 10 6 cells were gently collected in a 15 mL Falcon conical tube on ice and centrifuged 5 min at 1500 r.p.m. in the cold. The pellet was resuspended in RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and lysis was allowed for 10 min on ice. Lysates were then centrifuged 10 min at 13000 r.p.m. in the cold and boiling sample buffer added to the supernatant at 2×. Samples were further boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Final cell density in the sample was 5 × 10 7 cells mL −1. Around 5 × 10 5 cells were loaded per lane. After SDS-PAGE separation and transfer onto nitrocellulose membranes, immunodetection was performed as previously described but with ECL Prime Blocking Reagent instead of non-fat dry milk. When the GFP-Atg8 cleavage was analysed, a mix of mAb and pAB anti-GFP was used to enhance the signal. Detection was performed with ECL Plus using an EpiChemi II Darkroom device. Data quantification was carried out with ImageJ. Infected D. discoideum cells were fixed by rapid freezing in ultracold methanol and immunostained as previously described. Immunofluorescence images were recorded either with a Leica SP5 or Zeiss LSM700 or LSM780 confocal microscope using a 63× 1.4NA or a 100× 1.4NA oil-immersion objective. Infection assay Infections were performed as previously described, with few modifications. Briefly, after infection and phagocytosis, extracellular bacteria were washed off and attached infected cells were resuspended in HL5c containing 5 μg mL −1 of streptomycin, 5 U mL −1 of penicillin. Live imaging Cells were plated on a μ-dish at the indicated times and, after adherence, either 1μm sections or time-lapse movies with 4 s intervals were taken with a spinning disc confocal system mounted on an inverted microscope using the 63 × or the 100 × 1.4 NA oil objective. Images were processed with ImageJ. Quantification of autophagic fluorescent structures, bacteria co-localization or cytosolic GFP-Atg8 fluorescence intensity was performed manually. Under infectious conditions, only cells containing bacteria were considered for quantification. To improve imaging in S1A–S1C Fig, a 1 mm thin agarose sheet was overlayed in the middle of the μ-dish as described previously. Electron microscopy EM in Figs ​ Figs3B 3B and S2B and S2C was performed as previously described ; For Figs ​ Figs1E, 1E, ​,6F 6F and S8A, the exact protocol described before was followed. Samples were processed and analysed at the EM Core facility of the Faculty of Medicine. Quantitative real-time PCR RNA from non-infected cells or cells infected with M. marinum wt or ΔRD1 at appropriate times was extracted using the Direct-zol RNA MiniPrep kit as indicated by the manufacturer. 1 μg RNA was retro-transcribed using the iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit and polydT primers. The cDNA was amplified using the primers listed in S2 Table and the SsoAdvanced universal SYBR Green supermix. Amplimers for atg1, atg8a, atg8b, p62 and gapdh were detected on a CFX Connect Real-Time PCR Detection System. The housekeeping gene gapdh was used for normalization. PCR amplification was followed by a DNA melting curve analysis to confirm the presence of a single amplicon. Relative mRNA levels were determined by comparing first the PCR cycle thresholds for the gene of interest and gapdh, and second Ct values in infected cells vs non-infected cells. Autophagic flux assay Current autophagic flux assays in D. discoideum rely on a 4 h treatment with the lysosomotropic compound NH 4 Cl to suppress lysosomal acidification, which induces adverse effects on cell and organelle morphology. We therefore, developed an alternative assay using a cocktail of PI to block autolysosomal proteolysis of GFP-Atg8. Because of the fast autophagic flux in D. discoideum, as short as one hour of treatment was required to detect a lack of lysosomal function and an accumulation of GFP-Atg8 by immunoblot. In addition, we also observed a 2-fold accumulation of GFP-Atg8-positive structures by live microscopy. As a positive control for the flux assay, we used AR-12, which increased the number of autophagosomes, as well as the rate of degradation of the GFP cleaved from GFP-Atg8. The induction of flux was confirmed by the detection of 2.5-fold more GFP-Atg8 puncta in cells treated with AR-12 and PI compared to cells treated only with AR-12. These induction and blockade of the autophagic flux by AR-12 and PI, respectively, were not toxic, since the cell shape remained unaltered. We confirmed that these effects were autophagy-dependent, since almost no GFP-Atg8 cleavage or accumulation were observed in treated atg1 - cells. Infected or non-infected cells expressing GFP-Atg8 were cultured in a shaking Falcon 6 Well Clear Multiwell Plate at a density of 1.33 × 10 6 cells mL −1. One hour before the indicated time point, the PI cocktail was added at 2.5-fold the recommended concentration. Addition of ddH 2 O was used as mock-treatment. As a positive control, AR-12 was added 2 h before the indicated time point at a final concentration of 2.5 μM. In this case, DMSO was used as a mock-treatment. Cells were collected either on ice for immunoblotting or on a μ-dish for live imaging. Similar results were obtained with the vacuolar H + -ATPase inhibitor CMB. Two-hours treatment with 1 μM CMB was needed for a clear impairment of the lysosomal function and the autophagic flux. However, since 2 h, but not 1 h, treatment mildly but significantly affected atg1 - cells, 1.5 h treatment with CMB was finally used to monitor the autophagic flux during M. marinum infection. Statistical analysis The GraphPad Prism and MATLAB software were used to perform statistical tests and to plot graphs. For the autophagic flux assays, all data sets were fitted to Poisson distributions, and the corresponding parameter λ was estimated. 10 6 random permutations of the data sets were performed to generate random λ. These λ were used to calculate the probability of differences occurring by chance between the pairs of λ of the original data sets, as described in. The λ of each data set and the corresponding p -values obtained by the random permutation test are listed in S3 and S4 Tables, respectively. In Figs ​ Figs6C 6C and S7E, the log 2 of the ratios between the λ in drug-treated and mock-treated cells was calculated. The probability of differences occurring by chance were similarly tested using 2x10 6 -random permutations of the data sets. Supporting information S1 