 The unusual nature of the N-glycans of the cellular slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum has been revealed by a number of studies, primarily based on examination of radiolabelled glycopeptides but more recently also by mass spectrometry. The complexity of the N-glycomes of even glycosylation mutants is compounded by the occurrence of anionic modifications, which also present an analytical challenge. In this study, we have employed hydrophilic interaction anion exchange HPLC in combination with MALDI-TOF MS/MS to explore the anionic N-glycome of the M31 strain, which lacks endoplasmic reticulum α-glucosidase II, an enzyme conserved in most eukaryotes including Homo sapiens. Pre-fractionation with HIAX chromatography enabled the identification of N-glycans with unusual oligo-α1,2-mannose extensions as well as others with up to four anionic modifications. Due to the use of hydrofluoric acid treatment, we were able to discriminate isobaric glycans differing in the presence of sulphate or phosphate on intersected structures as opposed to those carrying GlcNAc-phosphodiesters. The latter represent biosynthetic intermediates during the pathway leading to formation of the methylphosphorylated mannose epitope, which may have a similar function in intracellular targeting of hydrolases as the mannose-6-phosphate modification of lysosomal enzymes in mammals. In conclusion, HIAX in combination with MS is a highly-sensitive approach for both fine separation and definition of neutral and anionic N-glycan structures. Keywords: mass spectrometry, HPLC, phosphate, sulphate, glycome 1. Introduction The humble cellular slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum 1 has become one of the most used non-mammalian genetic model organisms alongside Arabidopsis, Caenorhabditis, Drosophila, sea urchin and zebrafish. Its genome sequence was first published in 2005 2, but predating this were a number of studies on its glycosylation. Basic features such as the presence of intersecting N- acetylglucosamine, methylphosphate and sulphate on oligomannose-type N-glycans of the slime mould were shown by a number of methods such as anion exchange, normal phase, lectin affinity and gel filtration chromatography of radiolabelled glycans, solvolysis, mass spectrometry and/or nuclear magnetic resonance ; nevertheless proof of the actual structures of many neutral and anionic N-glycans derived from either wild-type or mutant strains was only possible after more recent developments in mass spectrometry 9 – 11. In our laboratory we have employed the strategy of off-line HPLC in combination with MALDI-TOF MS in order to examine the N-glycans of Dictyostelium 12, 13. An important step in our protocol is to first employ non-porous graphitised carbon, with acetonitrile to elute neutral glycans and then acetonitrile supplemented with trifluoroacetic acid to enrich the anionic ones, in a way similar to that used with mammalian glycans 14, 15. Subsequently, the neutral and anionic-enriched PA-labelled pools were subject to hydrophilic interaction anion exchange HPLC, which separates glycans according to their size/charge, resulting in fractions containing less complex mixtures so facilitating the use of MALDI-TOF MS together with glycosidase or chemical treatments; the fractionation prior to mass spectrometry also reduces suppression effects. This type of procedure has been performed with the HL241/ alg9 and M31/ modA strains deficient in two conserved enzymes of N-glycosylation in the endoplasmic reticulum 12, 13 : respectively, the ALG9 α1,2-mannosyltransferase and the α1,3-glucosidase II. Indeed, the initial stages of N-glycan biosynthesis in Dictyostelium are conserved as compared to plants and animals, as is the process of mannose-6-phosphorylation known from mammals; thus, the slime mould can be used as a model for examining the glycomic repercussions of mutations affecting these processes. Pathological phenotypes resulting from mutations in the human glucosidase II α-subunit gene orthologous to Dictyostelium modA include some cases of autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney and liver diseases 16. Figure 1 Summary of biosynthesis of N-glycans in Dictyostelium, relevant diagnostic MALDI-TOF-MS/MS fragments and HIAX-HPLC. Dictyostelium glycomutants tend to modify their N-glycans with fewer anionic groups on average as compared to the ‘wild-type’ AX3, due to the absence or blockage of acceptor sites on the glycans for these modifications 17. In the course of our previous study on the M31 glucosidase mutant 13, we were under the impression that more glycan structures were present than we could confidently assign and that we had reached the sensitivity limit with the mass spectrometers we were using, especially in negative mode MS/MS. However, by using instruments of increased sensitivity and performing further digests, we could extend our analysis of the neutral and anionic N-glycans of the M31 strain as fractionated by HIAX chromatography. We thereby detected an extended range of glycans with one or two phosphate and/or up to three sulphate groups and could also resolve a number of isobaric species; consequently, we can capture a number of metabolic intermediates of the mannose-6-phosphate glycan modification pathway in this organism, as well as identify examples of a novel ‘yeast-reminiscent’ α1,2-mannose extension. 2. Experimental Procedures 2.1. Preparation of neutral and anionic N-glycans The M31 strain, obtained from the Dictyostelium Stock Centre, was grown in HL5 liquid medium according to standard techniques 18. Cellular material was heat-treated in water, homogenised by sonication and proteolysed with pepsin in 5% formic acid, prior to purification of the peptides and release of N-glycans with PNGase A and F as previously published 13, 19. After Dowex AG50 chromatography, the flow-through was subject to solid phase extraction using non-porous graphitised carbon, with 40% acetonitrile and then 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid to elute respectively the neutral and anionic N-glycans; the pools were then separately labelled with 2-aminopyridine at the reducing terminus prior to subsequent HPLC and MALDI TOF MS/MS analysis 19. According to fluorescence of the labelled pools, the ratio of the neutral to anionic glycans was estimated to be 3:1; MALDI-TOF MS was used for quality control before and after labelling. 2.2. Chromatography of N-glycans Hydrophilic interaction anion exchange HPLC was performed with an IonPac AS11 column on a Shimadzu Nexera UPLC system as described previously 12, 13. A two solvent gradient with buffer A and buffer B was applied at a flow rate of 1 ml/min: 0-5 min, 99% B; 5-50 min, 90% B; 50-65 min, 80% B; 65-85 min, 75% B. A pool of pyridylaminated oligomannosidic N-glycans from white beans was used to calibrate the column and test efficiency of separation. For RP-HPLC isomeric/isobaric comparison with wild-type glycans, an Ascentis Express RP-amide column was employed with a gradient of 30% methanol in 100 mM ammonium acetate, pH 4 being applied at a flow rate of 0.8 ml/min as follows: 0-4 min, 0% B; 4-14 min, 0-5% B; 14-24 min, 5-15% B; 24-34 min, 15-35% B; 34-35 min, return to starting conditions 20. The fluorescence was measured at 320 nm and 400 nm with a Shimadzu RF-20A XS detector. 2.3. MALDI-TOF MS/MS of N-glycans HPLC fractions were dried and reconstituted in deionized water and analysed by MALDI-TOF MS using 6-aza-2-thiothymine as matrix, whereby the samples were dried under vacuum on a steel target prior to application of the matrix and drying once again 19. MS and MS/MS spectra were generated using either an Autoflex Speed MALDI TOF/TOF or an UltrafleXtreme MALDI TOF/TOF in positive and negative reflectron ion modes. Spectra were processed with the manufacturer’s software using the SNAP algorithm with a signal/noise threshold of 6 for MS and 3 for MS/MS and thereafter analysed manually. 2.4. Dephosphorylation and glycosidase treatments Phosphomono- and di-ester bonds on pyridylaminated N-glycans were cleaved with hydrofluoric acid on ice at 4 °C for 36 h prior to evaporation. For removal of phosphomonoesters, we also used shrimp alkaline phosphatase in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate/ carbonate buffer, pH 8, overnight at 37 °C. Mannosidase digestions of pyridylaminated N-glycans were performed at 37 °C in a final concentration of 50 mM ammonium acetate buffer using either Canavalia ensiformis α-mannosidase or Aspergillus saitoi α1,2-specific mannosidase. Endomannosidase digestions were performed using purified recombinant Bacteroides xylanisolvens BxGH99 13, 21 in 50 mM ammonium acetate buffer overnight at 37 °C, whereas α-glucosidase II treatment was done using a supernatant of Hi5 insect cells in the presence of a 50 mM ammonium acetate buffer overnight 13. In the case of sequential enzymatic treatments, the first enzyme was heat inactivated prior to addition of the second enzyme. Typically 1 µl of any HPLC fraction was used for these digests performed in PCR tubes, an aliquot of which was afterwards measured directly with MALDI-TOF MS without any further purification. 3. Results and Discussion 3.1. Fractionation of neutral and anionic N-glycans We have previously analysed a number of neutral and anionic N-glycans of the M31 strain of Dictyostelium discoideum, a mutant first isolated in the 1970s 22, 23, which we also demonstrated has a point mutation in the gene encoding the endoplasmic reticulum α-glucosidase II 13 ; this mutation accounts for a shift in the protein-linked N-glycome in the M31 strain to glycans with up to eleven hexoses, as compared to the Man 8 GlcNAc 3-4 Fuc 0-1 species typical of the cellular stage of the axenic ‘pseudo-wild-type’ AX3 strain. In the present study, partly by using of MALDI-TOF mass spectrometers with increased sensitivity especially in negative ion MS/MS mode as well as performing further glycosidase digestions, we are able to demonstrate new structural features in the M31 N-glycome. The N-glycans of the ‘neutral’ and ‘anionic-enriched’ pools were separated by HIAX 24 on the basis of size and degree of modification with sulphate and/or phosphate. Approximately 90 fractions were collected in total, in part by minutes as fluorescent peaks were not always obvious. These were then analysed by MALDI-TOF MS in positive and negative modes; from each run, approximately 30 fractions were verified to contain glycans. Those glycans containing phosphate and methylphosphate can be observed in both modes, whereas sulphated structures are detected primarily as - negative mode and as + in positive mode. In order to also determine the positions of the anionic modifications, MS/MS was performed before and after either dephosphorylation or α-mannosidase digestion; the detection of key fragments and differences in the fragmentation pattern after these treatments was crucial for the prediction of the glycan structures. In our previous study 13, we could confidently identify up to 36 N-glycans in 26 HIAX fractions of the M31 anionic glycan pool. Re-analysis enables us to detect 54 glycans in 30 anionic fractions, all verified by MS/MS. The backbones of many of these glycans contained between eight and eleven hexose residues as well as up to four N- acetylhexosamines ; the anionic modifications were present in a number of combinations of one or two phosphate and/or one to three sulphate residues. We did not detect any glycan with the unmethylated phosphate in addition to the isobaric sulphate. Furthermore, in the neutral pool, we can now identify five further glycans in addition to the 15 previously described 13. 3.2. Anionic N-glycans containing nine, ten or eleven hexose residues Indicative of the possible combinations of anionic modifications are those glycans based on nine mannose residues ranging from those with single phosphate or sulphate modifications through to those with up to one methylphosphate and three sulphates. The presence of the anionic modifications renders the Man 9 GlcNAc 2 structures partially resistant to jack bean α-mannosidase with maximally six residues being lost, rather than eight for unmodified Man 9 GlcNAc 2 ; thus, the positions of the sulphate or phosphate can be deduced since the A arm is not modified. The co-eluting larger sulphated and methylphosphorylated Hex 10-11 -based glycans are, due to the glucose residues on the A antenna, losing maximally two mannose residues upon α-mannosidase digestion. The susceptibility towards α-mannosidase digestion is even more limited in the presence of two or more anionic modifications; the combined digestion and MS/MS data indicate that the phosphates are normally terminal on the C antennae, as is commonly also the case in mammalian phosphorylated N-glycans 25 or the phosphoethanolamine-modified N-glycans of Penicillium species 26, whereas the sulphates tend to be subterminal; based on previous chemical desulphation data, it is assumed that the sulphates are 6-linked to mannose 27. Figure 2 Mannosidase digestion of selected glycans with single and multiple anionic modifications. In the case of glycans with one sulphate and one methylphosphate, these moieties were on opposite antennae, unless the glycan also carried an intersecting N-acetylglucosamine on the N-glycan; in the latter case, an m/z 497 fragment is observed. Those glycans with three or four anionic modifications, though, could carry sulphate and methylphosphate on the same arm, but none of those detected possessed an intersecting GlcNAc. Nevertheless, analysis of glycans with multiple sulphate residues is complicated by in source fragmentation in MS mode as well as multiple sodium and potassium adducts; the charge-based separation as well as the digestion data facilitated the interpretation of complex spectra and the subsequent structural annotation. As previously hypothesised, although the glucosidase II is absent from the M31 strain, the anionic Hex 9 HexNAc 2 -based glycans lack glucose residues as these may be removed in a post-Golgi compartment 13. Other common backbones of M31 glycans are those with ten or eleven hexose residues and in some cases, glycans with the same apparent mass were present across a number of fractions; without prior fractionation it would not have been possible to distinguish these glycans by regular MALDI-TOF MS analysis. Exemplary of these larger glycans were species with m/z 2566 in negative mode. These isobaric glycans could be distinguished by treatment with hydrofluoric acid and re-analysis in positive and negative modes. The form which was resistant to hydrofluoric acid, as judged by the lack of a shift of the m/z 2566.7 - ion, was concluded to carry one sulphate residue. The second isobaric glycan lost, however, 283 Da upon hydrofluoric acid treatment; this would be compatible with the combined loss of a phosphate and a N- acetylhexosamine. A third form, which lost 80 Da in positive mode but was no longer detectable in negative mode, was concluded to be modified by one phosphate. On the other hand, only the latter structure with a ‘free’ phosphomonoester was sensitive to phosphatase treatment, whereas sulphated and phosphodiester-modified structures were resistant. The three m/z 2566 glycans were also differentially susceptible to jack bean α-mannosidase treatment. Considering also the differential ionisation in the positive mode, as well as the fragmentation data, we concluded that we detected isobaric/isomeric structures modified by sulphate, phosphate or HexNAc-1-phosphate moieties. Thereby, the third N- acetylhexosamine in these structures are assumed to be either on the intersecting positions or linked as a phosphodiester; indeed, a fragment corresponding to Hex 0-1 HexNAc 1 P 1 was found for a number of structures. Figure 3 Analysis of isobaric anionic N-glycans found in the M31 glucosidase II mutant strain. Compared to the literature, the HexNAc-1-phosphate is presumed to be a GlcNAc-P-Man phosphodiester; thus, the HexNAc-1-phosphate modification found in the M31 strain is probably a biosynthetic intermediate of the mannose-6-phosphate pathway in which first GlcNAc-1-phosphate is transferred by the gpt1 gene product 29 and then, as in mammals 30, an ‘uncovering enzyme’ removes the GlcNAc 31, prior to the amoebal-specific methylation reaction 32 ; again, we assume that the uncovering enzyme operates less efficiently with the mutant glycans, which are in this mutant larger than in the wild-type and so resulting in steric hindrance. We conclude that for this reason, the biosynthetic intermediate is still detected on a few glycans in the final glycome. In the wild-type AX3, it would appear that all phosphate residues of the N-glycans are methylated, a biosynthetic end-point compatible with the presence of a specific methyltransferase detected in Dictyostelium extracts 32, whereas in this and another mutant we have detected non-methylated phosphate; thus, one may conclude that the ‘mutant’ glycans are not the preferred substrates for the methyltransferase. Furthermore, as many structures with an intersecting GlcNAc also carry one methylphosphate, interesting questions are whether first the GlcNAc-1-phosphate or the intersecting GlcNAc is transferred and when the methylation reaction takes place relative to the other modifications. 3.3. Neutral N-glycans containing twelve or more hexose residues Although Hex 8-11 HexNAc 2-3 based-structures constitute the vast majority of backbones in M31 and apparently maximally two ‘unprocessed’ glucose residues were present, we were surprised to find neutral forms of Hex 12-14 HexNAc 2-3 ; one question was whether they were glucosylated or not. Unexpectedly, these glycans lost up to six hexose residues when treated with endo-α-mannosidase as compared to maximally three which would be lost from a diglucosylated structure including a single underlying mannose. The pattern of Y-fragments suggested an elongation on the A arm, whereby the endo-α-mannosidase results indicate that the extension must be proximal to the glucose residues. Furthermore, only two glucose residues were removed using α-glucosidase II from Hex 11-13 HexNAc 2-3 structures. Finally, the MS/MS data before and after α1,2-mannosidase digestion led us to postulate that the mannose underlying the glucose extension can be branched and substituted with up to three α1,2-mannose residues ; the removal of the A-antennal extension by α1,2-mannosidase was slower than that of the single B and C α1,2-mannose residues, possibly for steric reasons as the additional elongation is predicted to be in close proximity to the diglucose cap on the A arm. As compared to previously-analysed wild-type AX3 glycans, the MS/MS patterns as well as RP-HPLC elution after endo-α-mannosidase digestion were compatible with an intersecting position for the third GlcNAc when this was present. Due to low abundance, the presence of structures of higher than Hex 14 HexNAc 2-3 cannot be confirmed, whereas potentially anionic versions of Hex 12-14 HexNAc 2-3 could not be structurally verified by glycosidase digestions. Although, α1,2-mannose modifications are known in yeasts and fungi, the position of such ‘outer chains’ is different and is also initiated with an α1,6-linked residue transferred to the core α1,3-mannose of the A antenna 26, 33. Thus, the oligo-α1,2-mannose extension in Dictyostelium represents a new eukaryotic glycan modification. Figure 4 Identification of a novel oligo-α1,2-mannose modification on neutral N-glycans. 3.4. Conclusion In conclusion, not only is the neutral N-glycome of the M31 showing unusual features, the anionic N-glycome of the M31 strain is rather complex due to the various possibilities and positions of the acidic modifications. On the HIAX column, the monosulphated glycans in any hexose series elute first, followed by the methylphosphorylated ones with or without an intersecting residue; the phosphorylated structures elute the latest. In general the more charged residues are present on a glycan, the greater the retention. The cumulative data indicate that phosphate residues, whether unsubstituted or as HexNAc- or methyl-diesters, tend to be on terminal mannose residues, whereas sulphate is generally a subterminal substitution. The methyl residues are only associated with phosphate and not with hexose as is the case in the distantly-related social amoeba Polysphondylium pallidum 11. Figure 5 Summary of the anionic modifications found in the M31 glucosidase II mutant strain. As the phosphorylation and sulphation reactions are presumably late in the biosynthetic pathway, but the lower glucosylated A-antenna is blocked to such modifications in the M31 mutant, a maximum of four anionic moieties can be expected. The lack of endoplasmic reticulum glucosidase II in the mutant also results in a lack of core fucosylation and reduced amount of bisected GlcNAc, but may reveal an acceptor site for the oligo-α1,2-mannose extension as well as act as a brake on Golgi mannosidase processing. Indeed, the mannose substituted with this extension is absent from the Man8A-based glycans dominant in the wild-type 12 ; thus the lack of A-arm processing in the Golgi of the M31 mutant allows this otherwise ‘unseen’ modification to occur at a detectable level. The reduced complexity in the M31 mutant, as compared to the wild-type, makes the analytical challenge surmountable, both in terms of detection and interpretation of unusual glycans. Furthermore, the approach of using HIAX is applicable to analysis of other species, including insects 34, can be combined with RP-HPLC 26, 35 opening up unprecedentedly highly-detailed glycomic studies capable of revealing new N-glycan modifications in wild-type and mutant model organisms. Supplementary Material Supplement Click here to view. Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to Dr. Ján Mucha for access to the UltrafleXtreme mass spectrometer. This work was funded by grants from the Austrian Fonds zur Förderung der wissenschaftlichen Forschung and A.H. and K.P. are FWF Felllows. Footnotes Conflict of interest The authors have no financial/commercial conflicts of interest. Article information Electrophoresis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 Sep 1. Published in final edited form as: Electrophoresis. 2017 Sep; 38: 2175–2183. Published online 2017 Jun 21. doi: 10.1002/elps.201700073 PMCID: PMC5761722 EMSID: EMS75643 PMID: 28556908 Alba Hykollari, Daniel Malzl, Shi Yan, Iain B.H. Wilson, and Katharina Paschinger Department für Chemie, Universität für Bodenkultur, 1190 Wien, Austria PMC Copyright notice The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at Electrophoresis 