 Linear chains of five to hundreds of phosphates called polyphosphate are found in organisms ranging from bacteria to humans, but their function is poorly understood. In Dictyostelium discoideum, polyphosphate is used as a secreted signal that inhibits cytokinesis in an autocrine negative feedback loop. To elucidate how cells respond to this unusual signal, we undertook a proteomic analysis of cells treated with physiological levels of polyphosphate and observed that polyphosphate causes cells to decrease levels of actin cytoskeleton proteins, possibly explaining how polyphosphate inhibits cytokinesis. Polyphosphate also causes proteasome protein levels to decrease, and in both Dictyostelium and human leukemia cells, decreases proteasome activity and cell proliferation. Polyphosphate also induces Dictyostelium cells to begin development by increasing expression of the cell–cell adhesion molecule CsA and causing aggregation, and this effect, as well as the inhibition of proteasome activity, is mediated by Ras and Akt proteins. Surprisingly, Ras and Akt do not affect the ability of polyphosphate to inhibit proliferation, suggesting that a branching pathway mediates the effects of polyphosphate, with one branch affecting proliferation, and the other branch affecting development. KEY WORDS: Development, Dictyostelium, Proteasome, Polyphosphate, Ras, Akt Summary: Polyphosphate is present in all eukaryotes, but little is known about its function. Here, we describe how Dictyostelium uses polyphosphate as a signal to initiate development. INTRODUCTION The transition from growth to differentiation is a fundamental aspect of biology, and both must be regulated in concert for proper development. Dictyostelium discoideum provides an excellent model for the study of the growth to differentiation transition in that Dictyostelium live as unicellular amoeba while sufficient nutrients are available, but upon nutrient depletion and starvation these cells stop proliferating, and aggregate together to form a multicellular structure consisting of stalk cells supporting a mass of spore cells. In addition to a ‘musical chairs’ mechanism based on the cell cycle phase that a cell happens to be in at the time of starvation causing an initial choice of differentiation into either a stalk or a spore cell, secreted autocrine factors also affect differentiation. Since the concentration of a constitutively secreted factor will increase as the cell density increases, some of the secreted factors allow cells to sense the local cell density, and induce a pre-starvation response in which cells begin expressing early developmental genes in anticipation of a high density of cells outgrowing the food supply, thus allowing cells to prepare for the starvation-induced GDT. Three pre-starvation factors have been described, although they have not been identified. We previously identified inorganic polyphosphate as a molecule secreted continually by growing cells. At high cell densities, where cells are about to starve, polyphosphate inhibits cytokinesis more than it inhibits cell growth, which then allows the starved cells to have as much stored nutrients as possible. Polyphosphate is an ancient and highly conserved molecule consisting of a linear chain of orthophosphates bound by high energy phospho-anhydride bonds. Recent work has highlighted the increasing roles of extracellular polyphosphate in a variety of eukaryotic cellular responses, including roles in coagulation, contact pathway activation, inflammation and proliferation. Polyphosphate increases matrix metalloproteinase-3 expression and activity in odontoblast-like cells, induces rapid ERK1 and ERK2 phosphorylation in SaOS-2 cells, and inhibits cyclin D1 expression through IKKα and ERK1/2 in endothelial cells; however, in general the intracellular signaling components activated by extracellular polyphosphate remain largely unknown. Determining the signaling pathways initiated by extracellular polyphosphate in Dictyostelium may provide insight into how this ubiquitous molecule mediates various cellular responses in more complex systems. Although polyphosphate is unusual as it is not a protein, peptide or organic molecule, it has many of the characteristics of Dictyostelium pre-starvation factors. Polyphosphate is continually secreted during growth and increases as a function of cell density, while it also shows increased extracellular accumulation upon a decrease in available nutrients. In this report, we show that polyphosphate is a pre-starvation factor that uses a signal transduction pathway involving Ras and Akt proteins to prime cells for development, and that, surprisingly, this pathway is not involved in polyphosphate-induced proliferation inhibition. RESULTS Polyphosphate changes the Dictyostelium proteome To elucidate the effects of polyphosphate on cells, we undertook a proteomic analysis of cells treated with or without polyphosphate. Polyphosphate downregulated 67 proteins by an average of at least 0.65 relative to control, and upregulated 28 proteins by an average of at least 1.75 across four sample sets. Polyphosphate did not significantly affect the amounts of 2459 proteins in the proteomics data, and did not discernably change the distribution of protein bands on a Coomassie-stained SDS-polyacrylamide gel of total cell proteins, indicating that the effects of polyphosphate are relatively subtle. Gene ontology analysis indicated that polyphosphate downregulated the proteasome assembly proteins Psmg1, Psmg2, Psmd4 and Psmd8, and the proteasome complex proteins Psmb1, Psmb4-1, Psmb5, Psmd4 and Psmd8, as well as actin cytoskeleton proteins. Proteins that were upregulated by polyphosphate showed no significant enrichments in any GO categories. Fig. 1. Polyphosphate decreases proteasome activity. Cells were cultured with the indicated concentrations of polyphosphate for 4 h and proteasome activity levels were measured and normalized to no-polyphosphate controls. Cells were... Table 1. Enrichments in proteins downregulated by polyphosphate Polyphosphate inhibits proteasome activity To determine whether polyphosphate affects the proteasome activity of Dictyostelium cells, proteasome activity was measured in mid-log Ax2 cells after a 4 h incubation with polyphosphate. Polyphosphate inhibited proteasome activity, and, as determined by western blotting, decreased levels of the proteasome subunit Psmb5 after a 4 h incubation with polyphosphate, mirroring the decrease observed by proteomics. Taken together, the data suggest that polyphosphate decreases proteasome activity by decreasing levels of proteasome proteins. Polyphosphate inhibits proteasome activity and proliferation of leukemia cell lines Proteasome inhibition has been suggested as a potential therapeutic for some cancers, as many malignant cells exhibit high proteasome activity, and proteasome inhibition often results in apoptosis. To determine whether the ability of polyphosphate to inhibit proteasome activity and proliferation is conserved, we tested the effect of polyphosphate on five human leukemia cell lines. None of the cell lines tested had significant differences in basal proteasome activity. Polyphosphate strongly inhibited the proteasome activity of four out of five lines tested. At 100 µM, polyphosphate had a modest effect on Dictyostelium proliferation, whereas at 150 µM polyphosphate strongly inhibited proliferation. Polyphosphate also inhibited the proliferation of the leukemia cell lines, and remarkably these cells showed the same sharp threshold in the response curve. These results suggest that the effect of polyphosphate on proteasome activity and proliferation may be conserved from Dictyostelium to humans. Polyphosphate induces development in the presence of nutrients Adhesion regulating molecule-1 is a ubiquitin receptor for the proteasome. Phosphoproteome analysis suggested that polyphosphate may have caused Adrm1 phosphorylation at residue T280 in three of the four trials, although polyphosphate did not significantly affect levels of Adrm1. To determine whether cells lacking Adrm1 have altered proteasome activity, we examined the proteasome activity levels of wild-type and adrm1 − cells. Compared to wild-type cells, adrm1 − cells had abnormally low levels of proteasome activity. Unlike wild-type cells, Dictyostelium cells lacking Adrm1 transition from vegetative growth to development while still in the presence of nutrients, suggesting a defect in the pre-starvation response and/or the GDT. To determine whether the starvation-induced GDT is associated with a decrease in proteasome activity, the proteasome activity levels of starved cells was measured. Starvation decreased proteasome activity by ∼50% after 30 min, similar to the reduction caused by polyphosphate, and a further decrease was observed over the next 6 h. These results suggest that a decrease in proteasome activity occurs during the GDT. Fig. 2. Polyphosphate induces cell aggregation. Proteasome activity of mid-log Ax2 and adrm1 −, or Ax2 cells starved in PBM for the indicated times, were measured and normalized to mid-log Ax2 controls. Cells were cultured with 150 µM... Unlike wild-type cells, adrm1 − cells express early onset development genes and begin to aggregate while in the presence of nutrients. To determine whether high levels of extracellular polyphosphate might have effects similar to the loss of Adrm1, we cultured cells with polyphosphate in HL5, a nutrient-rich medium, for 24 h. Using spectrophotometry to measure total protein, we had previously observed that polyphosphate increases protein per cell by 1.57±0.06 fold, and by scanning Coomassie-stained gels, we observed here that polyphosphate increased protein per cell by 1.3±0.2 fold. Western blots stained using a monoclonal antibody against CsA, an early onset development protein involved in cell–cell adhesion and aggregation, showed that polyphosphate increased levels of CsA by 7.4±1.0 fold, and this increase was significantly greater than the increase in total protein. The monoclonal anti-CsA antibody identifies an antigenic determinant common to other proteins that are developmentally regulated, and the polyphosphate-induced bands at ∼150 kDa suggest that polyphosphate may affect other developmentally regulated proteins. Taken together, these results indicate that polyphosphate can increase the expression of at least one developmental gene. In 25% HL5, control cells did not appear to aggregate after 24 h, while 150 µM polyphosphate caused cells to form aggregates similar to those seen in cells lacking Adrm1. Cells treated with less than 130 µM or more than 170 µM polyphosphate did not form aggregates. Equivalent levels of NaPO 4 did not cause aggregates, indicating that the induced aggregation was not due to increased phosphate levels. Cells cultured in 30% HL5 did not aggregate in response to polyphosphate, suggesting that sufficient nutrient availability inhibits polyphosphate-induced aggregation. Polyphosphate also did not cause aggregation when added to cells at low cell density. Taken together, these results indicate that at sufficiently high cell densities and sufficiently low levels of nutrients, the accumulation of extracellular polyphosphate can act as a pre-starvation factor, allowing cells to effectively anticipate starvation and begin development. Table 2. The effect of polyphosphate on cell aggregation Proteasome inhibition alone is not sufficient to induce development To further elucidate the role of proteasome inhibition during the process of GDT, cells were treated with the proteasome inhibitor Mg132. High concentrations of Mg132 consistently induced development in the presence of nutrients. This effect was only observed at Mg132 concentrations well above those that strongly inhibit proteasome activity, suggesting either that Mg132 has off-target effects that induce development, such as targeting cysteine or serine proteases, or that there are discrepancies between the effect of Mg132 on the in vitro proteasome activity assay and in vivo aggregation assay. To resolve this, we treated cells with lactacystin, a specific inhibitor of the 20S proteasome. Unfortunately lactacystin at normal working levels and in excess had no discernable effect on proteasome activity or aggregation, confirming previous reports that lactacystin, which is cell permeable in other systems, does not inhibit the proteasome when added to Dictyostelium cells. These results suggest that proteasome inhibition alone is not sufficient to induce GDT, although further investigation would be needed to confirm this observation. The proteasome is essential for cell cycle progression in many eukaryotic cell lines. To determine whether polyphosphate inhibits proliferation through its effect on the proteasome, cells were treated with Mg132, and proliferation was measured. Surprisingly, Mg132 concentrations that strongly inhibit proteasome activity and induce aggregation did not significantly affect proliferation, although 50 µM Mg132 did inhibit proliferation. In addition, adrm1 − cells, which have abnormally low proteasome activity, also showed normal proliferation and were sensitive to polyphosphate inhibition, suggesting that the inhibitory effect of polyphosphate on proliferation is not due to proteasome inhibition. Akt proteins and RasC mediate the effects of polyphosphate-induced development and proteasome inhibition A variety of available transformants were screened in 25% HL5 to identify cells with abnormal responses to polyphosphate. Cells lacking RasC, the p21-activated kinase PakD, Erk1, the Dictyostelium Akt homologs Pkba and PkgB, and the suppressor of cAMP receptor component NapA were all nonresponsive to polyphosphate-induced development. Cells lacking the secreted factor CtnA, the frizzled-like receptors FslB and FslK, the inositol hexakisphosphate kinase I6kA, the G-protein coupled receptors GrlB, GrlE and GrlH the autocrine factor CfaD, the target of rapamycin complex 2 component Lst8, the Dictyostelium polyphosphate kinase Ppk1, and the PTEN homolog CnrN did form aggregates in response to polyphosphate. Of the transformants that were unresponsive to polyphosphate, cells lacking RasC, PakD and Erk1 were unresponsive to Mg132-induced development while cells lacking Akt and NapA were responsive. To determine whether polyphosphate might affect signaling pathways used for starvation-induced aggregation, we included previously described aggregation phenotypes for all transformants tested. Cells lacking both Akt homologs PkbA and PkgB, RasC or PakD have abolished aggregation in response to polyphosphate and starvation, while cells lacking PkbA or NapA show delayed aggregation upon starvation but do not respond to polyphosphate-induced aggregation. Cells lacking Erk1 undergo starvation-induced aggregation, but form smaller aggregates than do wild-type cells and become stalled at later stages of development, yet are unresponsive to polyphosphate-induced aggregation. These results suggest that some pathway components of polyphosphate and starvation-induced aggregation are shared, while polyphosphate also utilizes unique components. Interestingly, cells lacking NapA show normal aggregation in response to Mg132 despite defects observed in polyphosphate- and starvation-induced aggregation, while cells lacking PkbA alone or both PkbA and PkgB showed delayed aggregation in response to Mg132. Table 3. The effect of polyphosphate or Mg132 on the aggregation of transformants Cells identified to be unresponsive to polyphosphate-induced development were examined for further defects in polyphosphate-induced proteasome inhibition, CsA increase, or proliferation inhibition. Cells lacking RasC and both Dictyostelium Akt proteins were unresponsive to polyphosphate inhibition of proteasome activity. Cells lacking Akt proteins, RasC, PakD or NapA did not exhibit polyphosphate-induced CsA expression, while cells lacking Erk1 responded normally. All of the cell lines tested exhibited polyphosphate-mediated inhibition of proliferation. Fig. 3. Some transformants have impaired polyphosphate signaling. Cells were cultured with 150 µM polyphosphate for 4 h and proteasome activity levels were measured and normalized to no-polyphosphate controls. Cells were... Polyphosphate did not cause a further decrease in proteasome activity in adrm1 − cells ; however, upon starvation a decrease in proteasome activity was observed. Polyphosphate did not affect the precocious aggregation of adrm1 − cells in 25% HL5, nor did it induce aggregation in higher concentrations of HL5. Cells lacking Adrm1 phenocopy many of the effects initiated by extracellular polyphosphate including expression of CsA and formation of aggregates in the presence of nutrients, as well as decreased vegetative proteasome activity. Whether or not polyphosphate affects Adrm1 in addition to decreasing other proteasome subunits to inhibit proteasome activity warrants further investigation. We also identified mutants that began the GDT precociously in the presence of nutrients, similar to what is seen cells lacking Adrm1. Cells lacking the autocrine factor CtnA or the frizzled-like receptors FslB or FslK, formed multicellular aggregates by 24 h in 25% HL5 while also exhibiting abnormally low proteasome levels, suggesting that CtnA, FslB, and FslK have roles in nutrient sensing or the pre-starvation response. Polyphosphate induces Akt phosphorylation To determine the role of Akt proteins in the polyphosphate response, levels of phosphorylated Akt proteins were measured in Ax2 cells following polyphosphate treatment in 100% HL5 using an antibody that recognizes phosphorylated T278 of PkbA and T309 of PkgB. Polyphosphate induced phosphorylation of the Dictyostelium Akt homolog PkgB within 1 min and the Akt homolog PkbA after 1 h. Polyphosphate did not appear to affect levels of total PkgB or PkbA in 60 min. Cells lacking PakD showed normal PkgB phosphorylation upon polyphosphate stimulation, while cells lacking NapA did not show a significant increase in phosphorylation. Phosphorylated PkgB was undetectable in cells lacking Erk1 or RasC. All four mutants showed activation of PkbA, suggesting that PkbA activation is upstream of these components of the pathway. PkbA phosphorylation was enhanced in cells lacking RasC or Erk1, suggesting that Erk1 and RasC somewhat inhibit PkbA phosphorylation. Upon cAMP stimulation, cells lacking RasC show delayed phosphorylation of both PkbA and PkgB. To determine whether PkgB also has delayed polyphosphate-induced phosphorylation in RasC and Erk1 null backgrounds, phosphorylation was analyzed at 2, 5 and 10 min after polyphosphate stimulation. Phosphorylated PkgB was undetectable at these timepoints in cells lacking Erk1 or RasC, suggesting that cAMP and polyphosphate signaling pathways have unique features. These data suggests that Akt activation is an early component of the polyphosphate signal transduction pathway that is necessary for both the transition to development and proteasome inhibition. Fig. 4. Polyphosphate-stimulated Akt and Erk1 phosphorylation in transformants. Ax2 cells were cultured with 150 µM polyphosphate for the indicated times, and phosphorylated Akt was detected by western blotting... Polyphosphate induces Erk1 phosphorylation in a delayed response We next investigated the role of Erk1 activation in polyphosphate-mediated induction of the GDT by using a monoclonal antibody that recognizes phosphorylation of the conserved TxY motif. Erk1 is activated in a delayed response to extracellular cAMP and folic acid. Polyphosphate induced Erk1 phosphorylation after 24 h in 100% HL5, with no significant induction after 2 and 12 h, suggesting that Erk1 phosphorylation is a secondary or indirect response, perhaps after aggregation competence is obtained and development is initiated. Polyphosphate did not induce increased Erk1 phosphorylation in rasC − cells; however, overall levels of phosphorylated Erk1 were higher in these cells compared to those in wild type, suggesting that RasC negatively regulates Erk1 phosphorylation. Phosphorylated Erk1 was undetectable under all conditions in cells lacking PakD and NapA. Cells lacking the Akt homologs PkbA and PkgB showed enhanced Erk1 phosphorylation upon polyphosphate treatment. Taken together, these results indicate that PakD and NapA are necessary for polyphosphate-induced Erk1 activation, while Akt somewhat inhibits polyphosphate-induced Erk1 activation, and RasC inhibits basal levels of phosphorylated Erk1. DISCUSSION Here, we show that polyphosphate acts as a pre-starvation factor by accumulating extracellularly upon nutrient depletion and/or high cell densities, initiating a signaling pathway that prepares cells for the transition from vegetative growth to development before the inevitable onset of starvation. Even in the presence of abundant nutrients, polyphosphate inhibits the proteasome, induces Akt and Erk1 activation, and increases expression of the early onset development gene csA. If the nutrients are low and cell density is high, polyphosphate also induces aggregation. This suggests that polyphosphate is able to prime cells for the eventual transition to development, but Dictyostelium cells are able to sense the presence of nutrients as well as a low local cell density, both of which can inhibit aggregation. Ras and Akt proteins are intimately involved with proliferation in other systems, but remarkably these and other signal transduction pathway components do not affect polyphosphate-mediated inhibition of proliferation. Fig. 5. Summary of polyphosphate signal transduction. Levels of extracellular polyphosphate increase as the local cell density increases. Polyphosphate requires Ras and Akt proteins to inhibit the proteasome, and requires Ras, Akt, NapA and PakD proteins... Polyphosphate was able to inhibit the proteasome of both Dictyostelium cells and human leukemia cell lines, suggesting that this is a conserved function from Dictyostelium to humans. Proteasome inhibition appears to be mediated by Akt proteins and RasC in Dictyostelium. The single Akt knockout pkbA − was sensitive to polyphosphate proteasome inhibition, while cells lacking both homologs were not responsive, perhaps suggesting redundant roles, as has been previously reported. An association between proteasome activity inhibition and the GDT was observed in all cases in this study; however, only excessive concentrations of Mg132 induced aggregation, suggesting that proteasome inhibition is associated with, but is not sufficient, to induce aggregation. However, this assumption is based on the comparison between an in vitro activity assay after incubation with inhibitors and an in vivo activity output in aggregation. It is possible that discrepancies exist between these two assays, such as the use of alternative substrates, making the interpretation of the direct role of proteasome inhibition difficult. While Adrm1 null cells phenocopy many of the effects observed upon polyphosphate treatment, whether or not Adrm1 is a target of the polyphosphate signaling pathway is still unclear. A more extensive study would need to be carried out to determine whether polyphosphate does induce a phosphorylation of Adrm1, and if so whether or not this phosphorylation is needed for any of the processes initiated by polyphosphate. Mammalian proteasomes undergo autophagic destruction upon amino acid starvation. Whether or not Dictyostelium undergoes a similar process during starvation warrants further investigation. Polyphosphate-induced CsA expression is dependent on Akt proteins, RasC, NapA and PakD. Erk1 is not necessary for polyphosphate proteasome inhibition or CsA expression; however, it is essential for polyphosphate-induced aggregation. Polyphosphate can activate Erk1 although this response is delayed. Previous reports have described similar results for Erk1 activation upon cAMP stimulation, and its activation is dependent on cell–cell interactions. Perhaps as cells become aggregation competent, in part due to polyphosphate-induced CsA expression, Erk1 activation becomes stronger because of the increase in cell–cell interactions, as Erk1 activation aligns with peak CsA levels. Akt proteins were not necessary for Erk1 activation, while NapA and PakD were both essential. Cells lacking RasC did not show an increase in phosphorylated Erk1 upon polyphosphate treatment; however, the endogenous levels of phosphorylated Erk1 were consistently higher in this background, suggesting that RasC negatively regulates Erk1 activation during vegetative growth. The observations that Erk1 phosphorylation requires NapA and PakD, and is inhibited by RasC, PkbA and PkgB, that PkbA phosphorylation is inhibited by RasC and Erk1, and that PkgB phosphorylation requires Erk1, RasC and NapA, indicate a considerable degree of cross-talk in the polyphosphate signal transduction pathway. Ras, Erk, Akt and NapA proteins are parts of the signal transduction pathway used by polyphosphate. These components are also involved in Dictyostelium chemotaxis response to cAMP, which is mediated by signaling pathways that interact with each other in complex ways, similar to what we have observed. Other studies have identified other regulators of the transition of growth to development, such as YakA, Gdt1 and Gdt2, which may interact with the polyphosphate signal transduction pathway. A reasonable assumption would be that polyphosphate induces a unique signaling pathway, leading to the activation of pathways used for the GDT and starvation-induced aggregation. Since polyphosphate appears to have similar effects on Dictyostelium and human cells, additional studies on components of the Dictyostelium GDT and cAMP signal transduction pathways may help to further elucidate the signal transduction pathways used by the ubiquitous and unusual signal polyphosphate. MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents and materials HL5 medium was from Formedium. Polyphosphate was from Spectrum. Blasticidin, Mg132 and low-fat milk powder were from CalBioChem. Dictyostelium cell lines were obtained from dictyBase. Nylon 17 mm and 5 µm pore size filters were from Sterlitech. RIPA buffer, RPMI, tissue culture grade six-well plates, and Super Signal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate were from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Donkey anti-mouse-IgG and anti-rabbit-IgG horseradish peroxidase -conjugated secondary antibodies were from Jackson ImmunoResearch. Laemmli sample buffer was from BioRad. Proteasome activity assay kits were from Sigma. Calf serum and biochemistry grade bovine serum albumin powder were from VWR. 4–20% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gels were from Lonza. Anti-CsA and anti-proteasome subunit 5 antibodies were from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank. Anti-phosphorylated Akt and anti-phosphorylated Erk1 antibodies and protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail were from Cell Signaling Technology. Lactacystin was from Enzo Life Sciences. Dictyostelium and human leukemia cell culture The cells used were Dictyostelium wild-type Ax2, pakD −, erk1 −, pkbA −, pkbA − /pkgB −, rasC −, napA −, adrm1 −, fslB −, fslK −, ctnA −, i6kA −, grlB −, grlE −, grlH −, cfaD −, lst8 −, ppk1 − and cnrN −. Mutant genotypes were verified by PCR, and cells were kept under constant selection. Cells were grown in shaking culture in HL5, and were never allowed to reach cell densities above 4×10 6 cells/ml. Proliferation curves were made and starvation was performed as previously described. HL-60, K562, THP-1 and U937 cell lines were from the ATCC. MonoMac1 cells were from DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures. Cells were grown in a BL2 facility in RPMI 1640 with 10% bovine calf serum containing 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 mg/ml streptomycin and tested for contamination. For proliferation assays, leukemia cells were incubated with or without polyphosphate in RPMI medium with 2.5% serum at a density of 1×10 6 cells/ml. After 24 h, cells were counted using a hemocytometer. Proteomics Mid-log Ax2 cells were treated with 150 µM polyphosphate for 3 h. 10 6 cells were collected by centrifugation at 200 g for 3 min, resuspended in 40 µl RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and incubated on ice for 20 min. Lysates were then sonicated for 1 min, and clarified by centrifugation at 18,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. 30 µl of supernatant was transferred to a tube containing 10 µl of 4× sample buffer, and heated at 95°C for 5 min. 10 µl of sample was run for 5–10 mm into a polyacrylamide gel. The gel was stained with Coomassie Blue for 1 h, and destained overnight in sterile water. The combined protein bands were diced into small pieces, and sent to the University of Texas Southwest proteomics core for trypsin digestion and tandem mas spectrometry analysis, using the normalized spectral index method for quantification. Gene ontology analysis was performed using the Gene Ontology database and the PANTHER classification system. Proteasome activity assay 1.5×10 6 cells from mid-log cultures were diluted to 1 ml using HL5 containing the appropriate final concentration of polyphosphate Mg132 or Lactacystin. After 4 or 24 h, cells were collected by centrifugation at 200 g for 3 min and resuspended in PBS. Cell lysates were generated by passing cells through 5 μm syringe filters. 100 µl of cell lysates were incubated with 100 µl of proteasome activity kit assay buffer, then incubated at room temperature overnight for Dictyostelium or at 37°C overnight for leukemia cell lines, and fluorescence was measured with an excitation of 490 nm and emission of 525 nm using a Synergy Mx plate reader. Western blots Cells were collected at 200 g for 3 min, followed by collection and resuspension 2× in PBM. Cells were then collected at 200 g for 3 min. The cell pellets were solubilized in Laemmli sample buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and heated to 95°C for 5 min. Gel electrophoresis and blotting were performed as described previously. Blots were blocked in TBS with 4% milk and 2% BSA. Blots were incubated with primary antibody in TBS containing 5% BSA and 0.1% Tween 20 at room temperature for 1 h or overnight at 4°C. After washing 3× in TBST for 5 min, blots were incubated with 1:5000 secondary antibody in TBS with 2% BSA for 1 h at room temperature. After washing 3× in TBST, blots were then incubated with Super Signal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate for 5 min. Signals were visualized with a ChemiDoc XRS+ and quantification of relative protein levels was performed with Image Lab. For blots with total protein loading controls, identical aliquots of the protein samples were electrophoresed on gels, and proteins were visualized via Coomassie Blue stain. Mccc1 loading control staining for phospho-Erk1 blots was performed as previously described. Anti-PkbA and anti-PkgB were kind gifts from Pascale Charest, and were each incubated in TBS containing 5% BSA for 1 h at 1:2000. Aggregation assay Mid-log cells were collected by centrifugation at 200 g for 3 min, resuspended in HL5 and the centrifugation and resuspension was repeated twice. Cells were resuspended to 1.5×10 6 cells/ml in HL5 diluted with PBM, and 2 ml was placed in the well of a six-well plate. Plates were incubated at room temperature in humid boxes, then analyzed by microscopy with a 10× phase-contrast objective on a Diaphot inverted microscope for aggregation and development. Images of a calibration slide were used for scale bars. Acknowledgements We thank Dr Pierre Cosson for providing adrm1 − cells. We thank Dr Pascale Charest for providing anti-PkbA and anti-PkgB antibodies. Footnotes Competing interests The authors declare no competing or financial interests. Author contributions Conceptualization: P.M.S., R.H.G.; Methodology: P.M.S., R.H.G.; Validation: P.M.S., J.W.; Formal analysis: P.M.S., W.C., R.H.G.; Investigation: P.M.S., J.W., W.C., R.H.G.; Resources: R.H.G.; Writing - original draft: P.M.S.; Writing - review & editing: R.H.G.; Supervision: R.H.G.; Project administration: R.H.G.; Funding acquisition: R.H.G. Funding This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health. Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months. Supplementary information Supplementary information available online at Article information J Cell Sci. 2017 Jul 15; 130: 2394–2404. doi: 10.1242/jcs.203372 PMCID: PMC5536921 PMID: 28584190 Patrick M. Suess, 1 Jacob Watson, 1 Wensheng Chen, 1, 2 and Richard H. Gomer 1, * Patrick M. Suess 1 Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3474, USA Find articles by Patrick M. Suess Jacob Watson 1 Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3474, USA Find articles by Jacob Watson Wensheng Chen 1 Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3474, USA 2 Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Key Laboratory of Anti-inflammatory and Immune Medicine, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China Find articles by Wensheng Chen Richard H. Gomer 1 Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3474, USA Find articles by Richard H. Gomer 1 Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3474, USA 2 Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Key Laboratory of Anti-inflammatory and Immune Medicine, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China * Author for correspondence Received 2017 Mar 1; Accepted 2017 May 27. Copyright © 2017. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd Articles from Journal of Cell Science are provided here courtesy of Company of Biologists 