 Open in a separate window Highlights • In attractant, cell front protrusion breaks cell symmetry and starts migration • In repellent, cell rear retraction breaks cell symmetry and starts migration • Myosin II motor is not required for front-driven migration toward attractant • Biased myosin II motor contractility drives rear-driven migration away from repellent Cell guidance cues are molecules that give “direction-of-travel” instructions—either toward or away from the cue—to migrating cells. Cramer et al. use sufficient temporal resolution to reveal that attractive and repellent cues employ distinct cytoskeleton-force-generating mechanisms to break the symmetry of a cell and start its migration. Results and Discussion To initiate migration, cells must break symmetry to establish a protrusive front and a retractive rear. A priori, it is not known if attractants and repellents share the same symmetry-breaking mechanism. Therefore, to investigate how cells break symmetry, we used cell margin displacement as a polarity marker because it directly reports cell migration without presupposing any particular mechanism. In principle, either stable, outward movement of the cell front or stable, inward movement of the cell rear, or both together, could break cell symmetry and start migration. These alternative mechanisms have very different implications for our understanding of how cells steer in chemotactic gradients and communicate between their front and back. Polarized cytoskeletal forces drive cell polarization. For almost all cell types, actin filament assembly or bleb formation in the front of the cell drive protrusion, but in our conditions, blebs were rare and are not studied, while myosin II motor-based and other distinct types of contraction can power retraction of the rear, depending on cellular context. In the wild, Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae are guided by both chemo-attractants and chemo-repellents. Here, we use the AX2 strain as “wild-type” cells, cyclic AMP, a natural attractant, and 8--cAMP, an analog of cAMP that repels these cells, hereinafter referred to as 8CPT. Strong gradients of each cue are used in all experiments. Figure 1 A Repellent and an Attractant Initiate Cell Movement at Opposite Cell Margins To begin to identify which cytoskeletal-based forces break cell symmetry and start cell migration, we determined the timing of the initial, stable front protrusion and rear retraction. 2 ). The temporal resolution was 1 s, which readily allows these events to be distinguished. For clarity, whichever cell margin displaces first is defined as the “start of migration”, while the start of whole-cell translocation is when both initial front protrusion and initial rear retraction have occurred. Figure 2 The Repellent 8CPT Initiates Cell Repolarization at the Opposite End of the Cell to the Attractant cAMP in Turning AX2 Cells Breaking of Cell Symmetry in Response to cAMP Attractant and 8CPT Repellent Dictyostelium, like many other cells, can migrate randomly in the absence of cell guidance cues. We therefore used a cooling-rewarming protocol that causes most cells to lose polarity, enabling us to capture their repolarization in response to guidance cues after they had been warmed up. We validated that this method faithfully recapitulates reported behaviors during polarization of amoeboid cells and other cell types that have not been priorly cooled and rewarmed. In particular, we confirmed that the shape of non-polarized cells can vary and that unstable protrusions and retractions of the cell periphery occur prior to polarization but do not break symmetry. Subsequent to this behavior, polarized displacement of the cell margin breaks symmetry and starts cell migration. We tracked and quantified the behavior of 87 cells in response to cAMP and 141 cells in response to 8CPT during the first 200–300 s of their encounter with the guidance cue. Of the cells that were non-polarized at the start of filming, about one-third polarized and migrated in the expected direction during the encounter. Most of the remaining cells did not polarize during the encounter period, though a few moved the wrong way and were disregarded from further analysis. In response to cAMP, cells formed a stable protrusion toward the source of the attractant to break symmetry and start migration. Throughout symmetry breaking, there was little or no change in position of the presumptive cell rear. This reveals that migration was initiated by protrusion of the front of the cell in response to this attractant. Retraction of the rear of the cell was delayed by about 14 s on average, and then, the whole cell moved toward the cAMP. Conversely, in response to 8CPT, cells broke symmetry and started migration by retracting part of the cell closest to the repellent. This occurred similarly for cells of initially flatter or rounder shape. Throughout the breaking of symmetry, there was little or no movement of the presumptive cell front. This shows that repulsive migration was initiated by retraction of the cell rear. Protrusion of the opposite end of the cell 1 K) was delayed by about 16 s on average, after which the whole cell moved away from the source of 8CPT. Once the whole cell had started moving, we could not detect delays between protrusion of the front and retraction of the rear on the same time and imaging scales. This is comparable to other front-rear analysis during cell migration. Also, during whole-cell movement, the speeds of front protrusion and rear retraction were essentially the same, with a ratio of around 1:0. Thus, by these measures, the protrusion and retraction delays that occur as cells break symmetry are specific to the initiation of migration itself and not to any general difference between the front and rear of the cell. Cell Turning In a distinct experimental approach—and one without cell cooling-rewarming—we studied different types of turns produced when migrating cells are forced to alter direction by changing the position of the chemotactic gradient. In a U-turn, cells steer around from their front, but do not repolarize because they keep their original cell front and rear. Alternatively, just after the gradient is moved, cells stop and typically produce transient, de-localized protrusions and retractions. Cells then repolarize by forming a new front and new rear either lateral to the original direction or at roughly 180°. Cells turn toward repositioned cAMP and away from repositioned 8CPT. We tracked 86 cells responding to cAMP and 48 cells responding to 8CPT, of which 95% and 85%, respectively, performed either U-turns, lateral turns, or reverse turns. Many cells performed U-turns toward re-positioned cAMP, similar to other reports. Of note, hardly any cells performed U-turns away from the repositioned 8CPT repellent, which may reflect a difference in underlying mechanism. To turn laterally or reverse toward repositioned cAMP, cells formed a new protrusion to break symmetry and start migration. In contrast, to reverse or laterally turn away from repositioned 8CPT, cells retracted a new rear to break symmetry and start migration. This occurred similarly for migrating cells of initially different shape. Hence, our findings on cell polarization are similar in two separate experimental systems in Dictyostelium cells. 2 ). That retraction breaks symmetry predicts that contractile force at the rear, rather than actin assembly at the front, initiates migration of these cells away from the repellent, 8CPT. Actin Assembly: Spatial Polarization at the Front To test this idea directly, we determined the dynamics of actin filaments and myosin II in live cells. Figure 3 Actin Filaments Polarize to the Front of AX2 Cells in Response to 8CPT Repellent after Symmetry Has Been Broken at the Rear Figure 4 Myosin II Plays a Distinctly Different Role in Cells Responding to 8CPT Repellent Compared to cAMP Attractant In response to cAMP attractant, actin filaments increased within a discrete zone on the side of the cell-facing attractant—the prospective front. This occurred a few seconds prior to the breaking of symmetry. 3 D). Correlated with further filament increase, this actin-rich zone then protruded to break symmetry and start cell migration. This response was specific to the front, as net increases in actin filaments were not detected elsewhere in the cell. These data show that in response to cAMP and in line with other work on actin and other relevant molecules, migration starts with an increase in actin assembly at the prospective front of the cell. In contrast, in response to 8CPT, actin filaments did not increase in the prospective cell front until an average 13 s after retraction of the rear had already broken symmetry. This delayed F-actin polarization became evident during the later phases of rear retraction. However, similar to the cAMP case, actin filaments increased at the cell front a few seconds before the start of protrusion. We conclude that migration away from the repellent is not initiated by a spatial bias in actin filament assembly, which instead is linked to the delayed protrusion of the front of the cell. Myosin II: Acquisition of Spatial Bias at the Rear Myosin II is typically diffusely distributed in polarized, amoeboid cells migrating on a two-dimensional surface with a bias toward the rear, whether they are responding to cAMP or 8CPT. However, we discovered differences in timing and manner of myosin localization during the initial response of cells to these signals. Myosin II only became biased toward the rear of cells exposed to cAMP about an average 33 s after they broke symmetry by extending their front. 4 E). Typically, bias was not detected as the rear started to retract but developed later during whole-cell translocation, increasing 2-fold on average. This bias toward the rear is primarily due to a global decrease in the front. Overall, these data suggest that the spatial bias in myosin II in response to cAMP is a global polarization event linked to early cell translocation. In contrast, myosin II bias at the rear was linked to the symmetry break and polarized on the side of the cell facing 8CPT a few seconds before it first retracted. Myosin II fluorescence increased 2-fold on average primarily due to a direct increase within the rear, suggesting that the bias in myosin II distribution produced in response to 8CPT is a local polarization event—contrary to the cAMP case. We do not yet know how myosin II polarizes, and several mechanisms are plausible. Whatever the mode, presumably, the relatively lower abundance of F-actin within the rear is a sufficient substrate for myosin II to generate force. Temporal Order of Actin and Myosin II Polarization These data must mean that as cells start migrating, F-actin polarizes before myosin II in response to cAMP—as previously reported —and that myosin II polarizes before F-actin in response to 8CPT. This is precisely what we observed in measurements of the timing of actin and myosin II polarization directly within the same cell. Importance of Myosin II-Motor Based Contractility As a final test of mechanism, we assessed Dictyostelium cells null for myosin II essential light chain, which form myosin II filaments but have little or no motor-based contractility. The importance of myosin II in cell motility depends on the context, but it is agreed that myosin II contractility is not required for Dictyostelium polarization, migration, and turning in response to cAMP when the cells move on a two-dimensional surface. The same is true for mlcE null cells polarizing in response to this chemo-attractant cue. And further, as with wild-type cells, protrusion of the front initiates migration. Our observation that a myosin II spatial bias is not linked to the initial retraction of the rear of cells moving toward cAMP explains why myosin II null cells can polarize toward this guidance cue. We and other groups have identified other modes of contractility that are independent of myosin II motor and suspect that at least some of these must retract the cell rear—at least initially when responding to cAMP. However, during whole-cell translocation, myosin II-motor-based contractility contributes to the speed of rear retraction —as we find for both guidance cues. Conversely, most mlcE null cells failed to polarize and migrate away from 8CPT within the standard 300-s analysis period : only 6.2% did so, which is 5-fold less than wild-type. More cells polarized if left for around 30 min longer in a turning assay. These cells could turn but use a different mechanism than wild-type cells. Retraction of the rear did not break symmetry unlike wild-type, but instead, the cells either polarized by protrusion at the front or performed U-turns, indicating steering from the front. Neither mode was typically observed with wild-type in response to 8CPT. These results strongly suggest that myosin II motor activity is important for symmetry breaking when it starts with rear retraction in these cells. By studying Dictyostelium cells at sufficient temporal resolution, we find explicit evidence that migration toward cAMP fits the widely reported model where actin filament assembly at the front drives protrusion, breaking symmetry and initiating migration. On the contrary, to move away from 8CPT, cells break symmetry by contracting at the rear using myosin II motor activity. In both cases, cell symmetry is broken by a local cytoskeletal response to the guidance cue, but this starts at opposite ends of the cell with distinct cytoskeleton protein activities. An important outcome of our work is that breaking symmetry from the cell rear does not fit any of the popular theoretical models for amoeboid movement or steering in response to the guidance cue. Myosin II contractility is sufficient for some types of cell migration, and both constitutive locomotion and the motility of cell fragments start with rear retraction, hinting that cell symmetry may regularly be broken by contraction of the rear of the cell. We predict that different types of repellents or other conditions that repel cells will turn out to employ this rear-driven mode of cell polarization. Clearly, this needs direct testing for different repellents, conditions, and cells. Overall, our work reveals that both “front-driven” and “rear-driven” modes of starting migration in response to guidance cues must now be considered. We envisage that these two distinct mechanisms provide an effective means for cells to navigate complex tissue environments and that their recognition will lead to the discovery of important, and as yet unrealized, pathways for the early steps of cell guidance. STAR★Methods Key Resources Table Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Louise P. Cramer. Experimental Model and Subject Details Dictyostelium Strains Dictyostelium discoideum axenic strain AX2 used as ‘wild-type’, and myosin II essential light chain null strain were used in the experiments. For F-actin visualization, Dictyostelium cells were transformed with an F-actin reporter construct consisting of GFP or RFP fused to the F-actin binding domain of Dictyostelium protein ABP-120, and for myosin II visualization transformed with the myosin II – GFP fusion construct. Method Details Cell Growth and Developmental Stage Dictyostelium cells were grown on tissue culture plates in axenic medium, 200 μg/ml Dihydrostreptomycin) at 22°C. For all experiments, developmental stage was carefully controlled: cells were developed to an aggregation-competent state by first harvesting vegetative amoebae from axenic media and washing them three times in KK 2 buffer. After washing, cells were counted and resuspended in KK 2 buffer at 2 × 10 7 cells/ml. They were then shaken at 180 rpm at 22°C for one hour before pulsing with 90 nM cAMP every six minutes for 4.5 hours, using a peristaltic pump. This ensures that the cAMP receptor and other genes are expressed properly. Treatment of Live Cells with Cell Guidance Cue All experiments were done with a gradient of cell guidance cue. Aggregation-competent cells were washed in KK 2 buffer prior to stimulation. Cells were then stimulated directly on the microscope with guidance cue flowing from a glass micropipette filled with either 2 μM solution of chemo-attractant cAMP, or, as previously reported with, 10 mM of chemo-repellent 8--cyclic-AMP, referred to here as 8CPT. The glass micropipette was positioned using a micromanipulator. Diffusion from the micropipette created a steep gradient of guidance cues. In these cells it is thought that 8CPT binds the cAMP receptor, cAR1. In these cells, cAMP works through G-alpha2; and as far as it has been investigated, 8CPT - through G-alpha1. Breaking of Cell Symmetry Assay We used live cells in all experiments. This assay reports the break in cell symmetry and consequent migration afterward. Aggregation competent Dictyostelium cells were prepared, washed in KK 2 buffer and settled at room temperature in KK 2 buffer on two-well Lab-Tek chambered microscopy coverslips. After settling, cells on coverslips were pre-cooled on ice for 10 minutes, which causes cessation of any random cell migration and induces loss of cell polarity. Then immediately, cells were moved to a microscope at room temperature for filming and stimulated with cell guidance cue at room temperature. Once on the microscope, encounter with cell guidance cue flowing from the micropipette as cells warmed-up induced the breaking of cell symmetry and initiation of cell migration either toward cAMP or away from 8CPT, which could be captured on film. Cells were filmed typically for 200 s-300 s and occasionally for 100-200 s from the point of the first stable encounter with cell guidance cue. Practically, the time it took to reach the first stable encounter with guidance cue is the time it took to move cells to the microscope, find the micropipette in the field of view and start filming; this was typically 1-2 minutes, but occasionally was 5-7 minutes. Images were collected every 1 s with dual fluorescence and DIC time-lapse microscopy using a Zeiss 710 laser scanning confocal microscope and a 63 × oil-immersion objective. Cell Behaviors Observed in the Assay In this assay, for both cell guidance cues, we observed: cells that polarized, cells that did not polarize, cells that were already migrating at the start of filming, and rarely, cells that moved the wrong way. We fully characterized and quantified these behaviors in 87-141 individual cells. We presumed that cells that were already polarized and migrating at the start of filming was due to fast cell polarization during the time it took to find cells and capture the first image. We excluded the rare cells that moved the wrong way from subsequent analyses. We were able to readily distinguish all these cell behaviors in careful analysis of movies. Thus, we readily identified polarizing cells that we captured in movies, and only analyzed those polarizing cells for our study. Limitations and Controls in the Assay In order to answer the questions posed in the study we had to trade sufficient temporal resolution with shorter total length of movie. Once cells initiated cell migration and whole cell translocation, they continued migrating for the remaining period of the movie, sometimes with re-polarization and re-migration in the expected direction. We illustrate examples of continued monitoring of the same cells through initiation of cell migration and subsequent whole cell translocation in. To compare behavior of AX2 cells with mlcE null cells we kept the period of filming the same and asked what proportion of cells initiated cell migration and subsequent whole cell translocation in that time period. Cell Turning Assay in Live Cells This assay reports cells induced to turn in a population of live migrating cells. We used cell turning as an alternate method to study breaking of symmetry. Aggregation competent Dictyostelium cells were prepared for filming as for the initiation of cell migration assay, except cells were not pre-cooled on ice, and to induce a cell turn the micropipette containing cAMP or 8CPT was moved to a new position that was filmed. Images were collected every 1 s with DIC time-lapse microscopy using a Zeiss 710 laser scanning confocal microscope and a 63 × oil-immersion objective. We fully characterized and quantified the assay in. Developmental stage was controlled the same for each cell turning assay. Further, for each cell that we tested, prior to moving the pipette, we ensured that that cell was fully polarized and undergoing whole cell translocation. Within this window of development and also dependent on how long each individual cell had been previously migrating for, migrating cell shape ranged from rounder to longer. We used cell turning to identify the temporal order of new cell front and new cell rear formation, therefore we only studied those cells that did turn and that had distinguishable cell boundaries and sequence of events. Quantification and Statistical Analysis Source Films used for Cell Analyses In most films in AX2 cells, cells were transformed with both actin and myosin II markers and dual fluorescence and DIC images acquired. Not all individual cells in all movies visibly expressed both markers, due to variable levels of expression cell to cell. For each experimental condition, we pooled polarizing cells for subsequent analysis. Then we separately analyzed cell margin displacement, 4 ), actin filament localization, myosin II localization and myosin II intensity. In further separate analysis, we analyzed actin and myosin II dynamics within the same cell in cells that sufficiently expressed both markers. Tracking Front and Rear Cell Margin Displacement Live cells were analyzed one-by-one, manually in each movie, frame-by-frame in MetaMorph. This is very labor intensive, but yields very accurate information on precise position of the cell margin, as required for the study. For all experiments, events were captured in live cells at a temporal resolution of 1 s that is significantly faster than the cell polarizes thereby allowing the start of cell front protrusion to be readily distinguished from the start of cell rear retraction. We identified which end of the cell was the front and rear, and which of these margins displaced first, readily and unambiguously by tracking through the movie frame-by-frame and marking position of the cell margin with time, typically at 200%–300% magnification on screen. Initial rear retraction manifest as either: retraction of a discrete, larger, cellular zone ; or coordinate, or near coordinate retraction of several, smaller discrete zones, located near each other ; or both in which case all discrete zones were tracked. Initial front protrusion tended to protrude from one contiguous or near contiguous cellular zone. Morphometrics Displayed in the Figures For manuscript space considerations, frames from the movies in the figures are illustrated at 1-4 s time intervals depending on either cell speed or duration of the delay between front and rear margin displacement. Distance-time graphs were plotted every 3 s as analysis showed that the delay between the front and rear was significantly longer than 3 s for these individual cells and an average 4–5 fold longer in the cell population. Line scans of fluorescence intensity were acquired at a line width of 5 pixels from raw images at the indicated times in the figures and raw data displayed. Kymographs were acquired at a line width of 3 pixels, every 1 s from raw time-lapse sequences and then scaled for illustration. Scaling of Images in the Figures All frames showing F-actin or myosin II fluorescence in cells and all frames that comprise kymographs, were scaled the same for any given individual cell and the same for all pixels in the image to allow fair comparison of fluorescence with spatial location and time for that cell. DIC images of cells were scaled to sufficiently increase the contrast so that the cell margins were clearly identifiable in reproduced images. For overlay images, scaled images were used for the source images. When comparing attractant and repellent, the parameters of the overlay were the same. Illustrated images in figures accurately reflect the original, raw images. Fluorescence Intensity Measurements Average integrated fluorescence intensity per unit area was measured in rectangles of approximate 3-6 μm 2 and within paired rear and front zones in the same cell from raw fluorescence images. Figure 4 A indicates the location of cell rear and cell front zones for measurements. The very tip of the cell front was excluded from measurements as myosin II is typically excluded from this zone in these and many other cells during whole cell translocation. The ratio of fluorescence intensities between relevant zones was then determined for each individual cell as that cell transited through key steps: non-polarized; initial displacement of the rear margin; whole cell translocation. The cell population average of individual ratios was then determined for each of these steps. Location of Statistical Details Details of all cell behaviors are located in Tables S1 and S2. Standard error of the mean and number of experiments are provided in the figures or results. n represents cells or cell margin zones as specified in the figure legends. 