 Capping Protein plays a central role in the creation of the Arp2/3-generated branched actin networks comprising lamellipodia and pseudopodia by virtue of its ability to cap the actin filament barbed end, which promotes Arp2/3-dependent filament nucleation and optimal branching. The highly conserved protein V-1/Myotrophin binds CP tightly in vitro to render it incapable of binding the barbed end. Here we addressed the physiological significance of this CP antagonist in Dictyostelium, which expresses a V-1 homolog that we show is very similar biochemically to mouse V-1. Consistent with previous studies of CP knockdown, overexpression of V-1 in Dictyostelium reduced the size of pseudopodia and the cortical content of Arp2/3 and induced the formation of filopodia. Importantly, these effects scaled positively with the degree of V-1 overexpression and were not seen with a V-1 mutant that cannot bind CP. V-1 is present in molar excess over CP, suggesting that it suppresses CP activity in the cytoplasm at steady state. Consistently, cells devoid of V-1, like cells overexpressing CP described previously, exhibited a significant decrease in cellular F-actin content. Moreover, V-1–null cells exhibited pronounced defects in macropinocytosis and chemotactic aggregation that were rescued by V-1, but not by the V-1 mutant. Together, these observations demonstrate that V-1 exerts significant influence in vivo on major actin-based processes via its ability to sequester CP. Finally, we present evidence that V-1’s ability to sequester CP is regulated by phosphorylation, suggesting that cells may manipulate the level of active CP to tune their “actin phenotype.” The addition of Capping Protein to seed-initiated actin polymerization assays results in the rapid cessation of polymerization because CP binds with very high affinity to the fast-growing barbed end of the actin filament to block further monomer addition. Direct extrapolation of this simple, potent biochemical property would suggest that the cell’s content of F-actin should rise and fall as its content of CP is artificially forced to fall and rise, respectively. Indeed, this finding was reported many years ago in Dictyostelium amoeba. This simple view of CP’s role in regulating actin assembly in vivo falls short of the whole story, however. The additional complexity arises from the critical relationship between CP and the Arp2/3 complex, the major actin nucleating machine that generates the branched actin networks comprising lamellipodia and pseudopodia. At the heart of this relationship is the fact that CP increases the rate of Arp2/3-dependent filament nucleation and promotes optimal branching by rapidly capping filaments. As a result, CP promotes actin-related proteins 2 and 3 -driven actin assembly and motility. This effect was evident from early solution experiments focused on defining the function of the Arp2/3 complex, verified by in vitro reconstitution of the Arp2/3-dependent motility of Listeria, and explained mechanistically by the elegant work of Akin and Mullins. Finally, evidence that CP promotes Arp2/3-dependent branched actin network assembly in vivo has been provided by several important studies where the cell’s content of CP was reduced by RNAi. Perhaps most dramatically, Mejillano et al. showed that the knockdown of CP in B16 melanoma cells resulted in a large-scale reduction in the size of their lamellipodia. Similarly, reduction in the level of CP in Drosophila S2 cells resulted in a large decrease in lamellipodial area. Interestingly, a second consequence of CP knockdown is a dramatic increase in the number of filopodia, linear actin structures that extend away from the cell surface. The extension of filopodia likely involves the action of formins and/or VASP, two actin polymerization machines that operate at the growing barbed end as processive polymerases to create the linear actin filaments that fill filopodia. Although both proteins are fairly effective at physically shielding the barbed end from CP, it is likely that their robustness as filopodia generators in vivo would be increased by a reduction in CP levels. Given the recent work demonstrating that formins and the Arp2/3 complex compete for G-actin in vivo, the increase in filopodia number seen upon CP knockdown may also be due in part to an increase in the amount of monomer available for formin/VASP after the reduction in Arp2/3-dependent nucleation caused by CP knockdown. The studies discussed above suggest that cells could regulate their “actin phenotype” by regulating their level of active CP. Consistent with CP regulation in vivo, estimates of the half-life of CP on the barbed end near the plasma membrane in living cells are approximately three orders of magnitude shorter than CP’s half-life on the barbed in vitro. To date, two direct regulators of CP activity have been identified. The first, CARMIL, is a ∼125-kDa protein that binds CP tightly via a small, highly conserved domain known as CAH3 or CPI. CP bound to CPI binds the barbed end with an affinity of ∼50 nM, which, although still quite significant, is ∼100-fold weaker than free CP. CPI also dramatically accelerates the dissociation of CP already present on the barbed end. Structural studies indicate that CPI reduces CP’s affinity for the barbed end in an allosteric fashion by restricting fluctuations within CP to a conformation that binds the barbed end weakly. Recent work suggests that CARMIL proteins function in vivo at the plasma membrane:cytoplasm interface of protruding edges, where they appear to be recruited, unfolded, and activated to promote actin assembly. The second direct CP regulator, V-1 or myotrophin, is a ∼13-kDa ankyrin-repeat protein that binds CP 1:1 with an affinity of ∼20 nM to render CP incapable of binding the barbed end. Structural studies of mouse V-1 have shown that it abrogates CP’s barbed end capping activity in a steric fashion by occupying CP’s main barbed end interaction site. Like CARMIL, V-1 is expressed throughout most of the Eukaryotic kingdom. Recent work in mouse embryo fibroblasts has indicated that V-1, like CP, is freely diffusing in the cytoplasm and that it is present in molar excess over CP. These observations argue that the majority of cellular CP may in fact be sequestered by V-1 at steady state, barring regulation. If true, this finding would represent a large departure from the traditional view that the cell’s entire complement of CP is active and would force a very different view of how barbed end capping is regulated in cells. Recent work by Fujiwara et al. seeking to define the functional interplay between CARMIL and V-1 has yielded a novel model for how barbed end capping may be regulated in cells. This model postulates that V-1 globally inhibits CP in the cytoplasm and that active, plasma membrane-associated CARMIL at protruding cell edges drives a complex exchange reaction converting sequestered CP into a version that binds the barbed end with ∼50 nM affinity. Implicit in this model is the idea that the barbed end capping activity required to drive Arp2/3-dependent branched actin network assembly is only generated downstream of a CARMIL-driven complex exchange reaction that liberates CP from V-1. One prediction of this model is that cells expressing a version of CP that cannot see the CPI motif in CARMIL and related proteins should phenocopy Arp2/3-inhibited cells. This prediction has recently received direct support by the work of Edwards et al.. Studies using gene ablation or RNAi have demonstrated that CARMIL proteins play important roles in the formation of cortical actin structures like pseudopodia and macropinocytic crowns in Dictyostelium and lamellipodia in tissue culture cells. In contrast, relatively little is known regarding the importance of V-1 in vivo, especially with respect to effects on actin assembly and organization. Most relevantly, Takeda et al. showed that the overexpression of V-1 in PC12 cells results in higher levels of cellular F-actin, presumably due to enhanced CP sequestration. Here, we sought to determine the functional significance of V-1 with regard to actin organization and function using the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum and a combination of overexpression and gene knockout approaches. Special emphasis was placed on using as a control a version of V-1 containing a function blocking mutation in its CP binding site to prove that the effects observed were because of V-1’s ability to sequester CP. In total, our data show that V-1 plays a major role in the regulation of CP activity in vivo, thereby influencing the organization, dynamics, and function of cortical actin structures that drive many fundamental cellular processes. Moreover, our results provide additional support for the novel model of CP regulation in vivo proposed recently by Fujiwara et al.. Results Biochemical Properties of Dictyostelium V-1 Mirror Those of Mouse V-1. Dictyostelium discoideum contains a single gene encoding a protein with 49% identity and 82% overall similarity to mouse V-1. Moreover, a Phyre2 homology model of D.d. V-1 superposes almost perfectly with the experimentally determined backbone structure of rat V-1 and indistinguishable from the value obtained for D.d. V-1 without the GST tag. Finally, Fig. S2 shows that, like mouse V-1, D.d. V-1 is incapable of uncapping CP-capped filaments and readily dissociates from CP upon the addition of the CP-binding domain of D.d. CARMIL. Fig. 2. Like mammalian V-1, Dictyostelium V-1 binds CP tightly to prevent it from capping the barbed end. SDS/PAGE gel showing the purified D.d. CP and GST-tagged D.d. V-1 used for the ITC measurement. Representative pyrene-based, seed-initiated, actin polymerization assays performed in the presence of 7 nM CP and increasing amounts of cleaved V-1 added before seed initiation Representative pyrene-based, seed-initiated, actin polymerization assays performed in the presence of 7 nM CP and increasing... Introduction of four consecutive point mutations into the first ankyrin loop of mouse V-1 reduced its affinity for CP by ∼200-fold, effectively eliminating its ability to sequester CP. Similarly, pulldown of full-length, FLAG-tagged D.d. V-1 containing the analogous function blocking mutations from Dictyostelium cell extracts using anti-FLAG M2 beads failed to coprecipitate CP. This result suggests that D.d. FBM V-1 can serve as an effective negative control for overexpression and rescue experiments. V-1’s potency as a CP regulator should scale positively with the degree to which its cellular concentration exceeds that of CP’s. To clarify this issue, we determined the amount of V-1 and CP in known numbers of vegetative Dictyostelium cells by Western blotting using antibodies to D.d. V-1 and D.d. CP, and standard curves created by using FLAG-tagged D.d. V-1 purified from cells and D.d. CP purified from bacteria. Two independent determinations yielded values of 49 and 56 ng of V-1, and 122 and 141 ng of CP, per 10 6 cells. Using a value of 1 pL per cell yielded mean cellular concentrations of 4.03 and 1.99 µM for V-1 and CP, respectively. Of note, these concentrations, and the ratio between them, are similar to the values obtained for V-1 and CP in mouse embryo fibroblasts. Given these results, and the affinity of D.d. V-1 for D.d. CP, ∼98% of CP in Dictyostelium cells could be sequestered by V-1 at steady state, barring regulation. Fig. S3. Cellular concentrations of V-1 and CP, V-1 immunostaining, FCS, quantitation of V-1 overexpression, and CAR1 levels. Western blot of a Dictyostelium whole cell extract and the indicated amounts... Finally, staining of vegetative Dictyostelium cells for V-1 yielded a diffuse cytoplasmic signal that was absent in V-1 knockout cells. This observation, together with the fact that the apparent diffusion constant for monomeric red fluorescent protein -tagged D.d. V-1 in the cytoplasm, as determined by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy, is essentially identical to that of mRFP alone suggests that D.d. V-1, like mouse V-1, is freely diffusing. In summary, the properties of D.d. V-1 mirror those of mouse V-1 in every way. Specifically, both bind CP tightly, block CP’s barbed end capping activity, do not uncap CP-capped filaments, are subject to CARMIL-driven complex exchange, are present in molar excess over CP, and are freely diffusing. In all subsequent figures, we refer to D.d. V-1 simply as V-1. Overexpression of V-1, but Not FBM V-1, Shifts the Cell’s Actin Phenotype from Pseudopodial to Filopodial. As discussed in the Introduction, CP knockdown in a variety of cell types has been shown to result in a decrease in both the size of lamellipodia and the cortical content of the Arp2/3 complex. If V-1 functions to antagonize CP, then its overexpression in wild-type Dictyostelium amoeba should produce similar effects. To look for a decrease in pseudopodial area upon V-1 overexpression in vegetative amoeba, we fixed and stained control cells and cells overexpressing mRFP–V-1 with Alexa Fluor 488–phalloidin and measured the phalloidin signal within pseudopodia as a proxy for pseudopodial area. In addition, we quantified on a per-cell basis total cellular mRFP fluorescence to correlate the degree of overexpression with the extent of change in pseudopodial area. Fig. 3 shows that Dictyostelium amoeba overexpressing V-1 do indeed exhibit on average a significant reduction in total pseudopodial area compared with control cells. Moreover, the magnitude of the decrease in pseudopodial area scaled positively with the degree of V-1 overexpression, arguing that V-1‘s effect on the size of these Arp2/3-generated structures requires its ability to sequester CP. Fig. 3. V-1 overexpression reduces pseudopodial area in a dose-dependent fashion. Shown is the size of pseudopodia for pooled overexpressing cells, cells overexpressing L, M, and H levels of mRFP-V-1, and cells overexpressing... To look for a decrease in the cortical content of Arp2/3 upon V-1 overexpression, we stained control cells and cells overexpressing high levels of mRFP-V-1 with phalloidin and an antibody to D.d. Arp3 and probed with the V-1 antibody yielded two bands. Importantly, the upper band disappeared when the extract was pretreated with phosphatase, suggesting that it corresponded to phosphorylated V-1. Identical results were obtained for FLAG-V-1 after its purification from cell extracts. Specifically, it ran as two bands in the absence of phosphatase treatment and one band after phosphatase treatment. In complete agreement with these observations, mass-spectroscopic analysis of FLAG-V-1 purified from Dictyostelium extracts identified a single serine residue that is phosphorylated in vivo. Notably, Ser-22 resides immediately adjacent to the loop comprising the first ankryin repeat that, when mutated, abrogates V-1:CP interaction. Moreover, examination of the structure of V-1 suggests that the addition of a phosphate on Ser-22 would disrupt the conformation of this loop, likely reducing V-1’s affinity for CP. Interestingly, mouse and other vertebrate V-1s contain a potentially phosphorylatable tyrosine at the position analogous to Ser-22 in D.d. V-1. Finally, precedents exist for the regulation of ankryin repeat proteins by the phosphorylation of residues adjacent to their ankyrin repeats. Fig. 10. V-1 is phosphorylated on Ser-22 in vivo, and a phosphomimetic version of V-1 interacts weakly with CP in vitro. Western blot of extracts of WT cells and V-1–null cells that were resolved on urea-glycerol gels and probed with... Fig. S8. Phosphorylation of Ser-22 may reduce D.d. V-1’s affinity for CP. Two views of the structure of mouse V-1 that provide insight into the possible effect Ser-22 phosphorylation might have on the function of D.d. V-1. Loop 1 in... To gain further support for the possibility that the phosphorylation of Ser-22 inhibits V-1’s ability to sequester CP, we generated a GST-tagged version of D.d. V-1 in which Ser-22 was changed to a glutamate residue. Fig. 10 D shows that this fusion protein pulled down far less CP from whole cell extracts than did an equal amount of WT GST-V-1. Moreover, Fig. 10 E and F show that GST-V-1 S22E was far less capable of sequestering CP in solution assays than WT GST-V-1. Specifically, the highest concentration of GST-V-1 S22E tested restored polymerization to only ∼50% of the seed-only rate, yielding an approximate half-maximal concentration of GST-V-1 S22E required to restore actin polymerization of 493 ± 191 nM. Importantly, the negative impact on V-1’s CP sequestering activity of adding an actual phosphate group to Ser-22 is likely to exceed the negative impact of replacing Ser-22 with a glutamate. Together, these observations argue strongly that the ability of V-1 to sequester CP is regulated by phosphorylation, and they suggest that Dictyostelium may tune the activity of CP by controlling the phosphorylation state of V-1. Discussion We recently proposed a model for CP regulation in vivo in which V-1 globally inhibits CP in the cytoplasm, and active, plasma membrane-associated CARMIL at protruding cell edges drives a complex exchange reaction converting sequestered CP into a version that binds the barbed end with ∼50 nM affinity. In this model, therefore, the barbed end capping activity required to drive Arp2/3-dependent branched actin network assembly is only generated downstream of the CARMIL-driven complex exchange reaction that liberates CP from V-1. Importantly, two predictions of this model have already been confirmed. First, the half-life of CP on barbed ends near the plasma membrane in living cells is much closer to the half-life of the CP:CARMIL complex on the barbed end in vitro than to the half-life of CP on the barbed end in vitro. Second, cells engineered to express a version of CP that cannot see the CPI motif in CARMIL and related proteins phenocopy Arp2/3-inhibited cells. A third prediction of our model—that cells containing elevated levels of V-1 should phenocopy cells containing reduced levels of CP—has now been confirmed in this study. Perhaps most telling, the overexpression of V-1, like the knockdown of CP, shifted the cell’s actin phenotype from pseudopodial to filopodial. Importantly, the extent of this phenotypic switch scaled positively with the degree of V-1 overexpression, as one would predict if V-1 is acting as a CP buffer. Moreover, this phenotypic switch did not occur in cells overexpressing FBM V-1, indicating that the switch was due to V-1’s CP-sequestering activity. Finally, given CP’s central role in actin assembly—and the likelihood that V-1 sequesters a major fraction of CP at steady state—our data confirmed a fourth prediction of our model, which is that cells lacking V-1 should exhibit significant defects in cellular processes dependent on actin assembly. Specifically, we showed that cells lacking V-1, like cells overexpressing CP, exhibit reduced levels of F-actin. More importantly, we showed that V-1–null cells exhibit myriad defects in actin-dependent cellular processes, including macropinocytosis in vegetative amoeba and cell migration/chemotactic aggregation in starved amoeba. Critically, all of these defects were rescued by the expression of V-1, but not by the expression of FBM V-1, indicating that V-1 exerts its effects on the cell’s actin phenotype via its ability to sequester CP. With regard to the underlying mechanism by which V-1 overexpression converts Dictyostelium amoeba from a pseudopodial to a filopodial phenotype, we think it revolves around the opposite relationship the two major nucleation machines have with CP. In the case of the Arp2/3 complex, CP promotes the quantity and quality of the branched actin arrays created by Arp2/3, such as lamellipodia and pseudopodia, by accelerating Arp2/3 complex-dependent nucleation and by promoting optimal branching within the resulting network. Formins and VASP, conversely, consider CP a “pest” and use physical mechanisms to keep it at bay as they build linear actin structures such as filopodia. Importantly, although formins are fairly effective at physically shielding the barbed end from CP, it is likely that their robustness as filopodia generators in vivo would be increased by a reduction in CP levels. Given all this information, interventions that impair CP function, such as CP knockdown or V-1 overexpression, would be predicted to reduce the formation of cortical actin structures built by the Arp2/3 complex and promote the formation of cortical actin structures built by formins and VASP. Of note, the increase in filopodia number seen upon CP knockdown/V-1 overexpression is probably also due in significant part to an increase in the amount of monomer available for formin/VASP after the reduction in Arp2/3-dependent nucleation. With regard to why Dictyostelium amoeba missing V-1 exhibit such widespread defects in actin-based processes, we think it is because the full function of such processes requires an optimum level of active CP. In the case of too little active CP, such as that seen in CP-knockdown cells or cells overexpressing V-1, Arp2/3-dependent actin assembly is compromised. In the case of too much active CP, such as that seen in cells overexpressing CP or the V-1 knockout cells described here, there are also negative consequences, one of which is a reduction in the cell’s total content of F-actin. This consequence, as well as the many defects in actin-based processes exhibited by V-1–null cells, most likely reflects the negative consequences of excessive barbed end capping in vivo. Importantly, the in vitro reconstitution of the Arp2/3- and CP-dependent motility of Listeria also demonstrated an optimum for CP—that is, both too little and too much CP impaired the actin polymerization-driven motility of the bacterium. Together, these observations argue that cells must maintain the level of active CP within a certain range to promote robust actin-dependent processes. Finally, although cells probably avoid extremes in both directions in the level of active CP, they might regulate the level of active CP over a limited range to modify their actin phenotype. One way to accomplish this goal would be through a posttranslational modification of V-1 that inhibits its ability to sequester CP. Relevant to this possibility, a previous study of vertebrate V-1 suggested that it might be phosphorylated and that phosphorylated V-1 might have a reduced affinity for CP. Moreover, other ankyrin repeat proteins have been shown to be inhibited by phosphorylation of residues adjacent to their ankyrin repeats. Consistently, we demonstrated here that D.d. V-1 is phosphorylated in vivo at a single serine residue adjacent to its first ankryin repeat, which is critical for V-1:CP interaction. Moreover, a version of D.d. V-1 in which this serine was replaced with a glutamate to partially mimic serine phosphorylation exhibited a pronounced reduction it its ability to sequester CP, implying that the phosphorylation of this serine might fully abrogate V-1:CP interaction. Although much remains to be determined regarding the biological consequences of V-1 phosphorylation, these initial results argue that cells probably regulate the activity of this CP buffer to suit certain physiological purposes. Methods Cell Cultures, Clones, and Reagents. Dictyostelium axenic strain AX3 was cultured in HL5 medium. Untagged, full-length versions of D.d. V-1 with or without the FBM or the S22E mutation were synthesized as Bam HI/Eco RI fragments by using the D.d. V-1 genomic sequence. WT and S22E versions were cloned into pGST-Parallel 2 to create the GST fusion proteins used for pulldown experiments and raising the rabbit polyclonal antibody to D.d. V-1. For expression in Dictyostelium, WT and FBM versions were cloned into mRFP-mars. For FLAG-V-1 and FLAG-FBM V-1, full-length versions of D.d. V-1 with and without the FBM were synthesized with the 8-amino-acid FLAG sequence and a three-residue spacer following the ATG and cloned into Exp4. The dynamic F-actin reporter GFP-LimEΔCC and the rabbit polyclonal antibody against D.d. Arp3 have been described. The rabbit polyclonal antibody against D.d. CPα was a gift of John Cooper, Washington University, St. Louis. The rabbit polyclonal antibody against D.d. CPβ was generated by using gel-purified CPβ. The mouse monoclonal antibody against CAR1 was a gift of Carol Parent, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda. The mouse monoclonal antibody against β-actin was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Labeled phalloidins and secondary antibodies were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. V-1 Knockout and Stable Cell Lines. The generation of D.d. V-1 knockout cells by homologous recombination, and the generation of stable cell lines expressing tagged versions of D.d. V-1, are described in SI Methods. Microscopy and Imaging-Based Quantitation. For staining, cells were fixed with 15% picric acid/2% formaldehyde in HL5 medium at room temperature followed by 70% ethanol. Confocal imaging was performed on a Zeiss LSM 510 or LSM 780 microscope equipped with a 63× 1.4-NA objective. To measure the effect of V-1 overexpression on pseudopodia size as a function of V-1 overexpression level, WT cells expressing mRFP-V-1 or mRFP-FBM V-1 were fixed and stained with Alexa Fluor 647–phalloidin. Actin-rich pseudopodia visible in 1.5-µm-thick ventral confocal sections were outlined, and the total fluorescence within these outlines was measured in the 647-nm and 543-nm channels. Note that for this and similar measurements, gain was minimized to avoid pixel saturation while still maintaining good dynamic range, and rapid scans with no frame averaging were used to avoid bleaching. In addition, note that for this and all overexpression experiments, results were expressed as a function of V-1 overexpression level by dividing the range of 543 nm channel values into thirds, yielding low, medium, and high overexpression levels; or fifths, yielding <20, 21–40, 41–60, 61–80, and >80 overexpression levels. To measure the effect of V-1 overexpression on the cortical content of the Arp2/3 complex as a ratio of cortical F-actin content, WT cells overexpressing mRFP-V-1 or mRFP-FBM V-1 were fixed and stained with Alexa Fluor 647–phalloidin and an antibody to D.d. Arp3. Actin-rich pseudopodia visible in 1.5-µm-thick ventral confocal sections were identified, and the total fluorescence within 1 µm of the cell edge was measured in the 647-nm, 543-nm, and 488-nm channels. To measure the effect of V-1 overexpression on filopodia number, WT cells overexpressing mRFP-V-1 or mRFP-FBM V-1 were fixed and stained with Alexa Fluor 488–phalloidin and optically sectioned in 0.4-µm slices, and the number of filopodia >1 µm in length were scored in projected images as a function of the strength of the mRFP-V-1 signal in the 543-nm channel. To measure the effect of V-1 overexpression on the total cellular content of F-actin, WT cells overexpressing mRFP-V-1 or mRFP-FBM V-1 were fixed and stained with Alexa Fluor 488–phalloidin and optically sectioned in 1-µm slices, and the total fluorescence in all sections summed in the 488-nm and 543-nm channels. To estimate the fold increase in cellular V-1 level in L, M, and H mRFP-V-1–overexpressing cells, the dimmest 20%, middle 60%, and brightest 20% of cells were fractionated and collected by using an Aria II Flow Cytometer and subjected to Western blotting using the anti-V-1 antibody, and the untagged and mRFP-tagged V-1 bands were quantitated by densitometry. Imaging of macropinocytic crowns and filopodia by lattice light sheet microcopy was performed on a custom-built instrument at Janelia Research Center, Howard Hughes Medical Institute. FCS. Measurements of the diffusion rates of mRFP and mRFP-V-1 in cells by FCS are described in SI Methods. Cell Biological Assays. Measurements of fluid-phase macropinocytosis, the preparation of ripple-stage cells, and measurements of rates of random cell motility were performed as described. Steaming assays were performed as described and imaged every minute for 12 h on a Zeiss V12 stereo microscope equipped with a 1.0× objective. To estimate the number of nuclei per cell, cells were stained at RT with Hoechst 33342 to reveal nuclei, followed by the plasma membrane dye FM 4-64FX at 4 °C to reveal cell boundaries for cells in clumps. The growth rate of cells in suspension was determined as described, except that a Cellometer Auto T4 cell counter was used. To measure cell adhesiveness, DIC and IRM images were captured on the Zeiss 510 LSM confocal microscope. The content of F-actin in Triton-insoluble cytoskeletons was determined as described. To determine the cellular content of F-actin by FACS, 1 × 10 6 cells suspended in 100 µL of PBS were fixed for 20 min at RT by the addition of paraformaldehyde to a final concentration of 4%, washed with PBS, permeabilized for 10 min using 0.4% Saponin in PBS, washed with PBS, labeled with 4 µM FITC–phalloidin for 1 h, washed with PBS, and resuspended in 1 mL of PBS. The total fluorescence intensity per cell for ∼30,000 individual cells was then determined by flow cytometry using a BD Biosciences model LSR II flow cytometer. Biochemistry. FLAG-V-1 and FLAG-FBM V-1 proteins were purified directly from Dictyostelium cells stably expressing them. Amoebas were broken by using Triton X-100 and spun at 10,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was then applied to anti-FLAG M2 affinity resin, and the FLAG-V-1 protein was eluted by using FLAG-peptide as described by the manufacturer. FLAG-V-1 was dialyzed into 1× PBS and concentrated by using a centrifugal filter. D.d. CP was purified from Escherichia coli strain BL21-RILP harboring the expression plasmid pET-28B containing both the α and β subunits of D.d. CP, essentially as described for mouse CP, but by using the CAH3 domain of D.d. CARMIL fused to GST as the affinity matrix. Eluted CP was dialyzed into 1× PBS and concentrated by using a centrifugal filter. To determine the affinity and stoichiometry of D.d. V-1 for D.d. CP, we performed ITC using 10 µM D.d. CP and 150 µM GST-tagged D.d. V-1 in 1× PBS and a iTC 200 ITC machine. To determine the cellular concentrations of V-1 and CP, known numbers of vegetative AX3 cells and known amounts of purified D.d. FLAG-V-1 and D.d. CP were subjected to Western blotting using the antibodies to D.d. V-1 and D.d. CP and an IRDye 800 goat anti-rabbit IgG as a secondary antibody. Band intensities were measured by using an Odyssey infrared imager. Lyophilized, pyrene-labeled rabbit skeletal muscle actin was reconstituted in G-buffer and determined to be ∼90% labeled. Standard, pyrene-based, seed-initiated actin polymerization assays were carried out as described. For the pulldown of CP using GST, GST-V-1, or GST-V-1 S22E, 50 µL of glutathione Sepharose resin containing 20 µg of fusion protein was incubated with cell extract for 2 h at 4 °C. After washing, CP was quantitatively eluted by using 5× TBS, the elute was resolved by SDS/PAGE, and the resulting Western blot was probed with an antibody to CP. The CAH3 domain-driven complex exchange reaction shown in Fig. S2 B was performed as described by Fujiwara et al.. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assay. Phosphorylation and Mass Spectroscopy. The demonstration that D.d. V-1 is phosphorylated in vivo using urea-glycerol gels, and the identification of Ser-22 as the site of phosphorylation by mass spectroscopy, are described in SI Methods. SI Methods V-1 Knockout and Stable Cell Lines. A linear gene-disruption fragment designed to promote a double-crossover gene replacement event was created by fusing nucleotides 1–283 and 346–672 of the D.d. V-1 genomic sequence to the 5′ and 3′ ends of the Blasticidin resistance cassette in plasmid Bsr2, respectively, by using the described approach. The introduction of this fragment into WT cells by electroporation and the isolation of Blasticidin-resistant clones by serial dilution in 96-well plates were performed as described. V-1–null cells were identified by Western blotting using the D.d. V-1 antibody and confirmed by sequencing PCR products spanning the integration site. Stable cell lines expressing mRFP-V-1 or FLAG-V-1 with or without the FBM were created in the same fashion using the appropriate antibiotic. Note that Dictyostelium cell lines containing stably integrated DNA typically exhibit a range of expression levels despite being clonal. FCS. FCS was performed on the cytoplasm of D.d. amoeba expressing either mRFP or mRFP-V-1 by using a Zeiss 780 ConfoCor3 equipped with 40× 1.2-NA water objective. After a 3-s photobleaching step to reduce the number of fluorescent molecules, 30 autocorrelation measurements of 1 s each were made per cell in the mRFP channel by using a 561-nm laser for excitation. The apparent diffusion constants presented in the text, which correspond to the apparent diffusion quantification provided by the Zeiss FCS default setting, represent the mean and SD for 10 cells in each condition. Phosphorylation and Mass Spectroscopy. For Western blotting, WT and V-1–null cell extracts, or FLAG-V-1 precipitated from cell extracts using anti-FLAG M2 beads, were prepared in the presence of phosphatase inhibitor mixture 3, resolved on urea–glycerol–acrylamide gels, and probed with the antibody to D.d. V-1. Some WT extracts and some precipitated FLAG-V-1 samples were pretreated with Lambda phosphatase before blotting. For mass spectroscopy, 60 µg of FLAG-V-1 was digested by using Glu-C enzyme. The resulting peptides were enriched for phosphopeptides by using the Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry was performed by using an Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra 1D Plus system coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer using collision-induced dissociation fragmentation. Peptides were first loaded onto a Zorbax 300SB-C18 trap column and then separated on a reversed-phase Picofrit analytical column. The LTQ-Orbitrap Elite was operated in a data-dependent mode. The raw files that were generated from the LTQ Orbitrap Elite were analyzed by using Proteome Discoverer software. Data were submitted to Mascot search engine with the following search criteria: phospho, phospho ; MS peptide tolerance 20 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.8 Da. The peptides were filtered for a false discovery rate at 1%. Supplementary Material Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. 