 Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, also known as Batten disease, refers to a group of severe neurodegenerative disorders that primarily affect children. The most common subtype of the disease is caused by loss-of-function mutations in CLN3, which is conserved across model species from yeast to human. The precise function of the CLN3 protein is not known, which has made targeted therapy development challenging. In the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, loss of Cln3 causes aberrant mid-to-late stage multicellular development. In this study, we show that Cln3-deficiency causes aberrant adhesion and aggregation during the early stages of Dictyostelium development. cln3 − cells form ∼30% more multicellular aggregates that are comparatively smaller than those formed by wild-type cells. Loss of Cln3 delays aggregation, but has no significant effect on cell speed or cAMP-mediated chemotaxis. The aberrant aggregation of cln3 − cells cannot be corrected by manually pulsing cells with cAMP. Moreover, there are no significant differences between wild-type and cln3 − cells in the expression of genes linked to cAMP chemotaxis. However, during this time in development, cln3 − cells show reduced cell-substrate and cell-cell adhesion, which correlate with changes in the levels of the cell adhesion proteins CadA and CsaA. Specifically, loss of Cln3 decreases the intracellular level of CsaA and increases the amount of soluble CadA in conditioned media. Together, these results suggest that the aberrant aggregation of cln3 − cells is due to reduced adhesion during the early stages of development. Revealing the molecular basis underlying this phenotype may provide fresh new insight into CLN3 function. KEYWORDS: calcium, cell adhesion, chemotaxis, CLN3, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, development, Dictyostelium discoideum Introduction Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, also known as Batten disease, is the most common cause of neurodegeneration in children, with incidence rates estimated to be between 1:25000 and 1:100000 depending on the region. 1 Historically NCL was categorized based on the age of onset and pathological features, but with the growing number of NCL genes identified, now at 13, a gene-based nomenclature has been proposed. 2-3 Clinical manifestations of the disease include the progressive loss of vision, mental ability, and motor function, as well as epileptic seizures and a reduced lifespan. 4 At the cellular level, abnormal lysosomal function leads to an excessive accumulation of lipofuscin in neurons and other cell types, which is a pathological hallmark of NCL. 5 The most common subtype of NCL, which typically has onset in the juvenile years, is caused by recessive loss-of-function mutations in CLN3. 6 CLN3 encodes a 438 amino acid multi-pass transmembrane protein that is primarily found in endosomes and lysosomes. 7 A number of different systems and cell models have been developed to study the function of CLN3. 8 Studies have linked the protein to intracellular trafficking, autophagy, apoptosis, lysosomal pH homeostasis, cell cycle control, osmoregulation, and calcium homeostasis. 9-22 However, the precise function of CLN3 is still not known. As a result, there are currently no effective treatments for the disease. The social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum is increasingly being used as a model system for neurological disease research. 23-24 Proteins linked to Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, Huntington's disease, and lissencephaly have been studied and more recently, this organism has proved useful for studying the functions of proteins linked to NCL. 25-30 The Dictyostelium genome encodes an ortholog of CLN3, as well as orthologs to most of the other known NCL genes, thus highlighting the potential of this eukaryotic system to serve as a valuable model for studying the functions of NCL proteins. Dictyostelium has a unique life cycle comprised of both single-cell and multicellular phases and serves as an excellent model system for studying a variety of cellular and developmental processes. 31 During growth, cells feed on bacteria and undergo a period of continuous mitotic cell division. Upon starvation, cells transition to a developmental stage where individual cells secrete the chemoattractant cAMP in a pulsatile manner causing cells to aggregate into multicellular mounds. Following aggregation, cells within the multicellular aggregate undergo a process of differentiation to form a fruiting body composed of a mass of spores supported atop a stalk. In Dictyostelium, Cln3 localizes to both the contractile vacuole system and the endocytic pathway. 29 Cln3-deficiency leads to increased rates of cell proliferation and precocious multicellular development; abnormalities that are rescued by the expression of either Dictyostelium or human CLN3. 29 Given these results, we sought to determine whether the observed aberrant mid-to-late stage development was due to events that occurred earlier in development, specifically during cell migration and aggregation. Intriguingly, aberrant wound healing has been reported in mammalian CLN3-deficiency models. 32-33 CLN3-deficient cells eventually heal the wound however they do so at a significantly reduced rate. In this study, we assessed the early development of cln3 − cells by examining their ability to chemotax toward cAMP and form multicellular aggregates. The results show that Cln3 is required for optimal adhesion and aggregation during early development via mechanisms that are independent of the cAMP signal transduction machinery. Results cln3 − cells display aberrant aggregation We previously reported Cln3-deficiency phenotypes during the mid-to-late stages of Dictyostelium development. 29 Specifically, we observed an overall accelerated rate of development between 12 and 24 hours of cln3 − cells as compared to wild-type. 29 Based on those observations, as well as the dramatic increase in cln3 mRNA expression during the early stages of development, 34 we sought to assess the effect of Cln3-deficiency on the earlier developmental processes that occur prior to those covered in that study. After 3 hours of starvation, which initiates multicellular development, there was no obvious difference between WT and cln3 − cells. Aggregation ripples were observed after 4.5 hours of development in both cell lines. However they were larger and more pronounced in WT cells compared to cln3 − cells. After 6 hours of development, cells of both lines had aggregated, however WT aggregates appeared tighter and more compact than cln3 − aggregates. After 9 hours, both WT and cln3 − cells had developed into multicellular mounds.When cells were plated at equal concentrations, Cln3-deficient cells consistently formed a greater number of mounds compared to WT. Moreover, cln3 − mounds were smaller than those formed by WT cells. Expression of GFP-Cln3 under the control of the act15 promoter in cln3 − cells effectively restored the number and size of mounds to WT levels. Figure 1. Effect of Cln3-deficiency on Dictyostelium aggregation and mound formation. Cells imaged after 3, 4.5, 6, and 9 hours of development. M, mound. R, Ripple. Scale bar = 1 mm. Quantification of the number of mounds observed after... The delayed and aberrant formation of cln3 − mounds led us to investigate the localization of GFP-Cln3 during these early developmental stages. During the single cell growth phase, GFP-Cln3 co-localizes with VatC, Rh50, and p80. 29 VatC forms part of the peripheral subunit of the V-ATPase that generates an acidic environment in several intracellular compartments, including the CV and endosomal systems. 35,36 However the protein is enriched ∼10-fold in the CV system. The rhesus-like glycoprotein Rh50 is a protein of unknown function that localizes exclusively to the CV system, while p80 is a late endosomal protein, also of unknown function. 37,38 Consistent with our previous observations of GFP-Cln3 localization during growth, 29 GFP-Cln3 localized predominantly to the vacuoles and tubules of the CV system, and to a smaller extent, to intracellular vesicles and punctate distributions within the cytoplasm. Together, these results suggest that the loss of a yet-to-be-defined function of Cln3 at the site of the CV and/or endocytic systems is responsible for the effects on normal growth and development in Dictyostelium. Figure 2. Localization of GFP-Cln3 in Dictyostelium cells during growth and starvation. Growth-phase cells and cells starved for 3 and 6 hours in KK2 buffer were fixed either in ultra-cold methanol or 4% paraformaldehyde... Cln3-deficiency delays aggregation The aberrant early development of cln3 − cells led us to investigate whether there was an effect of Cln3-deficiency on cAMP chemotaxis. Consistent with this hypothesis, aberrant wound healing has been reported for mammalian cell models lacking CLN3. 32-33 CLN3-deficient cells eventually heal the wound, however they do so at a significantly reduced rate compared to WT. In this study, we looked specifically at the chemotactic motility of Cln3-deficient cells toward cAMP using a well-established bioradial assay that assesses the total distance migrated by a population of cells over a 4 hour period. Cells are deposited on agar that contains a uniform concentration of cAMP. The starving cells make their own cAMP gradient by secreting cAMP-phosphodiesterase to locally break-down extracellular cAMP. 39 Although cln3 − cells were able to respond to cAMP, the total distance migrated by cln3 − cells was significantly less compared to WT. Cells deposited on agar that did not contain cAMP did not migrate outwards, but instead migrated inwards and began to form multicellular aggregates. After 4 hours of starvation on agar that did not contain cAMP, the area of cln3 − cell spots was significantly greater compared to WT, indicating that aggregation was delayed in cln3 − cells. Like aggregation on cellulose filters, cln3 − cells also formed a larger number of aggregation centers compared to WT. Since the bioradial assay only quantifies the total distance migrated during a certain period of time, it cannot determine if cln3 − cells have subtle defects in chemotaxis or cell speed. To address this possibility, we assessed the motility and chemotactic index of cln3 − cells toward natural cAMP waves generated by aggregation territories. WT and cln 3 − cells were starved for 6 hours in KK2 buffer to achieve chemotactic responsiveness. Cells were then collected and deposited onto glass slides and allowed to form natural aggregation centers. A small aliquot of starved cells was added to the slide and chemotaxis was observed using brightfield time-lapse microscopy. No significant difference in speed or CI was detected between WT and cln3 − cells. Figure 3. Effect of Cln3-deficiency on cAMP chemotaxis. Cells plated on 0.5% agar/KK2 + cAMP. Pictures of cell spots were taken at 0 and 4 hours. Scale bar = 200 µm. Quantification of the... To more closely examine early developmental events, cells were starved on plastic 6-well dishes and time-lapse microscopy was used to capture the onset of cell de-adhesion from the substrate, cAMP wave pulsing, and cell migration toward cAMP emanating from natural aggregation centers. Cell-substrate adhesion decreases during the early stages of development prior to cAMP pulsing and multicellular streaming. 40,41 In this study, both WT and cln3 − cells de-adhered from the substrate after ∼1.5 hours of starvation. However, the onset of cAMP wave pulsing and onset of migration toward the aggregation center were significantly delayed in cln3 − cells compared to WT. There was no significant effect of Cln3-deficiency on the periodicity of cAMP waves. Adherent Dictyostelium cells appear dark and amoeboid, while detached cells appear white and rounded. After 2 and 4 hours of starvation, cln3 − cells were more rounded compared to WT, suggesting that they were detached from the substrate. Cln3-deficiency delayed multicellular streaming by ∼1 hour compared to WT, but had no obvious effect on the number of aggregation centers. Interestingly, while cln3 − cells did eventually stream, the streams they formed were consistently shorter than WT and often broke apart prior to reaching the aggregation center. Figure 4. Effect of Cln3-deficiency on streaming and aggregation during Dictyostelium starvation. Effect of Cln3-deficiency on the onset of cell de-adhesion from the substrate. Data presented as the mean onset of de-adhesion ± SEM... Our previous study reported a rescue of Cln3-deficiency phenotypes during mid-to-late stage development after treatment with the calcium chelator EGTA. 29 Given these observations, and the fact that calcium signaling has also been linked to the starvation response in Dictyostelium, 42 the effect of EGTA on the streaming of cln3 − cells was assessed. Treatment of cln3 − cells with EGTA restored the timing of stream formation to times observed for WT cells. Finally, to assess whether the aberrant streaming and aggregation of cln3 − cells was due to altered cAMP signaling, cells were pulsed every 6 minutes over a 6-hour period with 75 nM cAMP. As expected, WT cells formed highly polarized cells after being placed on a glass slide. In contrast, cln3 − cells did not show a polarized morphology. Together, these results suggest that Cln3-deficiency impairs streaming morphology and aggregation in Dictyosteliuim. Effect of Cln3-deficiency on the expression of genes linked to cAMP signal transduction qPCR was used to assess whether the delayed early development of cln3 − cells was due to alterations in the expression of genes required for streaming and aggregation. Upon starvation, adenylyl cyclase generates cAMP from ATP. cAMP is then secreted outside the cell where it functions as a chemoattractant by binding to the cAMP receptor on the surface of neighboring cells. This binding initiates intracellular signal transduction that leads to chemotaxis, streaming, and aggregation. The signal is modulated by cAMP phosphodiesterase which degrades extracellular cAMP. 39 Like Cln3, the G protein α 9 subunit negatively regulates growth and multicellular development in Dictyostelium. 29,43,44 gpaI − cells form more cAMP signaling centers and complete aggregation sooner than WT cells, while overexpression of GpaI leads to defects in the formation of cAMP signaling centers. 43 Given the similar phenotypes observed in cln3 − and gpaI − cells, we wanted to assess the expression of gpaI during starvation. Consistent with previous studies, the expression of acaA, carA, pdsA, and gpaI increased in starved WT and cln3 − cells. 34 Importantly, there were no significant differences in gene expression between cell lines at any of the time points analyzed. We also observed no obvious differences between WT and cln3 − cells in the level of CarA protein during starvation or in the localization of the protein to the cell surface. Together, these findings suggest that the delayed and aberrant aggregation of Cln3-deficient cells is not a result of deregulated expression of genes linked to the cells chemotactic machinery. Figure 5. Effect of Cln3-deficiency on the expression of genes linked to cAMP signal transduction and the localization of CarA. qPCR of genes linked to cAMP signal transduction. Data presented as the mean normalized gene expression ± SEM.... Cln3-deficiency impairs cell-substrate and cell-cell adhesion during early development Cell-substrate and cell-cell adhesion are required for the migration and aggregation of cells during the early stages of Dictyostelium development. 41,45 As discussed above, when cells were developed on filters, WT aggregates appeared tighter and more compact than cln3 − aggregates. Since the onset of cell de-adhesion from the substrate was not significantly affected by the loss of Cln3, and the aberrant early development appeared to be independent of cAMP signal transduction, it was important to assess whether the observed phenotypes were due to defects in cell-substrate and/or cell-cell adhesion. Cln3-deficiency significantly impaired cell-substrate adhesion after 3 hours of starvation, which was effectively restored through the expression of GFP-Cln3 in cln3 − cells. In contrast, there was no effect of Cln3-deficiency on cell-substrate adhesion after 6 hours of starvation, suggesting that the defects in adhesion occurred during the period preceding multicellular streaming. Figure 6. Effect of Cln3-deficiency on cell-substrate adhesion during Dictyostelium starvation. Cells were deposited in 6-well dishes and allowed to adhere to the bottom of the dish for 2 hours. Cells were washed 2 times with KK2 buffer and then starved... During aggregation, Dictyostelium cells acquire EDTA-resistant cell-cell adhesion due to the expression of the EDTA stable glycoprotein contact site A. 46 CsaA is a heavily glycosylated protein that mediates homophilic cell adhesion during the later stages of aggregation. 46 csaA expression is induced by pulses of cAMP that are generated by starving cells, and the protein is anchored to the plasma membrane by a lipid glycan. 47,48 In the absence of EDTA, cell-cell adhesion was significantly reduced in cln3 − cells compared to WT after 2 and 4 hours of starvation. Interestingly, as was observed in the cell-substrate adhesion assay, there was no significant effect of Cln3-deficiency on cell-cell adhesion after 6 hours of starvation. In the presence of EDTA, cell-cell adhesion was significantly reduced in cln3 − cells compared to WT after 4 and 6 hours of starvation. Finally, to assess whether the aberrant cell-cell adhesion was due to defects in cAMP signal transduction, cln3 − cells were manually pulsed with cAMP. When pulsed with cAMP, WT cells formed multicellular clusters, while cln3 − cells did not. Together, these data suggest that Cln3-deficiency impairs cell-substrate and cell-cell adhesion during the early stages of development and manual pulsing of cln3 − cells with cAMP failed to correct the cell-cell adhesion defect. Figure 7. Effect of Cln3-deficiency on cell-cell adhesion during Dictyostelium starvation. Cells starved for 0, 2, 4, and 6 hours were added to separate wells of a 12-well dish containing KK2 buffer ± EDTA. Dishes were spun... Cln3-deficiency alters the levels of the cell adhesion proteins CsaA and CadA during early development Based on the differences observed in our cell adhesion analyses, the effect of Cln3-deficiency on the intracellular level of CsaA was assessed. After 6 hours of starvation, the amount of CsaA was significantly reduced in cln3 − cells compared to WT. Intriguingly, there was no significant difference between cell lines in the level of csaA mRNA during starvation, and no obvious difference in the localization of the protein. The localization and function of CsaA is determined by its glycosylation status. 49,50 Unmodified CsaA, which is stable and appears as a ∼50 kDa protein band on western blots, is non-functional and does not localize to the cell surface. 49,50 In contrast, partially glycosylated CsaA, which appears as a ∼70 kDa protein band on western blots, is transported to the cell surface and can form EDTA-stable cell-cell contacts. 49,50 To assess the effect of Cln3-deficiency on the glycosylation of CsaA, WT and cln3 − cells were treated with tunicamycin, which is a potent inhibitor of glycosylation and EDTA-stable cell-cell contacts. 40,49-51 After 6 hours, WT cells treated with either DMSO or tunicamycin had begun to stream, while cln3 − cells remained as single cells. In DMSO-treated cells, there was again significantly less fully glycosylated CsaA in cln3 − cells compared to WT. As expected, tunicamycin reduced the amount of fully glycosylated CsaA in both WT and cln3 − cells. However the reduction in cln3 − cells was more dramatic compared to WT. In addition to having a reduced amount of 80 kDa CsaA, cln3 − cells treated with tunicamycin also had a reduced amount of the 70 kDa protein. Importantly, there was no significant difference in the level of 50 kDa CsaA between cell lines, which supports previous work that showed no effect of tunicamycin on protein synthesis. 51 Together, these results indicate that Cln3-deficiency reduces the intracellular level of CsaA, but that the reduced level cannot be explained by alterations in csaA expression. Moreover, these data indicate that cln3 − cells are more sensitive to tunicamycin than WT cells. Figure 8. Effect of Cln3-deficiency on the expression and localization of CsaA during Dictyostelium starvation. Whole cell lysates from growth-phase cells and cells starved for 6 hours in KK2 buffer were separated... During the early stages of development, CsaA functions together with cell adhesion molecule A to mediate cell-cell adhesion. 52 CadA is a calcium-binding protein that shares limited sequence similarity with classical cadherins. 53,54 Cells initially contact each other via the binding of their filopodia, which are enriched in CadA. 55 This is followed by a second stage of cell-cell adhesion mediated by CsaA. 56 There were no significant differences between WT and cln3 − cells in the expression of cadA or the intracellular level of CadA during growth or starvation. CadA is presented to the cell surface and secreted via a non-classical pathway involving the CV system. 54,57 Although CadA lacks a signal sequence for secretion, it has been detected in conditioned media from developing cells and as an integral component of the extracellular matrix during the mid-to-late stages of Dictyostelium development. 58,59 Given these findings, and the observation that GFP-Cln3 localizes predominantly to the CV system in Dictyostelium, 29 we also examined whether Cln3-deficiency had any effect on the secretion of CadA, and if defects in its secretion could explain the aberrant early development of cln3 − cells. Intriguingly, after 6 hours of starvation, cln3 − conditioned media contained significantly more CadA compared to WT. Together, these results suggest that Cln3-deficiency alters the extracellular levels of CadA and results in lower intracellular levels of CsaA, and that these alterations are concomitant with aberrant cell adhesion and early stage development of Cln3-deficient cells. Figure 9. Effect of Cln3-deficiency on the intra- and extracellular levels of CadA during Dictyostelium starvation. Whole cell lysates from cells starved for 0 and 6 hours in KK2 buffer were separated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed... Discussion In this study, we have shown that loss of Cln3 causes adhesion and aggregation defects during the early stages of Dictyostelium development. Dictyostelium has historically served as an excellent model system for studying random and directed cell movement, and aberrant wound healing has been reported for mammalian cell models lacking CLN3. 32,33,60 In Dictyostelium, Cln3-deficiency delayed aggregation and caused cells to form a greater number of multicellular mounds that were comparatively smaller than those formed by WT cells. cln3 − cells showed ∼1 hour delay in the initiation of both cAMP pulsing and multicellular streaming. However, these phenotypes were not due to alterations in the expression of genes linked to cAMP signal transduction. cln3 − cells showed reduced cell-substrate and cell-cell adhesion, which correlated with a decrease in the intracellular level of CsaA, and an increase in the amount of soluble CadA in conditioned media. Finally, the localization of GFP-Cln3 to the CV system and endocytic pathway during early development, coupled with the ability of GFP-Cln3 over-expression to correct the delayed aggregation and aberrant formation of cln3 − mounds, imply that these defects are at least in part mediated by a Cln3 function within the CV and/or endocytic systems. The expression of genes linked to cAMP signal transduction was normal in cln3 − cells compared to WT. Interestingly, we also observed no significant effect of Cln3-deficiency on the levels of the extracellular quorum-sensing proteins conditioned medium factor and countin, which together modulate aggregate formation and size during early development. 61,62 CtnA is a 40-kDa component of the 450-kDa countin factor complex that negatively regulates cell adhesion and aggregate size. 63 Similar to phenotypes observed in cln3 − cells, high levels of CF cause reduced cell-cell adhesion, which leads to the breakup of streams and smaller mounds. 63 While we observed no effect of Cln3-deficiency on the extracellular levels of CtnA, it remains possible that the levels of the other components of the CF complex may have been affected by the loss of Cln3. Under normal conditions, cell-substrate adhesion decreases during the early stages of development prior to cAMP pulsing and multicellular streaming. 40,41 In this study, both WT and cln3 − cells de-adhered from the substrate after 1–2 hours of starvation. The primary defect in cln3 − cells appeared to be their ability to re-adhere to the substrate and initiate cAMP pulsing and multicellular aggregation. In support of this, we observed no significant difference between WT and cln3 − cells in speed or chemotactic ability. While cln3 − cells were eventually able to stream and aggregate, albeit poorly, the aberrant cell-substrate and cell-cell adhesion of these cells caused them to form abnormal streams and mounds. The ability of GFP-Cln3 expression to rescue these defects in cln3 − cells showed that the phenotype was a direct result of the loss of Cln3. Research using mammalian cell models has linked CLN3 function to intracellular trafficking. 9,10,13,15,19 Based on the results presented in this study, it is reasonable to suggest that Cln3 may relay cAMP signaling to the transport and/or secretion of vesicles that contain adhesion proteins. To support the aberrant adhesion of cln3 − cells and the subsequent delay in early development, we observed a reduction in the intracellular level of CsaA, which could not be easily explained by alterations in csaA expression or in the localization of the protein. These data suggest that Cln3 may be required for the trafficking of CsaA through the correct maturation pathway or for the turnover of the protein. In contrast to its effect on CsaA, Cln3-deficiency did not affect the expression or intracellular level of CadA, indicating that loss of Cln3 likely does not cause a global reduction in the levels of cell adhesion proteins. Previous work has shown that high levels of extracellular CadA have anti-adhesive effects, 64 suggesting that the increased level of extracellular CadA in cln3 − conditioned media contributed to the observed alterations in adhesion and aggregation. While the biological consequence of having more soluble CadA in conditioned media is not entirely clear, it is reasonable to suggest that increases in soluble CadA correlate with a reduction in the amount of CadA that is tethered to the cell membrane. Any such decreases would ultimately compromise cell-cell adhesion. Interestingly, CadA is presented to the cell surface and secreted via a non-classical transport pathway involving the CV system. 57,65 The protein localizes to the external surface of the plasma membrane and links to the membrane via the ABC transporter, AbcB4. 55,66 Coupled with the finding that GFP-Cln3 localizes predominantly to the CV system, these observations indicate that Cln3 may negatively affect CadA secretion. Alternatively, it is also possible that Cln3 may be required for the tethering of CadA to the cell membrane. Previous research has shown that alterations in CadA-mediated adhesion causes reductions in the level of CsaA. 67 Moreover, under conditions where CadA-mediated cell contact is reduced, manual pulsing of cells with cAMP cannot induce csaA expression. 67 These results may help to explain why manual pulsing of cln3 − cells with cAMP failed to correct the aberrant adhesion and aggregation. Moreover, while the expression of genes linked to cAMP signal transduction were normal in cln3 − cells compared to WT, our results do not rule out the possibility that activation of signaling components downstream of the cAMP receptor may be compromised. In total, these results suggest that the involvement of Cln3 in CadA-mediated cell adhesion warrants further investigation to gain a better insight into Cln3 function in Dictyostelium. Cell adhesion is known to play a very important role during all stages of the Dictyostelium life cycle. 41,45 Recent proteomic profiling of conditioned media from developing cells, and the ECM surrounding the multicellular tissue commonly referred to as the slug, revealed the presence of a number of proteins linked to adhesion. 58,59 Our previous study characterized Cln3-deficiency phenotypes during the mid-to-late stages of Dictyostelium development. 29 Specifically, loss of Cln3 caused precocious development and enhanced slug migration. 29 Based on the results presented in this study, an important question to now consider is whether aberrant adhesion also plays a role in the Cln3-deficiency phenotypes observed during the mid-to-late stages of development, or if the aberrant adhesion of cln3 − cells during early development sets the stage for later developmental phenotypes. The delay in the onset of cln3 − early development was interesting given our previous observation that cln3 − cells develop precociously following the formation of mounds. 29 While these results may seem contradictory, other Dictyostelium knockout mutants have also been shown to develop precociously for only some stages of the life cycle. Like cln3 − cells, loss of Png, which is involved in the degradation of misfolded glycosylated proteins, causes delayed aggregation, but precocious mid-to-late stage development. 68 Knockout of grlJ or pisA results in precocious development following aggregation. 69,70 Finally, knockout of iplA delays aggregation by 1–2 hours. 71 The observations that grlJ − and iplA − cells, which are linked to calcium homeostasis, display similar developmental timing as cln3 − cells was interesting given that altered calcium homeostasis has been observed in mammalian cell models that lack functional CLN3. 14,17,22 Calcium is an important signaling molecule throughout Dictyostelium development, and is required for a number of processes including migration, adhesion, and aggregation. 37,65,72-74 Our work has shown that Cln3-deficiency phenotypes observed during development can be suppressed by treating cells with the calcium chelator EGTA. 29 As discussed above, GFP-Cln3 localized primarily to the CV system during early development. The CV system in Dictyostelium is a major store of intracellular calcium. It is required for cAMP-induced calcium influx during chemotaxis, and is the organelle where calmodulin, the primary sensor of intracellular calcium predominantly localizes. 65,75,76 The findings presented in this study suggest that cln3 − cells may inappropriately buffer calcium from the environment, ultimately interfering with the local calcium transients that precede cAMP relay. 73 Together, these results provide further support for altered calcium homeostasis in cln3 − cells, and highlight the importance of analyzing the involvement of calcium in the function of Cln3 in Dictyostelium and in mammalian systems. In summary, we have shown that Cln3 is required for optimal adhesion and aggregation during early Dictyostelium development. The identification of early developmental phenotypes in Cln3-deficient cells, coupled with previous research showing aberrant mid-to-late stage development of cln3 − cells, suggests that future work in Dictyostelium may be able to provide fresh new insight into the primary function of CLN3. Materials and methods Dictyostelium cell lines, chemicals, and antibodies AX3 and cln3 − cells were grown and maintained at room temperature on SM agar with Klebsiella aerogenes. 77 Cells were also grown axenically at room temperature and 150 rpm in HL5 medium supplemented with ampicillin and streptomycin sulfate. cln3 − were maintained under selection with blasticidin S hydrochloride, while cell lines carrying the extrachromosomal vector pTX-GFP were maintained under selection with G418. 78 HL5 and low-fluorescence HL5 were purchased from Formedium. EGTA, cAMP, tunicamycin, and glutaraldehyde were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Mouse monoclonal anti-p80, 38 mouse monoclonal anti-CsaA, 49,50 mouse monoclonal anti-VatC, 36 and mouse monoclonal anti-tubulin were purchased from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank. Rabbit polyclonal anti-Rh50 37 was provided as a gift by Dr. Pierre Cosson. Rabbit polyclonal anti-CadA 79 was provided as a gift by Dr. Chi-Hung Siu. Rabbit polyclonal anti-CarA 80 was provided as a gift by Dr. Carole A. Parent. Mouse monoclonal anti-β-actin was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. All Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary antibodies were purchased from Life Technologies. Dictyostelium development Cells grown in HL5 were harvested in the mid-log phase of growth and washed 2 times with KK2 buffer. Washed cells were deposited in 4 individual droplets on black, gridded, cellulose filters overlaid on 4 Whatman #3 cellulose filters pre-soaked in KK2 buffer. Cells were maintained in a humidity chamber at room temperature in complete darkness. Structures were viewed and photographed with a Nikon SMZ800 microscope equipped with a SPOT Insight color camera 3.2.0. Images were captured with SPOT for Windows. After 9 hours, the number of mounds present in each 6 mm × 6 mm area where cells were deposited was scored for each of the 4 droplets and averaged by 4 to obtain a mean value for that experiment. Statistical significance was assessed in GraphPad Prism 5 using one-way ANOVA followed by the Bonferroni multiple comparison test. A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. Radial bioassay of Dictyostelium cAMP chemotaxis Chemotaxis toward cAMP was assessed using a radial bioassay. 81 Briefly, cells in the mid-log phase of growth were harvested from HL5, washed 2 times with KK2 buffer, and plated in 0.5 μl volumes on 0.5% agar/KK2 ± cAMP. Cell spots were imaged using a Nikon Eclipse TE2000-U microscope equipped with a Nikon Digital Sight DS-Qi1Mc digital camera. Images were viewed and analyzed using ImageJ. Statistical significance was assessed in GraphPad Prism 5 using the 2-sample t-test. A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. Analysis of cAMP chemotaxis and behavior during natural aggregation The behavior of WT and cln3 − cells in response to endogenously generated natural cAMP waves was analyzed. Cells starved for 6 hours in KK2 buffer were added dropwise to 750 ml of fresh KK2 buffer on a clean glass slide. Once mounds began to form, a small aliquot of freshly starved cells were deposited onto the slide, which was then placed on the stage of an Olympus IX81 inverted microscope and left undisturbed for 30 minutes to allow cells to settle. Brightfield images of chemotaxing cells were then acquired at 20 second intervals for 30 minutes with Image Pro Plus 7. Cell behavior was analyzed for motility parameters using the Image Pro Plus 2D Object Tracking tool. Chemotactic index was determined by calculating the net distance traveled in the direction of the aggregation territory divided by the total distance traveled. The average speed was also determined for each cell line. Experiments were performed in triplicate and the values represent the mean ± SD computed for the population of cells. Statistical significance was assessed using the 2-sample t-test. A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. Dictyostelium starvation and streaming assay Cells grown in HL5 and in the mid-log phase of growth were deposited in 6-well dishes and allowed to adhere to the surface for 2 hours. Cells were washed 2 times with KK2 buffer, and then starved in KK2 buffer while time-lapse movies capturing streaming and aggregation were taken with a Nikon Eclipse TE2000-U microscope equipped with a Nikon Digital Sight DS-Qi1Mc digital camera. Images and movies were captured and viewed with NIS Elements BR 3.0. The onset of cell de-adhesion from the substrate, cAMP wave pulsing, and cell migration toward aggregation centers was determined through visual analysis of the recordings. Adherent Dictyostelium cells appear dark and amoeboid, while detached cells appear white and rounded. The onset of de-adhesion was identified when all of the cells in the field-of-view appeared white and rounded. For cAMP pulsing experiments, cells were starved in KK2 buffer and incubated at room temperature and 150 rpm. cAMP was added to cell suspensions every 6 minutes to simulate the natural pulsing of cAMP. After 6 hours, an aliquot of cells was vigorously vortexed and placed on a glass slide. Cells were then imaged 30 minutes post-plating. Aggregation centers formed during starvation were imaged with a Nikon SMZ1500 stereomicroscope equipped with a Nikon Digital Sight DS-Fi1 digital camera. Images were captured and viewed with NIS Elements F Package. For analysis of protein levels during starvation, growth-phase cells and cells starved for 3 and 6 hours in KK2 buffer were harvested and lysed. Conditioned media from 6-hour starved cells was collected and filtered through a 0.45 µm filter unit. Proteins and equal volumes of conditioned media were separated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by western blotting. For analysis of the effect of tunicamycin on the level of CsaA protein during early development, cells were deposited in 6-well dishes and starved in KK2 buffer for 3 hours, after which time they were treated with either tunicamycin or DMSO. After an additional 3 hours of starvation, cells were imaged and lysed. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by western blotting. Statistical significance was assessed in GraphPad Prism 5 using the one-sample or 2-sample t-test. A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. Dictyostelium cell-substrate adhesion assay Cells grown in HL5 and in the mid-log phase of growth were deposited in 6-well dishes and allowed to adhere to the bottom of the dish for 2 hours. Cells were washed 2 times with KK2 buffer and then starved in KK2 buffer for 3 and 6 hours. At the onset of starvation, cells were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 0.5% NP-40, 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM sodium chloride and a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet. After 3 and 6 hours of starvation, the conditioned media was removed from the wells and replaced with fresh KK2 buffer. Plates were then spun at 150 rpm for 5 minutes at room temperature, after which time the KK2 buffer was removed from the wells, and cells were resuspended in lysis buffer. The total protein concentration of each lysate was measured using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit according to the manufacturer's instructions. Dictyostelium cell-cell adhesion assay Cell-cell adhesion was assessed using a protocol that has been described previously with modifications described below. 82 Cells grown in HL5 and in the mid-log phase of growth were washed 2 times with KK2 buffer and then resuspended in KK2 buffer at a concentration of 5 × 10 6 cells/ml. Cell suspensions were placed in 50 ml flasks, which were incubated at room temperature and shaken at 150 rpm. At the 0, 2, 4, and 6 hour time points, 2 ml were removed from each flask. Cells were spun down, resuspended in 1 ml of fresh KK2 buffer, and then vigorously vortexed. 400 µl of this cell suspension was then added to separate wells of a 12-well dish containing 400 µl of KK2 buffer ± EDTA. Dishes were spun at 150 rpm for 30 minutes at room temperature after which time 200 µl of 10% glutaraldehyde in KK2 buffer was added to each well. Dishes were spun for an additional 10 minutes after which time cell suspensions were removed from the wells and placed into 1.5 ml tubes. Tubes were gently inverted to resuspend the cells/aggregates and the number of single cells was then counted with a hemocytometer. Statistical significance was assessed in GraphPad Prism 5 using one-way ANOVA followed by the Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test. A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. For cAMP pulsing experiments, cells were starved in KK2 buffer and incubated at room temperature and 150 rpm. cAMP was added to cell suspensions every 6 minutes to simulate the natural pulsing of cAMP. After 6 hours, an aliquot of cells was placed on a glass slide. Cells were then imaged 10 minutes post-plating. Dictyostelium live cell imaging, fixation, and immunolocalization Cells were grown overnight on coverslips in low fluorescence HL5. Growth-phase cells, and cells starved for 3 and 6 hours in KK2 buffer, were fixed in either ultra-cold methanol or 4% paraformaldehyde, followed by immunolocalization using previously described methods. 83,84 The following primary and secondary antibodies were used: anti-VatC, anti-Rh50, anti-p80, anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 555, and anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 555. Coverslips were mounted on slides with Prolong gold anti-fade reagent with DAPI and sealed with nail polish. Fixed cells were imaged with a Zeiss Axioskop2 mot plus epifluorescence microscope equipped with a Zeiss AxioCam MRm digital camera. Merged images were generated using ImageJ. Immunolocalization of CarA and CsaA in WT and cln3 − cells during early development was performed using a previously described method. 85 Briefly, cells grown in HL5 and in the mid-log phase of growth were washed 2 times with KK2 buffer and then starved for 6 hours in KK2 buffer at room temperature and 150 rpm. After 6 hours, cell aliquots were incubated with the appropriate primary antibody on ice for 20 minutes. The cell-antibody mixture was vortexed every 5 minutes to disaggregate the cells. After 20 minutes, cells were spun down and washed 2 times with ice-cold KK2 buffer. Cells were then resuspended in secondary antibody solution containing a 1:500 dilution of either anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 or anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488. The cell-antibody mixture was incubated on ice for 20 minutes and vortexed every 5 minutes to disaggregate the cells. Cells were then spun down and washed 2 times with KK2 buffer. Cells were resuspended in fresh KK2 and placed on ice. An aliquot of cells was then placed on a slide, covered with a coverslip, and imaged immediately on a Zeiss Axioskop2 mot plus epifluorescence microscope equipped with a Zeiss AxioCam MRm digital camera. SDS-PAGE and western blotting Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by western blotting with anti-CarA, anti-CsaA, anti-CadA, anti-tubulin, and anti-β-actin. Immunoblots were digitally scanned using a GS800 Calibrated Densitometer scanner and Quantity One software. For each protein, the relevant bands from WT and cln3 − samples were quantified from the same blot with ImageJ. Protein levels were then normalized to β-actin levels. Statistical significance for CarA and CsaA protein level analysis was assessed using the 2-sample t-test. Statistical significance for CadA protein level analysis was assessed using the one-sample t-test. A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, and qPCR Cells grown in HL5 and in the mid-log phase of growth were starved in KK2 buffer at room temperature and 150 rpm. After 0, 2, 4, and 6 hours, cells were spun down, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C. Total RNA was extracted from frozen cell pellets using the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit according to the manufacturer's instructions. During RNA extraction, samples were treated with the RNase-Free DNase Set according to the manufacturer's instructions. cDNA was synthesized from total RNA using M-MuLV Reverse Transcriptase according to the manufacturer's instructions. qPCR was performed using the SsoFast EvaGreen Supermix and the CFX96 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System according to the manufacturer's instructions. Samples from 4 independent experiments were harvested. For each experiment, 3 technical replicates were performed for each primer pair. Data was analyzed using CFX Manager Software. Gene expression at each time point was normalized against the levels of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. The primers used for qPCR are found in Table 1. Table 1. Primers used for qPCR. Abbreviations AbcB4 ATP-binding cassette transporter B4 AcaA adenylyl cyclase A CadA cell adhesion molecule A CarA cAMP receptor A CLN3 ceroid-lipofuscinosis, neuronal 3 CM conditioned media CsaA contact site A CV contractile vacuole ECM extracellular matrix ER endoplasmic reticulum GpaI g-protein α 9 subunit GFP green fluorescent protein JNCL juvenile NCL NCL neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis PdsA cAMP phosphodiesterase A VatC vacuolar ATPase subunit C VatM vacuolar ATPase subunit M WT wild-type Funding This work was supported by a Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the National Institutes of Health: National Institute of Neurological Disorders & Stroke. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. Article information Cell Adh Migr. 2017; 11: 399–418. Published online 2016 Sep 26. doi: 10.1080/19336918.2016.1236179 PMCID: PMC5569969 PMID: 27669405 Robert J. Huber, a Michael A. Myre, b, † and Susan L. Cotman c, † Robert J. Huber a Department of Biology, Trent University, Peterborough, Ontario, Canada Find articles by Robert J. Huber Michael A. Myre b Department of Biological Sciences, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, Massachusetts, USA Find articles by Michael A. Myre Susan L. Cotman c Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Find articles by Susan L. Cotman a Department of Biology, Trent University, Peterborough, Ontario, Canada b Department of Biological Sciences, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, Massachusetts, USA c Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA CONTACT Robert J. Huber, Ph.D ac.utnert@rebuhtrebor, Trent University, Department of Biology, 2140 East Bank Drive, Peterborough, Ontario, Canada † These authors contributed equally. Received 2016 Jun 15; Revised 2016 Aug 23; Accepted 2016 Sep 6. Copyright © 2017 Taylor & Francis Articles from Cell Adhesion & Migration are provided here courtesy of Taylor & Francis 