 We describe a protocol to purify latex bead phagosomes from Dictyostelium cells. These can be later used for various in vitro functional assays. For instance, we use these LBPs to understand the microtubule motor-driven transport on in vitro polymerized microtubules. Phagosomes are allowed to mature for defined periods inside cells before extraction for in vitro motility. These assays allow us to probe how lipids on the phagosome membrane recruit and organize motors, and also measure the motion and force generation resulting from underlying lipid-motor interactions. This provides a unique opportunity to interrogate native-like organelles using biophysical and biochemical assays, and understand the role of motor proteins in phagosome maturation and pathogen clearance. Keywords: Phagosome maturation, Dynein, Kinesin, in vitro motility, Dictyostelium Background In vitro reconstitution of biological processes is important to understand the molecular components and mechanisms underlying them. One such process is phagosome maturation, which is involved in degradation of pathogens taken up by macrophage cells of the immune system, and is also used as a process of nutrition in lower eukaryotes. The transport of phagosomes on microtubules is intimately connected to their maturation. Notably, several intracellular pathogens disrupt phagosome transport to survive in a latent form inside cells. Therefore, reconstitution of phagosome transport might help to understand the strategy used by pathogens for immune evasion. Here, we describe a detailed protocol to prepare LBPs from cell extracts of the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. This protocol has been adapted and modified from the work by Gotthard et al.. Briefly, the cells are pulsed with latex beads and chased for different time durations to enable either early or late phagosome formation. Such phagosomes are buoyant in nature and float away from other endogenous vesicles when spun at high speeds. These phagosomes, collected along with the cytosol, show robust motion on in vitro polymerized microtubules. A detailed version of this protocol has also been published elsewhere. Using this method, we have recently shown cholesterol as a key regulator of phagosome transport and maturation. Furthermore, this assay has helped us to elucidate the mechanism of disruption of phagosome transport by lipophosphoglycan from the parasite Leishmania donovani. A description of the phagosome extract preparation from Dictyostelium cells is detailed below. This protocol describes only the purification of LBPs. The in vitro motility assay has been described elsewhere. Materials and Reagents Glass coverslip 1.5 ml microfuge tube Preassembled Acrodisc® syringe filters for lysing cells Syringes of 1-2 ml capacity for lysis 1 ml syringe with needle for collection of LBPs Dictyostelium discoideum AX-2 strain cells HL-5 medium for cell culture: HL-5 medium with glucose prepared according to manufacturer’s specifications Polystyrene beads: carboxylated polystyrene beads of 750 nm diameter Penicillin-streptomycin Protease inhibitor cocktail Liquid nitrogen for snap freezing Pepstatin A Methanol KH 2 PO 4 Na 2 HPO 4 Tris EGTA Sucrose DL-Dithiothreitol Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride Benzamidine hydrochloride Sorensen’s buffer Cell lysis buffer Centrifugation cushion buffer Equipment Rotatory shaker Differential Interference Contrast microscope Cell culture microscope with 10x and 20x objective for observing and counting cells Water bath sonicator Note: This product has been discontinued. Clinical centrifuge for pelleting cells Shaking incubator at 22 °C Autoclaved 500 ml conical flasks for shaking suspension culture Beckman Coulter centrifuge with JA-10 rotor JA-10 rotor Jars Beckman Coulter table top ultracentrifuge with MLS-50 rotor MLS-50 rotor Ultra-Clear centrifuge tubes Procedure Note: Steps mentioned in this protocol should be performed on ice in a walk-in cold room at 4 °C. In case of unavailability of such a room, all steps should be performed strictly on ice. Culturing of Dictyostelium cells Dictyostelium AX-2 cells are cultured in HL-5 suspension media with Penstrep at 22 °C and 150 rpm in a shaking incubator. The optimal cell density for phagosome extract preparation is between 4-8 x 10 6 cells/ml. A 100 ml suspension culture is usually sufficient for one preparation. Before each preparation a small aliquot of cells from the culture is put on a glass coverslip to observe motility of organelles inside cells under a 100x objective of a differential interference contrast microscope. A video for the intracellular motility is shown. Cells with poor intracellular motility and/or excess vacuoles are under stress, and should not be used. Vacuoles are easily observable as large membranous structures inside the cells. If cells appear healthy, before proceeding for the extraction procedure, it is required to perform the preparatory tasks as outlined in Note 3. Figure 1 Comparison of healthy versus unhealthy Dictyostelium cells. Video 1 Intracellular motility of organelles in Dictyostelium. Bead preparation The 750 nm bead stock solution mentioned in the materials section has a bead density of 1.08 x 10 11 particles/ml. 200 μl of the bead stock solution is taken in a 1.5 ml microfuge tube and beads are pelleted by centrifuging at 10,000 x g for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant is discarded and the bead pellet is resuspended in 1 ml of HL-5 medium. This washing step is repeated once more and the final bead pellet is resuspended in 500 μl of Sorensen’s buffer. In order to avoid clumping of beads, they are sonicated in a sonicating water bath for 10 min and kept on ice until further use. Cells are collected by centrifuging the suspension culture twice in a 50 ml Falcon tube at 900 x g for 3 min at room temperature. The cell pellet is immediately stored on ice and resuspended in 5 ml of ice-cold Sorensen’s buffer. Synchronization The washed bead solution is added to the cells and the bead-cell suspension is incubated at 4 °C for 20 min with gentle shaking on a rotatory shaker. Pulse After synchronization, the bead-cell suspension is added to 100 ml of HL-5 medium kept in a 500 ml conical flask at 22 °C to initiate bead uptake. The incubation is done at 22 °C and 150 rpm in a shaking incubator. To isolate early phagosomes, a pulse duration of 5 min is used. To isolate late phagosomes, the cells are pulsed with beads for 15 min. To stop the pulse, the 100 ml cell suspension is directly added to 330 ml of ice-cold Sorensen’s buffer kept in JA-10 centrifuge bottles. The cells are then pelleted by centrifuging them at 900 x g for 5 min at 4 °C in a Beckman JA-10 rotor. Chase The cell pellet is resuspended in 5 ml of ice-cold HL-5 medium and then added to 100 ml of HL-5 medium kept in a 500 ml conical flask at 22 °C to initiate the chase. For chase, the cells are incubated at 22 °C and 150 rpm in a shaking incubator. To isolate early phagosomes, no chase is needed and one can proceed directly to step 10 whereas to obtain late phagosomes, the cells are chased for 45 min to complete the process of phagosome maturation. Before chase period ends, we generally take 50 μl of cells on a coverslip to check whether the cells have phagocytosed beads and to ensure that LBPs are motile in vivo. Video 2 Motility of LBPs in Dictyostelium. To stop the chase, the cell suspension is directly added to 330 ml of ice-cold Sorensen’s buffer kept in JA-10 centrifuge bottles. The cells are then pelleted by centrifuging them at 900 x g for 5 min at 4 °C in a Beckman JA-10 rotor. Removal of non-phagocytosed beads After chase, the cell pellet is washed thrice with ice-cold Sorensen’s buffer to remove any non-phagocytosed beads. During each washing step, the cell pellet is resuspended in 50 ml of Sorensen’s buffer and centrifuged at 900 x g for 5 min at 4 °C. Cell lysis After the final washing step, the cell pellet is weighed and then resuspended in a 1:1 ratio of lysis buffer. The cell suspension is then lysed by one passage through a preassembled syringe filter containing a 5 μm pore size membrane. The cell lysate is collected in a microfuge tube and kept on ice. Lysis efficiency is examined on a coverslip using a 20x objective of the cell culture microscope. For optimal yield, 70-80% lysis of cells is desirable. Figure 2 Lysis of Dictyostelium cells using a 5 micron pre-assembled syringe filter. High speed centrifugation The cell lysate is then layered over a 1 ml cushion of LB/25% sucrose in a MLS-50 rotor tube and centrifuged in a Beckman MLS-50 rotor at 180,000 x g for 20 min at 4 °C. The LBPs, being more buoyant than other cell organelles and/or debris, do not pellet and are collected from the interface of the cell lysate and LB/25% sucrose as shown in Figures 3A and 3B. The top layer of the gradient is the cytosolic fraction. It is important to collect LBPs along with the cytosolic fraction otherwise their motility is compromised. Figure 3 Extraction of LBPs from cell lysate. Collection of LBPs A 1 ml syringe with needle is used to puncture the tube and phagosomes along with the cytosol are aspirated into the syringe. While transferring the aspirated solution from the syringe to a microfuge tube, it is important to remove the syringe needle otherwise the membrane might get disrupted. The phagosome/cytosol mixture is snap frozen in 36 μl aliquots in liquid nitrogen immediately after collection and stored in liquid nitrogen for up to a week. Each aliquot is rapidly thawed and used for one in vitro motility assay. Any unused thawed aliquot should be discarded. Notes While ordering Dictyostelium cells, it is recommended to order them as spores plated on SM agar plate. Spores are more resistant to temperature fluctuations that might occur during transportation. The cells can easily be revived from the spores by picking and adding them to fresh HL-5 media kept at 22 °C. HL5 media is autoclaved at 120 °C, 20 psi pressure for 20 min. It is essential to remove the medium from the autoclave at the end of the 20 min. If left in the autoclave for prolonged duration, the media caramelizes and is sub-optimal for cell culture usage. Following preparatory steps should be followed to perform the experiment in minimum amount of time: Keep centrifuges required at steps 7, 9, 10 and 12 at 4 °C Dispense 100 ml HL5 media in a 500 ml conical flask and pre-warm at 22 °C Dispense 330 ml 1x Sorensen’s buffer in a JA-10 jar and keep on ice. Bead stock solution should not be more than a year old. Phagosomes prepared from older bead stocks show reduced or no motility. Also, bead solution to be used for phagocytosis is prepared fresh before extraction. Stock solution of pepstatin A is prepared in methanol. It is highly recommended to not add glacial acetic acid to the solution as it compromises the motility of LBPs. It is important that the cell culture temperature is always maintained at 22 °C. Motility inside Dictyostelium cells is highly sensitive to temperature and a change of even 2-3 °C from the optimum can disrupt motility. It is important to maintain the range of optimal cell density for the extraction protocol. Over-confluent cells show reduced motility whereas cell count below the lower limit often leads to difficulty during syringe lysis of cells. In case of lower cell density, two 100 ml suspension cultures can be used provided cells from both the cultures show robust intracellular motility. Using cells from an over-confluent suspension is not recommended since the cells will begin the developmental phase of their life cycle. In vitro motion has only been characterized for LBPs isolated from vegetatively growing cells. Bead washing with HL-5 medium serves a dual purpose: It removes azide and other preservatives which are present in the bead stock solution. It coats the beads with a layer of HL-5 medium facilitating the process of bead uptake by cells during the phagocytosis step. Skipping this washing step therefore would lead to suboptimal phagocytosis and compromise the yield. Also, azide in the stock solution could potentially kill phagosome motility. Synchronization step at 4 °C causes attachment of beads onto the cell surface but does not allow the initiation of phagocytosis. Thus, when phagocytosis is allowed to begin at 22 °C it ensures a synchronized uptake of beads by cells. This is critical to isolate phagosomes in a stage-specific manner. It is crucial to strictly adhere to the pulse time duration, especially while isolating early phagosomes. In Dictyostelium, the early stage of phagosome maturation lasts for 5 min and any delay beyond this time point will cause a switch to late phagosome stage, which is also reflected in the phagosome motility. Improper washing of cells after pulse/chase leads to the presence of non-phagocytosed beads in the final phagosome extract. These beads cannot be distinguished from phagosomes under DIC microscope and are immotile during the motility assay. Hence, their presence can lead to a false conclusion of compromised phagosome motility. Cell lysis is the most crucial step in the extraction protocol. The success of this step is directly correlated with phagosome yield and the quality of phagosome motility. Therefore, it is imperative that this step be performed carefully. The total volume of the cushion and the cell lysate should at least be half of the maximum capacity of the ultra-centrifugation tube. Under circumstances when the above condition is not met, the cushion volume can be increased to 2 ml. Recipes Sorensen’s buffer 15 mM KH 2 PO 4 2 mM Na 2 HPO 4 Adjust pH to 6.0 Note: This buffer is used for washing of cells to remove media and non-phagocytosed beads. We prepare a 10x stock of this buffer, which is autoclaved and stored at 4 °C. Before each extraction, 1 L of 1x buffer is prepared and chilled for an hour before usage. Cell lysis buffer Ingredients Stock concentration Final concentration Tris-HCl 1 M 30 mM EGTA 200 mM 4 mM Sucrose - 30% Protease inhibitor cocktail 50x 2x Pepstatin A 1 mg/ml 20 μg/ml DTT 1 M 6 mM PMSF 200 mM 10 mM Benzamidine 320 mM 10 mM Open in a separate window Note: All stock solutions are prepared in ddH 2 O water if not stated otherwise. Stock solutions of protease inhibitor cocktail, pepstatin A and DTT stored at -20 °C; PMSF and Benzamidine stocks are prepared fresh. All of these are added to the buffer prior to the cell lysis step. It is important to carefully monitor the pH of this buffer. Deviations from pH 8.0 are detrimental for phagosome motility. Centrifugation cushion buffer Same composition as the cell lysis buffer except that it contains 25% sucrose instead of 30% sucrose 