 In recent years, Dictyostelium discoideum has become an important model organism to study the cell biology of professional phagocytes. This amoeba not only shares many molecular features with mammalian macrophages, but most of its fundamental signal transduction pathways are conserved in humans. The broad range of existing genetic and biochemical tools, together with its suitability for cell culture and live microscopy, make D. discoideum an ideal and versatile laboratory organism. In this review, we focus on the use of D. discoideum as a phagocyte model for the study of mycobacterial infections, in particular Mycobacterium marinum. We look in detail at the intracellular cycle of M. marinum, from its uptake by D. discoideum to its active or passive egress into the extracellular medium. In addition, we describe the molecular mechanisms that both the mycobacterial invader and the amoeboid host have developed to fight against each other, and compare and contrast with those developed by mammalian phagocytes. Finally, we introduce the methods and specific tools that have been used so far to monitor the D. discoideum — M. marinum interaction. Keywords: Dictyostelium discoideum, Mycobacterium marinum, host-pathogen interactions, model organisms, phagocytosis, infection, methods Introduction The amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum Dictyostelium discoideum is a soil amoeba that feeds on bacteria by phagocytosis. The Amoebozoa branch split from the common lineage leading to fungi and animals, shortly after these crown organisms split from the Plant lineage. D. discoideum has a very AT-rich haploid genome, organized into 6 chromosomes, which has been sequenced and annotated. The isolation in the 70's of axenic strains that could feed on liquid medium by pinocytosis enabled the easy laboratory culture of D. discoideum. In addition, this amoeba is genetically tractable, being relatively easy to transform for gene expression from extrachromosomal plasmids, generation of knockins, and knockouts by homologous recombination, and mutagenesis by Restriction Enzyme-Mediated Integration. Moreover, D. discoideum can be used in multiple cell biology, biochemistry, and imaging assays, as well as for high-throughput screens and RNAseq analysis. For these reasons, D. discoideum has been extensively used as a model system to study very diverse biological processes such as motility, chemotaxis, vesicular trafficking, gene expression, facultative multicellularity, and host-pathogen interactions. Central role of autophagy in development and host-microbe interaction In conditions of nutrient repletion, D. discoideum lives as a vegetative unicellular organism. However, when resources become scarce, the amoeba triggers a developmental program for the aggregation of hundreds of thousands of cells into a true multicellular organism. This process is known as the “developmental cycle” of D. discoideum and has been extensively studied as one of the evolutionary origins of multicellularity. Aggregation and morphogenesis during development require a high level of cellular activity. To undertake this metabolic demand in the absence of nutrients, D. discoideum relays on macroautophagy, a major catabolic pathway in eukaryotes. Non-selective autophagy consists of the engulfment of bulk cytosolic material in a double-membrane compartment called the autophagosome. Upon fusion with lysosomes, autolysosomes degrade, and recycle their content, enabling cell survival under starvation. One of the major regulators of autophagy is the target of rapamycin complex 1. Under nutrient repletion, TORC1 downregulates autophagy by repressing the expression of autophagy genes and/or by phosphorylation and inhibition of proteins involved in autophagosome formation. In D. discoideum, the TORC1 complex consists of the TOR serine/threonine kinase and two TOR activators, Lst8, and Raptor. Like in mammals, starvation decreases TORC1 activity, leading to induction of autophagy. Since many of the well-studied proteins known to participate in mammalian autophagy are conserved in this amoeba, autophagy can be easily monitored in D. discoideum. For instance, like in mammals, the activity of D. discoideum TORC1 can be analyzed by monitoring the phosphorylation state of Raptor and the TORC1 effector protein 4E-BP1 by immunoblotting. In addition, in D. discoideum also the changes in autophagosome formation can be distinguished from changes in autophagic degradation by the differential response of Atg18 and Atg8a. Accordingly, during induction of autophagosome formation Atg8 and Atg18 translocate from the cytosol to membranes of nascent and elongating phagophores. Immediately after closure of the autophagosome, Atg8 stays in both inner and outer membranes, while Atg18 dissociates. Upon fusion of the autophagosome with lysosomes, the hydrolytic enzymes delivered from the lysosome not only degrade the autophagic cargo but also the inner membrane of the autolysosome and its associated Atg8, while the Atg8 on the outside is recycled to the cytosol. In recent years, D. discoideum has also become an interesting model to study the molecular mechanisms regulating xenophagy. Xenophagy is a selective autophagy pathway specifically recognizing and digesting intracellular pathogens. It relies on selective receptors that recruit the cargo to be degraded to autophagic membranes. Several xenophagy receptors have been described in mammalian cells, but only one, p62, has been identified or studied so far in D. discoideum. In addition, although D. discoideum lacks galectins, which recognize bacterial or host membrane glycans, another family of cytosolic lectins in this amoeba, the discoidins, share many molecular and biological characteristics with galectins. Dsc are highly expressed upon starvation, bind to self-glycans during development and can be secreted to the extracellular medium. Interestingly, Dsc bind to sonicated extracts of Escherichia coli and Klebsiella aerogenes, as well as to glutaraldehyde-fixed K. aerogenes bacteria. Recent studies have revealed that Dsc are enriched on compartments containing virulent Legionella pneumophila strains but not the less virulent L. hackelieae, suggesting a role in innate immunity. Moreover, one ortholog of the human TRIM37, a member of the Tripartite Motif protein superfamily of autophagy receptors and regulators that often interact with galectins, has been identified in D. discoideum. It will be interesting to uncover whether or not Dsc, TRIM-like protein and p62 cooperate in the immunity of D. discoideum against pathogenic bacteria. The bacterial pathogen Mycobacterium marinum Mycobacterium is the only genus of the Mycobacteriaceae family. It comprises more than 150 different species, among them two of the most important human pathogens, M. leprae and M. tuberculosis, causing leprosy and tuberculosis, respectively. The latter represents the most severe bacterial diseases, responsible for 1.8 million deaths worldwide in 2015. One of the important features of Mtb is its capacity to persist inside its host in a non-replicating state with low metabolic activity. This phenomenon is called dormancy and affects 2–3 billion people. Latent tuberculosis is non-transmissible and presents no clinical manifestation. However, the disease reactivates in 5–10% of the cases usually as a consequence of immunosuppression, becoming contagious. Therefore, providing treatments to prevent the reactivation of latent tuberculosis is an important concern in the control of this disease. Mtb belongs to the group of genetically related mycobacteria, the Mtb complex, that cause tuberculosis in human or other animals. However, another group of human pathogens emerging as a major public health problem is the Non-Tuberculous Mycobacteria or Mycobacteria Other Than Tubercle bacilli, which includes among others the species M. ulcerans, M. abscessus, M. avium-intracellulare complex and M. marinum. In contrast to Mtb, with no environmental reservoir demonstrated so far, M. marinum is an intracellular pathogenic mycobacterium with ubiquitous distribution. It can be found in aquatic environments, and it affects a wide range of freshwater and marine vertebrates including fish, amphibians, and turtles. During infection of these animals, M. marinum forms granulomatous lesions highly similar to the ones produced by Mtb in humans. In addition, M. marinum also develops a latent disease in the zebrafish model. Very importantly, and reflecting their genetic proximity, M. marinum is also an opportunistic pathogen of humans, but due to its optimal growth at 30°C, M. marinum infections are mostly localized and restricted to the skin and extremities. These lesions are usually painless and can be treated with anti-Mtb antibiotics when healing is not spontaneous. At the cellular level, the infection course of M. marinum is also very similar to that of Mtb. Both bacteria avoid degradation within the host cells by arresting the maturation of their phagosomes and, contrary to the non-tuberculous M. avium, they escape to the host cytosol prior to dissemination. The genome of the M. marinum strain M was sequenced and annotated in 2008 by Stinear et al.. Whole genome comparisons revealed that M. marinum is the ancestor of M. ulcerans and that both species are the closest relatives of the Mtb complex. Among these species, M. marinum has the largest genome with 6.6 Mb, while the genome size of M. ulcerans and Mtb is 5.8 and 4.4 Mb, respectively. The genome of M. marinum shares 85% nucleotide identity with Mtb and 97% with M. ulcerans. Although phylogenetically and genetically close, Mtb and M. marinum present some differences such as the cell wall composition, the abundance of proline-glutamic acid polymorphic guanine-cytosine-rich sequence and proline-proline-glutamic acid proteins, and the synthesis of carotenoid pigments, which only occurs in M. marinum. Nevertheless, and more importantly, many virulence factors are conserved between M. marinum and Mtb. One example are the genes involved in dormancy. In addition, M. marinum and Mtb secrete virulence effector proteins through their complex cell walls thanks to very sophisticated secretion systems. In this context, the two mycobacteria possess five type VII secretion systems called ESX1-5, in reference to the first secreted factor identified ESAT6. The T7SS are not exclusive to mycobacteria and have been found in other bacterial genera such as Streptomyces and Bacillus. Despite their diversity, the T7SS share two common characteristics: the presence of FtsK/SpoIIIE transmembrane proteins and the secretion of small peptides of around 100 amino acids with the conserved motif Trp-X-Gly. The WXG motif is involved in the generation of a helix-turn-helix structure and is present in two of the most studied T7SS secreted peptides, the 6 kDa early secretory antigenic target ESAT6 and the 10 kDa culture filtrate protein CFP10. Each ESX system is encoded in its respective ESX cluster or locus, which also contains the genes for secreted peptides and other accessory proteins. The ESX loci do not complement each other, which suggests that they are involved in different functions. Only three of them have been shown to play a role in pathogenesis: ESX-1, 3, and 5. Whereas ESX-3 is required for iron and zinc acquisition, ESX-5 is involved in nutrient intake, cell wall integrity and secretion of PE and PPE proteins. The ESX-1 locus is the most studied, since it was shown to be very important for mycobacterial virulence. The attenuated M. microti and M. bovis BCG bacille Calmette–Guérin, used for vaccines, lack a partially overlapping region of the ESX-1 locus, which was called Region of Difference 1. This region comprises two genes that encode the above mentioned secreted peptides ESAT6 and CFP10. Early studies using transposon libraries and purified proteins identified ESX-1, and in particular ESAT6 and CFP10, as membranolytic factors in both Mtb and M. marinum. Importantly, the deletion of M. marinum RD1 can be complemented with homologous genes from Mtb, thus confirming the functional similarity of the RD1 regions in both species. Even though a 3.7 kb portion of M. marinum RD1 is partially duplicated within its genome, deletion of RD1 prevents M. marinum escape from its phagosome as occurs with Mtb, suggesting that the duplicated fragment of M. marinum is not functional. These pathologic, phylogenetic, and genomic aspects make of M. marinum an interesting model to study mycobacterial infections. Importantly, M. marinum also has advantages for laboratory work. Despite the fact that this species is considered a slow growing mycobacterium, M. marinum grows faster than Mtb, with a doubling time of 6–8 h vs. the 20–24 h of Mtb. Furthermore, M marinum is a level 2 biosafety organism, and numerous molecular tools are available and transposable from Mtb to M. marinum, and vice versa. The D. discoideum — M. marinum infection model D. discoideum has been used to study conserved mechanisms of bacterial pathogenicity and host defenses involved in many human diseases induced by diverse bacteria genera such as Francisella, Legionella, Salmonella, or Mycobacterium. In both D. discoideum and human phagocytes, the main cell-autonomous defenses rely on the highly conserved microbicidal machinery that arms the phagosome. This includes a number of genes and pathways involved in bacteria recognition, phagocytic uptake, actin dynamics, phagosome identity, acidification and maturation, lysosomal degradation, production of Reactive Oxygen Species, metal poisoning and nutrition immunity. The ability of M. marinum to replicate within D. discoideum was first described in 2003. Solomon and collaborators monitored monolayers of D. discoideum infected with GFP-producing M. marinum at 25.5°C, a temperature optimal for the joint growth of host and bacterium. For these long-term infection assays, and to avoid rapid host cell death, D. discoideum needs to be infected at low multiplicity of infection. After an initial incubation without antibiotics, to allow the phagocytosis of M. marinum, streptomycin was added to the infection sample to impede the growth of extracellular bacteria. In this first approach, the increased growth of M. marinum was assessed by direct observation, but other quantitative methods such as luminescence recording, fluorescence-activated cell sorting and colony-forming units counting have confirmed the intracellular proliferation of this bacterium within D. discoideum, both in static and shaking cultures. Other antibiotics such as amikacin or a mix of penicillin and streptomycin can be used to kill the extracellular M. marinum when performing infection assays in D. discoideum. The presence of extracellular bacteria in the infection sample can be tested by incubating live cells with an anti- M. marinum serum and performing immunofluorescence assays ; Only the extracellular bacteria, and not those inside the amoeba, are accessible to the serum. M. marinum infection course in D. discoideum The infection cycle of M. marinum in D. discoideum starts with the phagocytosis of the bacterium by the amoeba, and finishes with the bacterial egress from the cell. 1 ). Three different growth stages of M. marinum can be distinguished during the infection cycle: an initial phase during the first 12 h post-infection, when M. marinum actively manipulates the D. discoideum phagocytic pathway to convert the phagosome where it resides into a replication-permissive niche, an enhanced proliferation phase between 12 and 37 hpi, and a phase of arrested proliferation and/or decreased bacterial load due to bacterial death or release after 37 hpi. This infection cycle might be impacted by the number of bacteria initially taken up. When a single amoeba internalizes a clump of bacteria, the M. marinum clump either cannot initiate its intracellular growth, remaining in a dormant or undigested state as occurs in zebrafish, or causes cytotoxicity to D. discoideum. Figure 1 M. marinum infection course in D. discoideum. M. marinum is phagocytosed by D. discoideum and rapidly manipulates its phagocytic pathway to reside within a replicative niche. The ESX-1 secretion system of M. marinum perforates the MCV, which... Table 1 M. marinum infection stages in D. discoideum and methods used for their analysis. Early M. marinum infection phase During uptake, M. marinum is surrounded by a circular ruffle and ingested into a newly produced phagosome. 2 ). The engulfment of the bacterium by the tight phagocytic cup has been observed by microscopy of live and fixed cells, using markers of the actin cytoskeleton of D. discoideum. In addition, phagocytosis of GFP-producing or Alexa 488 hydrazide-labeled M. marinum has been quantitatively monitored by flow cytometry. It is important to notice that the labeling of surface amines with Alexa Fluor 488-tetrafluorophenyl ester, normally used for other bacteria such as Klebsiella pneumoniae or Salmonella enterica, is not suitable for M. marinum, presumably due to its extremely hydrophobic and poor-in-proteins cell wall. Figure 2 Establishment of the MCV during the first 12 h of infection. M. marinum is engulfed by an F-actin-positive phagocytic cup, resulting in an early phagosome that likely fuses sequentially with early and late endosomes. Rab5a is rapidly recycled from the... Ten minutes after phagocytosis, the early endosomal marker Rab5a is withdrawn from the M. marinum phagosome, compared to 3 min for the non-pathogenic M. smegmatis. Subsequently, the late endosome and lysosome marker Rab7a is detected at the early MCV, as occurs in macrophages. However, M. marinum rapidly bypasses the phagocytic pathway and blocks the maturation of its compartment. Thus, late maturation markers such as vacuolin and cathepsin D are absent from the MCV from 0.3 to 6 hpi, and the vacuolar H + -ATPase is almost undetectable on the MCV at the end of this infection phase 2 ). In this context, and contrary to M. smegmatis, only a small percentage of the phagocytosed M. marinum are killed by D. discoideum within the first hours, even in conditions of mild starvation that stimulate autophagy. It has been shown that actin polymerization is required for the efficient maturation arrest of the M. marinum MCV during early infection of D. discoideum. Thus, Arp2/3 and WASH, two complexes involved in actin nucleation and polymerization on endosomal membranes, can be observed in increasing association with the MCV from 0 to 6 hpi. 2 ). This is concomitant with the presence of a patchy F-actin coat covering the MCV and with the absence of VatA, a peripheral subunit of the vATPase, on the same MCV at 6 hpi. On the contrary, amoebae either treated with the inhibitor of actin polymerization latrunculin A, producing a fusion construct between VacA and the actin-depolymerizing factor cofilin, or lacking the WASH complex harbor actin-negative MCVs which accumulate VatA and VatM, while losing the endocytic marker p80. Interestingly, p80 is not lost from the phagosome containing M. smegmatis and the avirulent mutant M. marinum L1D. In agreement with the LatA-dependent accumulation of the vATPase on MCVs, LatA treatment also leads to acidification of the bacterial compartment, resulting in decreased bacteria viability. Interestingly, actin polymerization also prevents the acidification of the M. marinum and Mtb phagosomes in murine phagocytes. In addition to Arp2/3 and WASH, the D. discoideum homolog of mammalian flotillin, vacuolin B, is also essential for the establishment of the MCV, assisting M. marinum in the retrieval of the vATPase from its niche. On the contrary, the small GTPase RacH of D. discoideum contributes to the maturation of the MCV into phagolysosomes, reducing the intracellular bacterial load. It has to be noticed that M. marinum does not interfere with the contractile vacuole of D. discoideum. This osmoregulatory organelle consists of interconnected vesicles, cisternae and tubules that fuse with the plasma membrane to expel the excess of water ingested during macropinocytosis and maintain cell volume. The contractile vacuole accumulates Rab11 GTPase, vATPase, and calmodulin, but the latter does not localize to the MCV. In addition, tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate -dextran, which labels the endolysosomal system but not the contractile vacuole, can be found inside the MCV. M. marinum proliferation phase After establishment as a replication-permissive niche, the MCV becomes more spacious. 1 ). It still harbors Rab7a and, as occurs in human monocytes, it accumulates the post-lysosomal marker vacuolin/flotillin. On the contrary, VatA association with MCVs significantly decreases. Intriguingly, WASH contributes to M. marinum growth, and the WASH and Arp2/3 complexes can be observed at the MCV at 24 hpi. However, the F-actin coat of the MCV is almost completely lost and treatment with LatA does not alter the association of p80 or VatA with the MCV. Kil2, a D. discoideum P-type ATPase involved in intra-phagosomal killing of Klebsiella, does not play any role in the establishment of the MCV nor in M. marinum intracellular replication. In addition, the D. discoideum homolog of coronin, a mammalian protein involved in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton that positively modulates intracellular mycobacterial growth in macrophages, appears heterogeneously localized at the MCV but seems to negatively regulate the uptake or early survival and proliferation of M. marinum. These data suggest that other host factors must be responsible for the support of the M. marinum intracellular replication in this amoeba. One of the bacterial effectors required for the successful proliferation of M. marinum within D. discoideum is MAG24-1, a PE-PGRS protein also essential for replication in mammalian macrophages, frogs and flies. Actually, due to its role in intracellular growth, MAG24-1 can be used as a tool to monitor the proliferation of M. marinum mutant strains in D. discoideum by simply following the expression of GFP under the control of the mag24-1 promoter in bacteria carrying the map24::GFP vector. Another factor essential for optimal M. marinum intracellular growth is the ESX-1 secretion system, responsible for the rupture of the phagosomes containing M. marinum and its release into D. discoideum cytosol at the end of this infection phase. Mtb and M. avium can be seen in D. discoideum within spacious compartments that accumulate vacuolin but, contrary to Mtb, the ESX-1-deficient M. avium does not escape its MCV. A functional ESX-1 is important for optimal M. marinum proliferation, and the exogenous expression of M. marinum ESAT-6 in D. discoideum rescues the inefficient intracellular replication of ΔRD1 bacteria. The role of ESX-1 in phagosomal escape and intracellular proliferation of M. marinum and Mtb has also been described in mammalian cells. In addition to ESX-1, other mycobacterial factors have been shown to contribute to phagosomal rupture. The mycobacterial cell wall components phthiocerol dimycocerosates have been revealed essential for ESAT-6 activity, suggesting some sort of cooperativity not yet understood. The D. discoideum ammonium transporter AmtA is a useful marker to determine whether or not mycobacteria are inside a compartment, since its fluorescent versions ubiquitously localize to all the endosomes and the MCV. Methods based on fluorescence resonance energy transfer, such as FRET-based microscopy or flow cytometry, have been performed in macrophages infected with Mtb and M. marinum to detect the mycobacteria-mediated phagosome disruption. Late M. marinum infection phase After 37 hpi, when M. marinum has escaped its MCV, the intracellular bacterial load stabilizes and even decreases. This might be the result of the convergence between recapture and killing of cytosolic bacteria in lytic compartments, and the release of the bacteria to the extracellular medium or neighboring cells. 1 ). Events of recapture have not been reported so far in D. discoideum, but in macrophages cytosolic M. marinum is ubiquitinated and recaptured into non-autophagic double membrane compartments. It was proposed that ESCRT, a protein machinery that sorts ubiquitinated cargo to degradation into intraluminal vesicles, would deliver these bacteria to multivesicular bodies and finally to lysosomes, but the bactericidal activity of these putative recapture compartments was not established. Regarding release, and as a consequence of the wide range of strategies used by bacteria to survive and replicate within their hosts, multiple egress strategies have emerged in the course of evolution. 1 ). In some cases, egress implies the disruption of one or several host membranes, which may lead to the host cell death. Mycobacteria modulate the death of their host cells, inducing apoptotic or necrotic processes with different biological implications. These processes vary depending on the mycobacterial species, host cell types, and infection stage. In this context, many studies have associated ESX-1 activity and mycobacterial vacuolar escape to an increased host cell cytotoxicity and death. Thus, incubation with purified ESAT-6, as well as infection with wild-type Mtb and M. marinum but not with ΔRD1 mutant bacteria, lyse epithelial and red blood cells and macrophages. This is of special relevance since mycobacterial egress from its host might influence spread of the infection in a tissue. Similarly, by using a microfluidic device to microscopically monitor single-cell long-term infection in D. discoideum, it has been shown that a quarter of the phagocytosed M. marinum induces death and lysis of the amoebae, contributing to bacteria release. Alternative non-lytic mechanisms of bacterial egress also occur during mycobacterial infection in D. discoideum. For instance, release of M. marinum within the first hours of infection, when most of the bacilli are still intravacuolar, thereby suggesting an exocytic process, can be induced by mild starvation of D. discoideum. This phenomenon is likely akin to the known massive exocytosis of lysosomal enzymes that D. discoideum undergoes upon starvation. In addition, bacterial ejection occurs at later time points once mycobacteria have escaped the MCV and accessed the host cytosol. During ejection, M. marinum and Mtb, but not the ESX-1-deficient M. avium, use the actin cytoskeleton of D. discoideum to form an actin-based short barrel structure formed at the plasma membrane, called the ejectosome, through which they exit the cell. In this context, some D. discoideum actin-binding proteins such as coronin and myosin IB are enriched at the ejectosome. In addition, ejection cannot occur in amoebae lacking the actin polymerization complex WASH. Strikingly, other markers of the actin cytoskeleton such as the actin nucleator complex Arp2/3 and myosin II are not enriched at the ejectosome, suggesting that this structure may assemble de novo during ejection. It has been proposed that the D. discoideum plasma membrane reseals at the posterior of the bacterium after ejection, preventing the amoebal lysis or leakage. Exclusion of DAPI from the nuclei of live amoebae during ejection demonstrates that M. marnium does not kill or induce leakage of its host while egressing by this mean. Exocytosis and ejection can be discriminated by fluorescence microscopy with various D. discoideum markers. For instance, only during exocytosis the intracellular pole of the egressing bacterium is positive for endosomal and MCV markers such as p80 and vacuolins. In addition, the extracellular part of the exocytosed bacterium is free of any plasma membrane marker. On the contrary, upon ejection, extracellular Mtb and M. marinum are wrapped in plasma membrane remnants positive for p80 or PM4C4. Clumps of bacteria can be exocytosed, but ejectosomes, which are often observed to form clusters, only release individual bacteria. Once bacteria exit the cell, neighboring cells might become new hosts. Within macrophages, a subpopulation of cytosolic M. marinum sheds its ubiquitinated cell wall possibly to avoid recapture into lysosomes. These bacteria induce the polymerization of actin tails and spread via actin-dense filopodia that can be caught by other cells. However, and presumably due to the high rates of actin turnover, cytosolic M. marinum does not form persistent actin tails in D. discoideum, but events of cell-to-cell transmission synchronized with actin-based ejection are observed. D. discoideum RacH, mentioned before to contribute to the maturation of the MCV, also assists M. marinum in its release from the amoeba and the subsequent intercellular dissemination. Accordingly, ejection of M. marinum is not observed in racH -cells, and the population of infected racH - amoebae almost fully retain all bacteria until 37 hpi. In agreement with these results, quantitative dissemination assays have confirmed the positive role of RacH in M. marinum cell-to-cell spread. In these fluorescence microscopy assays, an unlabeled donor D. discoideum strain was infected with red fluorescent M. marinum, and a wt acceptor strain expressing GFP was added to the infection after 12 h. Transmission from racH - infected cells to wt cells was reduced over eight-fold. M. marinum induces membrane damage that is counteracted by D. discoideum Rupture of host membranes by bacterial pathogens is achieved by the well-orchestrated secretion of lipases, proteases and pore-forming toxins. This is the case of vacuolar bacteria such as Mycobacterium, Shigella, Listeria, or Salmonella, which escape to the host cytosol via the disruption of their vacuole. Although the membranolytic activity of the mycobacteria ESX-1 secretion system is widely accepted, it has been proposed that ESX-1-dependent membrane disruptions do not require ESAT-6 activity in physiological conditions in macrophages. Instead, the perforations would occur upon direct contact of Mtb and M. marinum ESX-1 with host MCV membranes, which would confine the membranolytic activity to the bacterial poles, where the ESX-1 is enriched. Incompatible with this proposed model, M. marinum mutants specifically lacking only ESAT-6 and CFP10 in an otherwise intact RD1 locus are defective in hemolysis, cytolysis, and cytotoxicity. Similarly, the virulent Mtb H37Rv strain with a 12 amino acids deletion in ESAT-6 shows impaired membranolytic activity in the THP-1 human macrophages. Regarding CFP10, it has been shown that the protein dissociates from ESAT-6 in acidic conditions similar to those encountered within the phagosome, and it does not disrupt artificial liposomes on its own. As a consequence, CFP10 has been proposed to act as a chaperone of ESAT-6, conferring stability or protection against proteases. Despite the fact that the structures of ESAT-6 and CFP10 have been solved, it is not yet well-understood how ESAT-6 induces membrane disruptions. Perforation and repair of the MCV membrane at early time points M. marinum resides inside a phagosome that shields it against the host intracellular immune responses but limits nutrient access. Maybe as a reaction, the bacterium creates a porous vacuole which might appear ideal to obtain unrestricted access to nutrients. Indeed, very early during infection of D. discoideum, M. marinum induces ESX-1-dependent damages in the MCV membrane, which results in the decoration of cytosol-exposed bacteria with Ub already at 1.5 hpi. This MCV membrane damage leads to a well-orchestrated early autophagic response consisting in: transient downregulation of TORC1 and upregulation of transcription of autophagy genes such as atg1, the two paralogs atg8a and atg8b, and p62, enhanced formation of autophagosomes, and recruitment of the xenophagy machinery to the damaged MCV. These responses to MCV damage are significantly reduced or even abolished when M. marinum lacks the RD1 locus and, more specifically, ESAT-6 and CFP-10. However, contrary to the increased bacterial killing expected from an enhanced xenophagic response, M. marinum survives and proliferates within D. discoideum by blocking the autophagic flux and its subsequent degradation within autolysosomes. Once again, the main player involved in this blockage is the mycobacterial ESX-1 secretion system, also shown to block the autophagic flux in human cells infected with Mtb. Along these lines, even though 40–50% of the early M. marinum MCVs are positive for the autophagosomal marker Atg8a and for markers of acidic compartments, and assuming that the presence of Rab7 on the MCV should ensure fusion with late endosomes and lysosomes, the MCVs containing wt bacteria are devoid of lysosomal enzymes and degradative activity, as demonstrated by the lack of cathepsin D and proteolysis-dependent DQ-Green BSA fluorescence. This suggests that the ESX-1-induced membrane damage make MCVs leaky for hydrolytic enzymes. This MCV leakage, together with the retrieval of the vATPase, and possibly hydrolases, by WASH- and Arp2/3-dependent polymerization of actin, 2 ], would affect both autophagic flux and killing of mycobacteria. Interestingly, depletion of hydrolases from the acidic Salmonella -containing compartment has already been described, although the mechanism is different. Salmonella subverts the Rab9-dependent retrograde trafficking of mannose-6-phosphate receptors in human cells, which results in fusion of the SCV with lysosomes that are reduced in hydrolytic enzymes. The membrane damage inflicted by Salmonella induces an amino acid starvation response in the host cell that inhibits TOR and induces autophagy and membrane repair, leading to the normalization of the amino acid levels and the reactivation of TOR at the surface of SCVs. Interestingly, it has been recently shown that mammalian TRIM16, a member of the TRIM family, recognizes the endomembrane perturbations induced by Mtb ESX-1 and affects TORC1 activity, inducing autophagy to protect macrophages from damage. The role of autophagy in mediating membrane repair during D. discoideum infection with M. marinum has also been recently proposed. After downregulation of TORC1 and induction of the autophagic response mentioned above, D. discoideum Lst8 and two TORC1 activators, the Rheb GTPase and Lamtor1 localize to damaged MCVs coinciding with reactivation of TORC1 at 7 hpi. 2 ). In addition, EM inspection of infected amoebae lacking the major autophagy initiator Atg1 reveals that most bacteria escape very early to the cytosol, followed by a striking increased load of highly ubiquitinated cytosolic bacteria that cannot be degraded by xenophagy. This suggests that the autophagy pathway of D. discoideum is required for the repair of the MCV membranes, preventing the escape of mycobacteria to the cytosol. It remains unclear why M. marinum accelerates its growth only after 24 hpi in the atg1 -amoebae. One plausible explanation is that autophagy would not only recognize damage and repair the MCV, but it could also provide M. marinum with cytoplasmic nutrients such as membranes and lipid droplets by the fusion of autophagosomes with the MCV. D. discoideum plasma membrane damage and sealing at later time points Despite the function of autophagy in membrane repair during early infection, most M. marinum bacilli are able to break completely their MCV and finally access the D. discoideum cytosol. As previously described, M. marinum perforates the plasma membrane of D. discoideum to egress through an actin-based ejectosome. The ESX1 secretion system, and more specifically secreted ESAT-6, are required for ejection of the bacteria. This is demonstrated by restoration of ejection of the ΔRD1 mutant by ectopic expression of M. marinum ESAT-6 in D. discoideum. Despite this perforation, the integrity of the D. discoideum plasma membrane is continuously maintained during and after ejection by the autophagy machinery. 1 ). This is necessary to avoid lytic cell death and to improve cell-to-cell transmission of the bacteria. Accordingly, the autophagosomal markers Atg8, GFP-p62, and Ub are present at a pocket formed around the intracellular distal pole of ejecting M. marinum. On the contrary, GFP-Atg18 and GFP-2xFYVE, two reporters of expanding phagophores, are less or rarely present, respectively. This, together with the fact that the transcription levels of autophagy genes remain unchanged at these late stages of infection, suggest that M. marinum exploits pre-formed autophagosomes during its ejection. The core autophagy machinery of D. discoideum is required for the recruitment of Atg8 to the distal pole of ejecting M. marinum. Strikingly, atg1 - cells can form the actin-based structure of ejectosomes, but these are not functional for cell-to-cell transmission. In addition, the selective receptor p62 is not required for the recruitment of Atg8 to the ejecting bacterium. This, together with the fact that M. marinum grows normally within p62 -cells, suggest that alternative autophagy receptors might exist in D. discoideum. Interesingly, the ESX-1 secretion system, which induces the recruitment of autophagic markers to bacteria escaping the MCV, does not play a role in the localization of Atg8 to bacteria during ejection. This was shown by co-infecting cells with wt and either M. marinum ΔRD1 or the non-pathogenic M. smegmatis. In these cells both bacteria form ejectosomes and recruit Atg8 to their distal pole. M. marinum exploits D. discoideum lipids Inside their hosts, pathogens are restricted to a limited supply of nutrients. For instance, to drive proliferation, intracellular bacteria need to exploit a suitable energy source. In recent years, it has become evident that Mycobacterium spp. access host lipids to gain energy via β-oxidation and the glyoxylate shunt. The importance of lipids for Mtb, but also for other Mycobacterium spp., is supported by the high number of genes harbored in the Mtb genome and required for lipid and fatty acid metabolism. The encoded proteins have diverse roles in cell wall synthesis, formation of intracytosolic lipid inclusions and production of energy. Strikingly, 100 of these genes exclusively encode proteins involved in the five reactions of β-oxidation. Interestingly, the chromosome of M. marinum is 50% larger than the one of Mtb, which is also reflected by a higher number of genes involved in lipid metabolism. For instance, the genome of M. marinum encodes 32 fadD acyl-CoA synthase paralog, compared with 23 in Mtb. This larger genome likely reflects the capacity of M. marinum to infect and produce a tuberculosis-like disease in a larger range of environmental hosts compared to Mtb. Lipid droplets are recruited to the MCV during the early infection phase Despite the increasing evidence pointing to a central role of lipids during Mtb infection, the basic cellular mechanisms by which pathogenic mycobacteria exploit host lipids are still poorly understood. One of the major characteristics of tuberculosis is the appearance of foamy macrophages during chronic infection. The accumulation of LDs that leads to the foamy characteristics of the respective host cells was observed during Mtb infection, but also in infections with M. bovis and M. leprae. By using D. discoideum as a model for foamy macrophages, it was recently shown that host LDs move to the MCV within minutes after phagocytosis. The clustering of host LDs at the MCV can be monitored by live microscopy using Bodipy 493/503 as a neutral lipid marker for LDs that were induced by feeding cells with exogenous FAs prior to infection. We propose that host LDs might be translocated into the MCV by a process similar to lipophagy, a selective autophagy pathway for LDs, or by a fusion-like process similar to that observed in a macrophage/ M. avium infection model system. In analogy to LD-bilayer or LD-LD fusion, the phospholipid monolayer of an LD might first fuse with the outer leaflet of the MCV membrane leading to the release of the hydrophobic core lipids into the membrane bilayer of the MCV. In a second step, a new LD-like structure might bud into the lumen of the MCV. Figure 3 Lipid distribution and re-arrangement during infection. Soon after bacteria uptake, host lipid droplets are clustered around the MCV. Indicates the possibility of LDs capture and translocation... Host lipid distribution at the M. marinum proliferation phase At later infection stages, LD-like structures disappear, but neutral lipids and sterols, which can be detected by Bodipy 493/503 and filipin staining, are homogenously distributed within the MCV. Interestingly, these observations are in agreement with the fact that mycobacteria are one of the rare species able to catabolize host sterols and, more precisely, cholesterol. By labeling D. discoideum with Topfluor-Lysophosphatidylcholine, a fluorescent phospholipid precursor, it was observed by live microscopy that host phospholipids accumulate at the membranes of the MCV, most likely by standard membrane trafficking. Strikingly, intravacuolar bacteria accumulate considerably more ILIs when D. discoideum cells are treated with exogenous FAs. Not only the FAs released from host triacylglycerols but also those from phospholipids are used by M. marinum for ILI formation. This was shown by thin layer chromatography using a D. discoideum dgat1/2 double mutant, which is depleted in both diacyglycerol O-acyltransferases Dgat1 and Dgat2. This mutant shuttles excessive lipids into phospholipids, and does not synthesize TAGs and generate LDs. Interestingly, by measuring bacteria growth with the help of high-content microscopy and a luminescence-based assay, it was observed that M. marinum growth was unaffected in the dgat1/2 double mutant leading to the conclusion that host phospholipids can successfully substitute for host TAGs. The transfer of host lipids to the intracellular pathogen can also be monitored by live-cell microscopy. To this end, host cells are labeled with Topfluor-LysoPC prior to infection. Strikingly, fluorescently-labeled host phospholipids become first enriched at the membrane of the MCV 10 min post-infection, and inside the bacteria at 21 hpi. Consequently, it was proposed that host lipids are transferred to the MCV by membrane trafficking and then further processed by bacterial or host phospholipases to facilitate uptake of FAs into the bacteria. Recently, the question whether Mtb has enzymes to successfully cleave/hydrolyse host lipids was addressed. The authors propose that host lipids are cleaved by Msh1, which is upregulated upon hypoxic conditions, and secreted into the host cytosol, where it hydrolyses TAGs. For M. marinum, it has been shown that the formation of ILIs depends on its type VII secretion system ESX-5, presumably thanks to the absorption of nutrients such as FAs through membrane porins or channels that are formed into the outer membrane of M. marinum by this ESX-5 apparatus. In the case of Mtb, FAs are transported into the bacteria via the mammalian cell entry 1 complex and LucA that interacts with subunits of the complex and coordinates its activity, and which is required for full virulence of Mtb in vivo. The reason why intracellular mycobacteria accumulate ILIs during infection is so far poorly understood. One possibility is that these bacteria use ILIs as an energy source. For instance, it has been shown that in macrophages infected with M. avium and without any additional fat source, LDs are rapidly depleted from the macrophages, immediately followed by ILIs depletion from the pathogens. Moreover, with the help of an in vitro dormancy model, it was proposed that M. bovis BCG uses the TAGs released from ILIs as an energy source during reactivation from dormancy. In addition, when the synthesis of TAGs is inhibited in Drosophila melanogaster, the accumulation of host LDs induced by M. marinum infection is also prevented, and the mycobacteria-LDs association, as well as the number of intracellular viable M. marinum, are reduced. Furthermore, ILI-rich mycobacteria have been shown to be more tolerant to rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol, and ciprofloxacin. Finally, an antioxidant role of LDs was proposed recently. Importantly, host lipids might not only be used by these bacteria as an energy source but also as building blocks for cell wall lipids. The core of the mycobacterial cell wall consists of mycolic acids that are esterified to arabinogalactan polysaccharides, which are in turn covalently attached to a peptidoglycan backbone. This core structure serves as anchor for extractible “free lipids” such as PDIMs and phenolic glycolipids. One unique feature of pathogenic Mycobacterium spp. is their antibiotic resistance that is conferred by the “mycomembrane,” the impermeable lipid bilayer that is formed by the mycolic acids and the free lipids. During infection, PDIMs are involved in Mtb uptake, block of phagosomal maturation and acidification arrest, in escape to the cytosol and egress from the host cells. In addition, PDIMs are essential for the multiplication and persistence of Mtb in the lungs of infected mice, and Mtb strains inhibited in PDIM synthesis are more susceptible to killing by an early innate host response. Corroborating this, it has been demonstrated that FAs released from host LDs are used by Mtb to synthesize PDIMs. PDIMs are also implicated in the virulence of M. marinum. Like Mtb in macrophages, M. marinum synthesizes PDIMs from FAs released from D. discoideum LDs and phospholipids. To monitor lipid transfer from the host to the pathogen, D. discoideum lipids can be labeled by using fluorescent FAs such as Bodipy 558/568 C12 or Topfluor-LysoPC prior to infection. The incorporation of the fluorescent label into D. discoideum and M. marinum lipids can be detected by TLC and fluorescent lipid species can be identified with the help of fluorescent standard lipids. A transposon insertion in the M. marinum tesA gene, encoding a putative type II thioesterase, leads to an altered cell wall without PDIMs and PGLs and the subsequent lack of the permeability barrier. As a consequence, the M. marinum tesA mutant is attenuated in D. discoideum and in zebrafish embryos. Inhibitor and gene mutations altering the PDIMs and PGLs of M. marinum affect its virulence in D. discoideum and adult zebrafish, respectively. In addition, Cambier et al., elegantly described how Mtb and M. marinum preferentially recruit and infect permissive macrophages while microbicidal ones are evaded. This bypass of the innate immune system was proposed to be the result of cell-surface-associated PDIMs hiding underlying pathogen-associated molecular patterns. LD proteins target cytosolic M. marinum at late infection phases At later infection stages, LD proteins such as the D. discoideum homolog of perilipin as well as Dgat2 localize to cytosolic M. marinum. Perilipin belongs to the class II of LD proteins, which bind the LD surface through hydrophobic and amphipatic domains, and circulates between LDs and the cytosol. During infection, perilipin is proposed to partition into the waxy mycobacterial cell wall in a similar way, via its amphipathic and hydrophobic regions. Importantly, by using a luminescence-based assay to measure intracellular M. marinum growth, it became evident that in a D. discoideum perilipin mutant, bacteria growth is inhibited starting from 20 hpi, the time at which M. marinum reaches the cytosol. Consequently, it was proposed that perilipin might exert a barrier function, protecting the M. marinum cell wall during the cytosolic phase of the infection from degradative host processes such as neutral lipases. Dgat2 belongs to the class I of LD proteins, which bind the LD surface through an hydrophobic hairpin motif, and is exclusively localized at LDs. Consequently, Dgat2 is transferred to the waxy cell wall of M. marinum by coalescence with LDs and lateral diffusion. The end of the romance: using D. discoideum to uncover therapeutic targets in M. marinum D. discoideum plaque assays As for animals, M. marinum is pathogenic for D. discoideum. Contrary to the food bacterium Klebsiella, the growth of D. discoideum is restricted when plated on M. marinum lawns. Researchers have made use of this growth incapacity to perform genetic and chemical screens for the search of virulence genes and anti-mycobacterial compounds. For instance, M. marinum TesA, a putative type II thioesterase required for the synthesis of the cell wall lipids PDIMs and PGLs, was identified in a D. discoideum plaque assay where a M. marinum transposon mutant library was screened for bacterial attenuation. The role of TesA in virulence was further confirmed during infection of zebrafish embryos, and the tesA gene was proposed as a possible genetic target for disruption in human mycobacterial pathogens. In addition, another plaque assay screen of M. marinum transposon mutants allowed Chen and collaborators to discover that two genes, mmar_2318 and mmar_2319, involved in the biosynthesis of lipooligosaccharide contribute to M. marinum virulence in D. discoideum and limit bacterial entry in human macrophages. Chemical screens can also be performed in amoebae. For instance, drugs targeting the M. marinum cell wall have been recently identified to block/decrease M. marinum virulence by inhibiting bacterial aggregation and permeability, sliding motility and/or intracellular replication within D. discoideum. All these findings highlight D. discoideum as an alternative host for the screening of Mycobacterium virulence factors and potential antibacterial compounds. High throughput screening Since the advent of next-generation sequencing technologies, numerous methods to investigate the host-pathogen interaction at different levels have been developed. Among them, RNA sequencing is becoming the standard to analyze the transcripts of each actor involved in a bacterial infection, either independently or simultaneously by dual RNA-Seq. This method has been used to describe the gene expression profile of M. marinum during exponential and stationary growth, as well as under stress conditions. In addition, it has allowed to determine the contribution of specific cells to the innate immune response against M. marinum, Mtb, and M. bovis and to identify genes such as whiB4, which encodes a protein regulating the PE/PPE genes and is required for M. marinum and Mtb virulence. Moreover, a recent metabolomics study coupled to dual RNA-Seq allowed to reconstruct the dietary map of Mtb during macrophage infection. Since the RNA-Seq methodology has already been established in D. discoideum, it will be of high interest to perform dual RNA-seq in the D. discoideum — M. marinum infection model. Another NGS method is transposon sequencing, which allows the analysis of fitness and genetic interactions in microorganisms by using random transposon insertion libraries in bacteria Thanks to this method, various researchers have identified essential genes for Mtb growth and cholesterol metabolism and have investigated the Mtb virulence factors required for survival in human dendritic cells. Concerning M. marinum, only one study has been published so far, in which the authors identified ~300 genes essential for survival of the bacteria in vitro. These genes are mostly shared with Mtb and correspond to 6% of the total coding sequences. The authors investigated the strategies used by M. marinum to exploit different phagocytic cells, from protozoan and vertebrate origin. The behavior of the M. marinum transposon mutant pool was highly similar between the two mammalian cell lines and between the two amoebae D. discoidum and A. castellani, while an intermediate behavior was observed in cells derived from fish, probably due to their higher similarity with natural M. marinum hosts. Thus, the authors concluded that M. marinum has both conserved and host-specific virulence determinants. Regarding the conserved virulence factors, transposon interruption of PDIMs, ESX-1, or Mce1/4 leads to high attenuation of M. marinum virulence in multiple hosts. In addition, a new virulence factor of M. marinum was highlighted and validated in vivo, the cpsA gene. This gene encodes a protein of the LytR family of transcriptional regulators and has been recently demonstrated to be required for M. marinum cell wall integrity and virulence in the zebrafish model. Moreover, amoebae-specific pathways have been pointed out by the authors. For instance, transposon insertions in multiple genes involved in biosynthesis of vitamin B 12 highly increased fitness of M. marinum in Acanthamoeba, while they had no or little impact on the bacteria within the other host cells. To conclude, M. marinum uses specific mechanisms to adapt to different intracellular environments. Some specific requirements for infection of mammalian cells are not applicable for protozoa infection, and vice versa. Finally, REMI sequencing has recently been developed for D. discoideum by the group of C. Thompson. The REMI method was first described in Saccharomyces and then adapted to D. discoideum. The technique comprises the integration of linear DNA into eukaryotic genomes for insertional mutagenesis. Combining REMI with NGS, a genome-wide collection of tagged mutants can be created to investigate host genes. However, REMI-Seq has not yet been used in the context of mycobacterial infection. Therefore, this tool, combined with other methods described above, are promising and innovative approaches that could help identify genes and pathways involved in mycobacteria-host interaction. Concluding remarks In this review, we have described the so far known processes involved in the intracellular cycle of M. marinum within the amoeba D. discoideum. The comparison with studies carried out in human cells with Mtb revealed that the infection cycles of both bacteria share numerous similarities. However, many of the virulence mechanisms used by both pathogens to subvert the immune response of their hosts remain to be elucidated. We propose the D. discoideum — M. marinum system as a suitable and powerful model to study infection by tuberculous mycobacteria. It needs to be noticed that not all the markers listed here were monitored in all the listed strains, and vice versa. Please see main text and supplementary tables for more details. IFA, immunofluorescence assay; TEM, transmission electron microscopy; qPCR, quantitative polymerase chain reaction; SEM, scanning electron microscopy; CLEM, correlative light and electron microscopy. Author contributions EC-M, CB, LL, and AL-J wrote the original draft. EC-M and CB drew the figures and prepared the tables. EC-M, CB, LL, and TS reviewed and edited the draft. TS supervised this work. Conflict of interest statement The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Footnotes Funding. The TS laboratory is supported by multiple grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation, and TS is a member of iGE3 as well as of the COST Actions BM1203 EU-ROS and CA15138 TRANSAUTOPHAGY. Supplementary material The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Article information Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017; 7: 529. Published online 2018 Jan 9. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00529 PMCID: PMC5767268 PMID: 29376033 Elena Cardenal-Muñoz, * Caroline Barisch, Louise H. Lefrançois, Ana T. López-Jiménez, and Thierry Soldati Department of Biochemistry, Sciences II, Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland Edited by: Ludwig Eichinger, University of Cologne, Germany Reviewed by: Salvatore Bozzaro, Università degli Studi di Torino, Italy; Hubert Hilbi, University of Zurich, Switzerland *Correspondence: Elena Cardenal-Muñoz hc.eginu@lanedrac.anele Received 2017 Nov 3; Accepted 2017 Dec 18. Copyright © 2018 Cardenal-Muñoz, Barisch, Lefrançois, López-Jiménez and Soldati. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License. The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. Articles from Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology are provided here courtesy of Frontiers Media SA 