 Background: We encountered the opportunity to study proteochemically a brackish water invertebrate animal, Mytilopsis leucophaeata, belonging to the bivalves which stem from the second half of the Cambrian Period. This way, we were able to compare it with the vertebrate animal, the frilled shark that stems from a much later period of geologic time. Results: The mussel contains a well-adapted system of protein synthesis on the ER, protein folding on the ER, protein trafficking via COPI or clathrin-coated vesicles from endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi and plasmalemma, an equally well-developed system of actin filaments that with myosin forms the transport system for vesicular proteins and tubulin, which is also involved in ATP-driven vesicular protein transport via microtubules or transport of chromosomes in mitosis and meiosis. A few of the systems that we could not detect in M. leucophaeata in comparison with C. anguineus are the synaptic vesicle cycle components as synaptobrevin, cellubrevin and synaptosomal associated protein 25-A, although one component: Ras-related protein could be involved in synaptic vesicle traffic. Another component that we did not find in M. leucophaeata was Rab11 that is involved in the tubulovesicular recycling process of H+/K+-ATPase in C. anguineus. We have not been able to trace the H+/K+-ATPase of M. leucophaeata, but Na+/K+-ATPase was present. Furthermore, we have studied the increase of percent protein expression between 1,070 MYA (the generation of the Amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum ) and present. In this time span, three proteomic uprises did occur: 600 to 500 MYA, 47.5 to 4.75 MYA, and 1.4 to 0 MYA. The first uprise covers the generation of bivalves, the second covers gold fish, chicken, brine shrimp, house mouse, rabbit, Japanese medaka and Rattus norvegicus, and the third covers cow, chimpanzee, Homo sapiens, dog, goat, Puccinia graminis and wild boar. We hypothesise that the latter two uprises are related to geological and climate changes and their compensation in protein function expression. Conclusions: The proteomic and evolutionary data demonstrate that M. leucophaeata is a highly educatioanal animal to study. Keywords: Mytilopsis leucophaeata, Proteomics, Localisation, Function and adaptation periods BACKGROUND Mytilopsis leucophaeata or the brackish water mussel, belonging to the Dreissenidae or bivalve mussels, origi- nated from Europe more than 60 million years ago (Paleocene, Verween et al. 2010). Subsequently, it disap- peared to Central America and returned to Europe (harbour of Antwerp) in 1835. Since then, it is a stable inhabitant of European brackish waters. In the period of September 2009 to September 2010, two of my colleagues studied the influence of a number of parameters on size, growth condition, diet and attachment via development of byssal threads (Grutters and Verhofstad 2010). Bivalves have survived a long history from about 510 million years ago to present. This means that it has been adapted to geologically and climate-changing conditions, which might be reflected in the evolution of their proteome. For this reason, the present study was started in order to see whether the presence of certain proteins might unveil certain metabolic systems in this aquatic animal. Almost simultaneously, an article from Riva et al. did so in relation to the effect of a pol- lutant on the metabolism of Dreissena poly- morpha with emphasis on gills. In the same year, Fields et al. and Tomanek et al. published a study on the effect of temperature and hyposalinity on protein expression in the gills of the Mytilidae Mytilus gallopro- vincialis and Mytilus trossulus. In addition, we were inter- ested in comparing amino acid sequences of our mussel with animals stemming from later periods of life in order to cheque the phylogenetic developments that had taken place meanwhile. METHODS Forty individuals of the brackish water mussel, caught from a branch of the North Sea Channel to Amsterdam harbour, were taken by scalpel knives and tweezers from their shells, yielding a total wet weight of 1.8 g, sufficient for further analysis. The body parts were taken up in 5 ml triethanolamine HCl, pH 7.0 in 25% glycerol in the pres- ence of 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride to prevent autolysis (Schuurmans Stekhoven et al. 2003). Further procedures, such as Potter-Elvehjem homogenisa- tion; fractionated centrifugation to fractions F1, F2 and F3; delipidation of fractions prior to electrophoresis; electro- phoretic separation of proteins in the fractions; staining and destaining of the gels; determination of the apparent molecular weights of the protein bands on gel; excision of the protein bands; transport to the mass spectrometric analysis laboratory in Leicester; as well as the mass spectrometric analysis itself, is given in full detail in our previous publication. Information as to the cellular localisation and function of the analysed proteins stem from handbooks like Biochemistry of Hubert Stryer, Google, Pubmed. com, BLAST and UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Protein Knowl- edgebase and literature referred to therein. The absorption spectrum of the brownish coloured F1 fraction was made with a Zeiss M4QIII spectrophotom- eter at 20- to 50-nm intervals. A 100 μlof the F1 fraction was dissolved in 1 ml 2% SDS, subsequently centrifuged for 5 min at 5,000 rpm in a table top centrifuge, and the supernatant scanned. RESULTS Homogenisation and fractional centrifugation Potter-Elvehjem homogenisation of the mussels required very harsh and frequent pottering, yielding a brownish homogenate. Subsequent centrifugation at 1,200, 9,000, and 100,000 g yielded the F1 to F3 fractions. Total pro- tein of the fractions amounted to 78.3 for F1, 7.03 forF2 and 6.2 for F3, hence ratio F1:F2; F3 = 12.6:1.13:1.0. This ratio brought about association with the kidney and colon of the frilled shark Chlamydoselachus anguineus in which particular proteins are serving as additional construct in linking filaments to the plasma mem- brane. However, in the mussel case, in particular in rela- tion to the brown colour of F1, and less so of F2, we had to think more in terms of byssal threads, the biopolymers by which mussels attach themselves to their substrate like rocks or even ship walls. The brown colour is based on an aqueous solution of pheomelanin of which the almost exponential absorption curve fits to our curve of M. leucophaeata F1. Byssal threads apparently are high MW bio- polymers as F1 did not demonstrate any entrance of pro- tein into the gel. This started only in the lightly brown F2 and came to full expression by the light yellow F3, which demonstrated proteins in the apparent molecular weight range of 14.1 to 240 kDa. The tables are subdivided into prokaryotic and eucaryotic ribosomal subunits, proteins from the ER, Golgi network and plasma membrane, proteins of the cytoskel- eton and muscle and cellular vacuoles, vaults, nuclei and mitochondria. From all these proteins, the prokaryotic or eucaryotic origin is mentioned as well as the function and cellular localisation as could be found in literature, including data banks. All proteins are accompanied by their accession numbers from between square brackets. Confu- sion between capital O and the number zero is excluded since capital O is only present at the first position and number zero in any position from 2 to 6 of the accession series. Translation of the accession data to protein easily occurs by using the programme PubMed by choosing the term protein. Fig. 1. Figure 1 Absorption spectrum of SDS-solubelised F1 fraction from M. leucophaeata from 325–750 nm. Data points are indicated by black spots that have been line connected. Table1 Ribosomal composition of the F3 fraction of M.leucophaeata in the prokaryotic and eucaryoticrange Table 2 Proteins from ER, Golgi network and plasma membrane Table 3 Proteins of cytoskeleton and muscle Table 4 Proteins from cellular vacuoles, ribonucleoprotein particles, nuclei and mitochondria Table 1 shows that 52% of the ribosomal subunits is of bacterial origin with a decreasing order in percentage for Pseudomonas fluorescens, Pseudomonas stutzeri, Pseudomonas mendocina, Pseudomonas syr- ingae, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas putida and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The other half of the components is occupied by eucaryotes, ran- ging from pearl oyster to Norway rat. Possible causes and impacts of the bacterial contamination will be han- dled under ‘Discussion’ section. Outside Table 1, only very few bacterial proteins have been identified, except peptidoglycan-associated lipopro- tein in the plasma membrane of P. putida, outer membrane porin F from P. fluorescens and 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate-dependent phosphoglycer- ate mutase from Rhodospirillum centenum SW. The latter photosynthetic bacterium is housing in mar- ine and brackish water and so can be easily caught by the mussel valves. Still another intruder in the list of proteomics is ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase from Agrostis stolonifera as this reaction takes place in chloroplasts. The habitat of creeping bent grass is on wetlands with tolerance to flooding (Garry Oak Ecosystems Recovery team: www.goert.ca/documents/A.stolonifera.pdf) or inundation of riparian zones which may have brought the plants in contact with the mussels. Major intracellular activities, presented in Table 2, are protein folding on endoplasmic reticulum, assembly of multimeric protein complexes inside the ER (heat-shock 70 kDa protein cognate 3, 78 kDa glucose- regulated protein) and protein translocon formation across the ER. In addition, we found a number of transport processes, such as cargo transport from trans- Golgi to plasma membrane, protein sorting at trans-Golgi network and re- cruitment of clathrin to the membrane, protein trafficking via COPI or clathrin-coated vesicles from ER to Golgi and plasma- lemma, tubulovesicular recycling of protein from Golgi → ER and synaptic vesicle traffic. Further, a few constructional processes are involved like fragmentation and reassembly of Golgi stacks during and after mitosis + formation of tER (transitional endoplas- mic reticulum ATPase), contractile ring formation and regulation of actin filament assembly + disassembly. Subsequently, we rec- ord a number of cellular signalling components like neural signalling GTPase (guanine nucleotide-binding protein G or G, subunit α), integrin signalling at adhesions and Gαβγ activation of phospholipase c in a cellu- lar signalling process. Another constructional component is heat-shock 70 kDa protein, yielding conservation of protein shape and protection against stress. In addition, we noticed a number of metabolic enzymes (α-amylase, glycogen phosphorylase, trypsin, enolase) and cation- activated enzymes (sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase as modulated by Rap-1b, calcium- transporting ATPase, Na + /K + -ATPase) and the selectivity conferring protein in renal brush border nucleic acid con- ducting channel. The contribution of cellular signalling components ap- pears to be modest in number but has been encountered before in a proteomic analysis of Mytilus galloprovincia- lis and Mytilus trossulus: three to four signalling compo- nents in a total of 47 to 61 proteins, i.e. 6.4% to 6.5%. The cytoskeletal and muscle components with their numbers between parentheses can be sum- marised as follows: actin non-muscle, cytoskeleton = transport track for myosin; linkers of actin to plasma membrane: plastin, radixin, spectrin α and β chains ; myosin-9, involved in vesicle transport via actin filaments ; tubulin α and β chains (microtu- bules, involved in ATP-driven vesicle transport or trans- port of chromosomes in mitosis and meiosis), myosin muscle, involved in contraction: myosin-11, myosin LC-1 + heavy chain + adductor muscle light chain, paramyosin, adductor muscle actin → contraction, actin, muscle precursor, tropomyosin, α-actinin, actin larval muscle. Additional cytoskeletal organised components are: the chaperonin TCP-1, heat-shock cognate protein HSP90-β, ubiquitin (involved in prote- olysis), elongation factor 1α and eucaryotic initiation factor 4A-I. After corrections for bacterial and plant contamina- tions in Tables 1 and 2, we come to a total of M. leuco- phaeata-related analyses of 112. The analyses, related to the cytoskeletal and muscle components amount to 30, i.e. 26.8% of all analyses. Simi- lar results have been scored by Tomanek and Zuzow for M. trossulus and M. galloprovincialis: 16.4% and 25.5%, respectively. In a later study, they even scored 39.4% and 52.8%, respectively. These numbers underline the importance for these water- bound animals of a sturdy built body with solid protection against predators. Intracellular stability by the cytoskeleton via linking of actin filaments to the cell membrane, pres- ence of adductor muscles for closure of the shell halves provide additional support for the above ideas, and of course, the presence of paramyosin is essential for binding of the animal to the substrate, including stones and ship walls that bring them to the harbours. In this last part of our analyses, we find only transport vesicles (V-type H+-ATPase, major vault pro- tein); histones H2A, H2AV, H2B, H3 and H4; proteasome subunit α type-2, −5A and −7; the 14-3-3 protein ε; ATP synthase subunit α-+ β-precursor; the citric acid cycle en- zymes succinate dehydrogenase; probable malate dehydro- genase 3; and phosphoenolopyruvate carboxykinase that is responsible for the conversion of oxaloacetate to phospho- enolpyruvate in the gluconeogenesis pathway ; and the mitochondrial ADP/ATP exchanger. This gives a fair picture of what is going on in the sub- cellular compartments indicated, but some of the ani- mals of comparison require some criticism with regard to their comparability as will be brought forward in the discussion of Tables 3 and 4. Fig. 2. Figure 2 A + B. Graphical expression of pro- and eucaryotes from which proteins were found in the mussel's proteome. The x-axis indicates the time of generation in MYA, and the y-axis indicates the accumulated expression in percent... As mentioned in the ‘Introduction’ section, we were also interested in the protein chemical developments that had taken place in the mussel's long history. For that reason, we have registered the generation time for all vertebrates and invertebrates that had provided se- quences that led to the identification of proteins that have been presented in Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4. Proteins that could be considered as intestinal contaminants: bacterial pro- teins, but also a single plant, living in flooded wetlands, have been omitted. Figure 2A,B provides the graphical re- sult of MYA from 1,100 to zero vs. the sum of the verte- brate + invertebrate contribution. It can be seen that the graph curves upward from 600 to 500 MYA, thereby cov- ering the generation of bivalves. From 320 to 50 MYA, the line is linear, covering the insect Drosophila melanogaster teleosts Takifugu rubripes and goldfish. Thereupon follows a second uprise until 4.75 MYA in which period Birds, Decapoda, Muridae (rat and house mouse), rabbit and the Japanese medaka participate. After this period, there is some levelling off, but is followed by a third uprise, lasting from 1.4 to 0 MYA (Figure 2B). Animals and fungi, in- volved in this period, are: cow, chimpanzee, Homo sapiens, dog, goat, stemrust and wild boar. From the total of 20 items, 10 belong to Table 1 and are part of ribosomes that are involved in the protein synthesis machinery. The only cow that was miss- ing in Table 1 can be found in Table 2 as a provider of cyclophilin C, a protein folding catalyst on the ER. Chim- panzee can be found in Table 2 at Ras-related protein Rap- 1b and in Table 3 at tubulin α-1 A chain and eucaryotic initiation factor 4A-I. Rap-1b is a cellular signalling com- ponent in neuronal cells and lympho- cytes. Tubulin α-1 A chain is part of the cytoskeleton, which supports the cell shape and serves as transport track for vesicles. Eucaryotic initiation factor 4A-I is involved in binding of the messen- ger RNA to the ribosome. H. sapiens is for about half categorised under the ribosomes at Table 1. Further, humans can be found in Table 2 at α-amylase, glycogen phosphorylase, and dolichyl-diphosphooligosaccharide pro- tein glycosyltransferase and in Table 3 at myosin-9. Func- tions are: provision of glucose from its polymers, protein transport across the ER and transport of vesicles along actin filaments. The only dog is related to protein synthesis ; stemrust (Puccinia graminis) is also related to the cytoskeletal actin and wild boar to transitional ER ATPase and the serine protease trypsin. The first is involved in breakdown and repair of Golgi stacks during and after mitosis, respectively, plus formation of the transitional ER. The second is involved in proteolysis. Summarising all processes involved in the third proteo- chemical uprise (covering the Pleistocene and Holocene) shows a composition of protein synthesis, breakdown, folding and transportation across the ER. In addition, binding of messenger RNA to the ribosome, cellular sig- nalling, microtubular vesicle transport, breakdown and repair of Golgi stacks during and after mitosis and for- mation of the transitional ER are also involved. Glucose supply is provided by α-amylase and glycogen phos- phorylase; in the latter case yielding glucose-1P. All these processes are essential for survival of the animal, and during its evolution, it may have been necessary to adapt to the changing environmental conditions. In addition, we liked to analyse also the second proteo- chemical uprise (48 to 4.75 MYA, corresponding withhalf Eocene to second half of Pliocene). Animals belonging to this time range are chicken, brine shrimp, house mouse, rabbit, Japanese medaka, and Rattus norvegicus, with the number of recorded protein components between parentheses. Summation yields a number of 23, slightly more than the third uprise with 20 components, but taking an appreciably longer time span: 43 vs. 1.4 million years. Processes involved in this second period ofdevelopment of the mussel are: transcription regulation, DNA repair and replication + chromosome stabilisation (chicken his- tone H2A. V: 1 item), protein synthesis at the ER by ribo- somes from Muridae, binding of aminoacyl-tRNA to the ribosomes in protein synthesis,pro- tein folding at the ER, cargo sorting at the plasma membrane and trans-Golgi network (clathrin heavy chain 1, R. norvegicus : 1 item, and AP-1 complex, subunit β-1, M.musculus : 1 item), also including endocytosis. Besides protein synthesis, folding and sorting, there is also the recycling from Golgi to ER. Not only protein synthesis is involved, but also protein cleav- age (proteasome subunit α type-7, chicken: 1 item). Pro- tein is transcellularly transported via phosphorylation/ dephosphorylation of myosin on the cytoskeletal actin tracks. Components of this system are provided by brine shrimp and Japanese medaka (cytoplasmic actin: 1 item). Intracellular stability is given by linking of actin filaments to each other or to the plasma membrane (spectrin α chain, chicken: 1 item, and radixin, house mouse: 1 item). Intracellular vesicle transport is provided by tubulin α-3 chain, which is also involved in mitosis. Heat-shock proteins: 70 kDa and cognate protein HSP 90-β are involved in conservation of protein shape and cytoskeletal stabilisation + signal transduction. Last, but not least, muscle contraction for closing and opening the valves is effected by sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase 3 and myosin-11. Not to forget is ATP synthase, which will make trans- portation and muscle contraction, besides many other processes, possible via its formation of ATP. Comparison of the processes, represented by the proteins of the second and third uprise, shows similar- ities and differences. For instance: protein synthesis via ribosomes at the ER counts for 50% in uprise 3, but only for half as much in uprise 2. Uprise 2 covers transcription regulation, DNA repair and replication + chromosome stabilisation (1 item), whereas uprise 3 does not. Protein folding at ER occurs in both periods, but cargo sorting at the plasma membrane and trans-Golgi network is only in period 2. The same holds for recycling from Golgi → ER, whereas protein transport across the ER belongs only to period 3. On the other hand, protein cleavage occurs in both periods. The same holds true for actin tracks, but not for actin linkers (3 in period 2 only). Both periods contain vesicle transport (1 and 2 items in periods 2 and 3, respect- ively). Further activities that relate only to period 2 are pro- tein shape conservation + cytoskeletal stabilisation + signal transduction by heat-shock proteins (2 items). Activities that are related to closing and opening the valves, plus the enzyme that this facilitates, only occur in the second uprise, but cellular signalling by Rab-1b and enzymes involved in the hydrolysis of polysaccharides are confined to uprise 3. DISCUSSION Table 1 showed an abundance of 52% in bacterial riboso- mal subunits. Although the presence of bacteria in the intestine of a eucaryote is a common phenomenon, the capacity of the present bacteria to break down and thereby detoxicate organic pollutants raises the possibil- ity that these bacteria have been added on purpose to the canal inhabited by the mussel. The following detoxify- ing properties have been ascribed to some of the indicated strains: P. fluorescens is beneficial for plants in terms of suppressing pathogens, aiding nutrient absorption and degrading environmental pollutants. P. putida is a versatile environmental isolate that is capable of growth on several aromatic hydrocarbons, including benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and p-cymene. Its broad substrate toluene dioxygenase has been widely utilised in biocata- lytic synthesis of chiral chemicals, as well as in the me- tabolism and detoxification of trichloroethylene. P. putida F1 is known to be chemotactic to aromatic hy- drocarbons and chlorinated aliphatic compounds and has the potential for use in biomediation applications (site of DOE Joint Genome Institute, University of California). On the other hand, the strain W619 that showed up in our ana- lyses is more competent with regard to heavy metal resis- tances and beneficial effects on plants (Wu et al. 2011). P. mendocina DSWY0601 and ymp extrude a polyhy- droxybutyrate depolymerase that can degrade PHB plastic. P. stutzeri strain A1501 is equally beneficial to plants by denitrification of NO 3 −, converting it to N 2 and fixation of N 2 → 2 NH 3. Subse- quently, NH 4 + is coupled to α-ketoglutarate under forma- tion of glutamate (Stryer 1995c; Lalucat et al. 2006). In contrast to the above positive descriptions, the list of bacteria also contains some negatively acting contributors: P. aeruginosa, P. syringae and E. coli. P. aeruginosa, des- pite its positive contribution in oil degradation in the presence of glycerol or the biosurfactant rhamnolipid, also excretes toxins that are dele- terious for the pulmonary system. P. syringae is a plant-pathogenic bacterium, in- fecting bean to tomato, causing bacterial speck to bac- terial cancer ( P. syringae Genome Resources home page: Pseudomonas-Plant Interaction from Cornell University: Department of Plant Pathology: www. pseudomonas-syringae.org). E. coli APEC01 is a dele- terious avian pathogenic bacterium causing epidemic colibacillosis in the poultry industry. Some data of similarity with C. anguineus (Schuurmans Stekhoven et al. 2012) are: synaptic vesicle traffic and enolase in the plasma membrane of syn- aptosomes. The first reminded us of the neurotransmitter cycle that we found in the brain of C. anguineus via its modulator α-synuclein and v- and t- snares VAMP1/2 and SNAP-25 + syntaxin 1. However, although bivalves contain a nervous system (Encyclopaedia Brittanica: www.brittannica.com/EBchecked/topic/67293/ bivalve/35745/The-shell), we have not been able to find the abovementioned v- or t-snares for bivalves. In partial contrast to this are the results obtained for M. galloprovin- cialis in which results for three t-snares in the Mediterranean mussel have been obtained via tran- scribed sequences: SNAP-25A [Accession No. } Q5TZ66 ], SNAP-type protein and SNAP-47. Yet, v-snares have not been detected either in this case. Presence of enolase in the plasma membrane appears to have an endangering effect via its complex formation with plasminogen that by subsequent activation to plasmin can break down the extracellular matrix and so can allow invasion of patho- gens, viruses and metastatic cancer cells (Liu and Shih 2007; Díaz-Ramos et al. 2012). Normally, plasmin is used to dissolve fibrin blood clots but upon generation on the cell surface might cause the above effects. How- ever, in our analyses, neither plasminogen nor plasmin or plasmino- gen activator has been traced. On the other hand, in the transcribed sequences of M. galloprovincialis, two sequences were found that matched plasminogen. Furthermore, despite the clear presence of Na + /K + -ATPase in our analyses, we have been unable to find the presence of phospholemman, known as a modulator of Na + /K + -ATPase, even though our analyses covered a wide range of molecular weights. Since phosphorylation of Na + /K + -ATPase causes dissociation of phospholem- man, this may have led to its absence in the analyses. In addition, salinity may also decrease the FXYD con- tent relative to the Na + /K + -ATPase content. In another report, it has been indicated that no FXYD protein can be found in arthro- pods or any nonvertebrate animals. We think that the only way that is left to trace the absence or presence of FXYD in bivalves is to analyse their DNA. One of the fungi that have entered the list of com- parative sequences is P. graminis at actin in Table 3. This mould spreads its occurrence by spore formation via two different hosts, thereby causing the so-called stemrust, especially in wheat and barley. Although contamination of the brackish water mussel with infected wheat and/or barley from freight ships in the harbour cannot be excluded, another possibility is indistinguishable peptides formed by trypsin treatment (cf. Schuurmans Stekhoven et al. 2010) as used in the analysis of actin from Crassostrea gigas or Puccinia graminis. A few of the possibilities are a 20 gfagddapr 29, h 41 qgvmvgmgqk 51 and y 70 piehgivtnwddmek 85 for Crassostrea gigas and the same sequences for Puccinia graminis, but with a numbering of a 19 -r 28, h 40 -k 50 and y 69 -k 84. It appears that the sequences are quite conserved since they are also found in β-actin of the mammal M. musculus. Another subject of criticism is the possibly hereditary plant sequences in the genome of the mussel. An ex- ample could be the occurrence of Proteasome subunit α type-5A and ADP/ATP carrier protein from Arabidopsis thaliana. Thale cress grows on edges of agricultural fields, stone walls alongside tracks and roads and Mediterranean scrublands with scattered holm oaks but is no inhabitant of wet lands (Picó et al. 2008). Therefore, we have looked for comparable sequences in MytiBase: a knowledgebase of mussel with 3,275 transcribed sequences (Venier et al. 2009). To our surprise: also in this large list of transcribed proteins, a few examples of plant heritage were met: first the occur- rence of 14-3-3-like protein b of Oryza sativa together with 14-3-3 C1 protein from Oncorhynchus mykiss. Identical sequences, found for Oryza sativa with those for O. mykiss, are e 16 -e 34, p 65 -f 80, l 94 -d 100 and s 113 -d 134. It is evident that the sequence for Oryza sativa is 97 amino acids less than that of O. mykiss, due to incomplete DNA. Yet, we can calculate an identity that must be minimally 25% the same. Since the sequences in case of M. galloprovincialis have been determined via DNA, we have to accept a genetic link between animals and plants, and so the link with proteasome subunit αtype 5A, ADP/ATP carrier protein 3 and Arabidopsis thaliana may be genuine and not artificial. A second example of plant heritage by M. galloprovin- cialis is found in the presence of probable ATPase from the chloroplast of Oenothera organensis which grows in the mountains of New Mexico, far away from the mussel of the Mediterranean Sea. Hence, there has been a time that they were neighbours. This hypothesis is built on three assumptions: Some DNA ofconsumed food can be taken up in cells and incorporated into the DNA of the consumer if it displays some similarity with DNA of that consumer Since bivalves do not inhabit the mainland, the plant consumers could be snails, which form a sister clade with bivalves, forming the Pleistomollusca. If geological conditions, like flooding, would force gastropods to evolve to bivalves, it is not unthinkable that bivalves would contain land plant sequences in their genome as has been shown by Venier et al.. Before accepting this hypothesis, it will be necessary to trace the snail's genome or RNA for plant resemblances. In the generation of the brackish water mussel M. leuco- phaeata in the period of 1,070 to 0 MYA, two additional genetic uprises occurred beyond the uprise caused by the generation of the bivalves per se. The question arises why this has to be achieved by acceleration in a developmental uprise: the second in the period of 48 to 4.75 MYA and the third in the period of 1.4 to 0 MYA. In the 48 to 4.75 MYA period, earth was in motion with formation of mountains and separation or collision of geological plates, volcano formation, followed by climate cooling (Pidwirny 2012). In the later period, earth was subject to freezing with extinction of many species, which may have forced the mussel to a counterreaction by speeding up its adaptation of DNA to that of modern species. Evidence for climate change-induced effects on adap- tation of the genome of animals and plants has been recently published (Reusch and Wood 2007; Buckley et al. 2012; Franks and Hoffmann 2012). Failure to adapt to the changes may eventually lead to extinction. In this respect, M. leucophaeata did not fail, otherwise it could not have been able to survive for 500 million years until present. Therefore, it is remarkable that it has only a limited range of salt concentration: 6.7 to 7.4 ppt to provide for an optimal condition. At higher sa- linities, the condition index is reduced to 50 at a salinity of 11 ppt. Seawater usu- ally has a salinity of 35 ppt (Office of Naval Research: www.onr.navy.mil/focus/ocean/water/salinity 1.htm). There- fore, one may question how M. leucophaeata can survive the trip via the ocean to the brackish North Sea Channel. Transportation of larvae and postlarvae with tolerance to salinity of 32 ppt in ballast water makes the trip possible. The salinity of the North Sea Channel varies from 1.7 to 9.2 ppt, which M. leucophaeata can enter with confidence. 