 Signal transduction and cytoskeleton networks in a wide variety of cells display excitability, but the mechanisms are poorly understood. Here, we show that during random migration and in response to chemoattractants, cells maintain complementary spatial and temporal distributions of Ras activity and phosphatidylinositol -bisphosphate. In addition, depletion of PIP 2 by disruption of the 5-phosphatase, Dd5P4, or by recruitment of 4-phosphatase INPP4B to the plasma membrane, leads to elevated Ras activity, cell spreading, and altered migratory behavior. Furthermore, RasGAP2 and RapGAP3 bind to PIP 2, and the phenotypes of cells lacking these genes mimic those with low PIP 2 levels, providing a molecular mechanism. These findings suggest that Ras activity drives PIP 2 down, causing the PIP 2 -binding GAPs to dissociate from the membrane, further activating Ras, completing a positive-feedback loop essential for excitability. Consistently, a computational model incorporating such a feedback loop in an excitable network model accurately simulates the dynamic distributions of active Ras and PIP 2 as well as cell migratory behavior. The mutually inhibitory Ras-PIP 2 mechanisms we uncovered here provide a framework for Ras regulation that may play a key role in many physiological processes. Cell migration mediates a large number of key physiological activities during development and in the adult. These processes require coordination of signal transduction and cytoskeletal events, which regulate the dynamics and localization of cellular protrusions and contractions. For instance, local activations of Ras GTPases and PI3K pathways link to Rho GTPases, which mediate cytoskeletal rearrangements. The behavior of the signal transduction and the cytoskeleton networks suggest that they are excitable and has led to the “excitable network hypothesis” for cell migration. In migrating Dictyostelium cells, waves of Ras and PI3K activation propagate along the cell cortex, while back protein, PTEN, dissociates from the membrane, generating coordinated “shadow” waves. Theoretical models of excitability involving activator–inhibitor feedback loops have been remarkably successful in accounting for the behaviors of migrating cells, but the molecular events comprising the loops are not well understood. Phosphoinositides have played a prominent role in the molecular definition of excitable signal transduction networks. Phosphatidylinositol -trisphosphate and phosphatidylinositol -bisphosphate, the product of PTEN, have come to characterize the front and back states in excitable network models. Evidence of PIP 2 accumulation at the rear of cells and in the furrow during cytokinesis has supported these models. Synthetic depletion of PIP 2 leads to significant hyperactivation of cellular protrusions. However, in migrating cells, back-to-front gradients of PIP 2 are modest, suggesting the existence of more important regulators of back activities. PIP 3 can also be converted to PIP 2. This phosphoinositide has been associated with phagocytosis and pinocytosis, but its role in cell migration is relatively understudied. In a previous study, we identified a pleckstrin homology domain-containing Dictyostelium -specific back protein, Callipygian, which binds to membranes, dissociates selectively from protrusions, and associates with the rear of polarized cells. This promotes polarity and increases migration efficiency. Here, we characterize CynA’s binding partner PIP 2 and provide evidence for the existence of a mutually inhibitory positive-feedback loop between Ras and PIP 2. This regulatory feedback loop appears to be a major regulator of the signal transduction network excitability, and therefore a critical controller of cellular protrusions and migration modes. Results Back-to-Front Gradient and Transient Chemoattractant-Induced Depletion of PIP 2. Fig. 1 shows the behavior of CynA in relation to spontaneous actin polymerization in a randomly migrating cell. As previously reported, a tandem PH-domain biosensor, tPH CynA -KikGR, is depleted from actin-rich protrusions at the front of cells. A resulting gradient in tPH CynA -KikGR membrane association from back to front is apparent. Kymographs of the cell perimeter show that this dynamic relationship is tightly maintained as the cell migrates. A construct with four PH domains, ttPH CynA -GFP, which may have greater sensitivity, detected a similar gradient, but it extended further along the sides toward the front in polarized cells. Fig. 1. Back-to-front gradient and transient chemoattractant-induced depletion of PIP 2. Growth-stage wild-type Ax3 cell coexpressing tPH CynA -KikGR and LimE-RFP. Kymographs of tPH CynA and LimE intensity on... Several assays of supernatants from cells expressing CynA-derived constructs indicate that these proteins are biosensors for PIP 2. When applied to filters spotted with multiple phosphoinositides, CynA-GFP, tPH CynA -GFP, and ttPH CynA -GFP bound strongly to PIP 2, slightly to PIP 3, and negligibly to all other lipids. Controls with supernatants from cells expressing PH Crac -YFP showed preferential binding to PIP 3, to a lesser extent to PIP 2, while PH PLCδ -YFP showed binding to PIP 2. Similarly, in a total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy-based assay, CynA-GFP, tPH CynA -GFP, and ttPH CynA -GFP bound specifically to surface-tethered lipid vesicles containing PIP 2, with little binding to vesicles containing PIP 3 or PIP 2, or controls. Control supernatants from cells expressing PH PLCδ -GFP showed binding to PIP 2. In addition to its localization at the back, ttPH CynA -GFP was also found to be associated with focal patches at the base of protrusions at the front, as was another PIP 2 sensor, C-terminal PH domain of TAPP1. On PIP strips, cPH TAPP1 -GFP associated strongly with PIP 2 and slightly with PIP 3, like tPH CynA -GFP. However, association of cPH TAPP1 -GFP with the back of the cell was not apparent. In mammalian cells, TAPP1 has been reported to localize to the front, while in zebrafish neutrophils, it was found at the leading and trailing edges. To resolve these apparent discrepancies, we reexamined the distribution of the cPH TAPP1 -GFP. We reasoned that perhaps the TAPP1 biosensor lacked sufficient sensitivity for detection at the back of the cell during live-cell imaging. To assess this possibility, we fixed cells. Under these conditions, it was clear that cPH TAPP1 -RFP was also present on the membrane in a gradient from back to front that resembled that detected by tPH CynA -KikGR. Since PIP 2 is a product of PIP 3, which increases during cell activation, one might expect PIP 2 to also increase; instead, it decreased. In cells treated with latrunculin A, tPH CynA -KikGR displayed a relatively uniform distribution around the cell perimeter. Within 10 s of addition of chemoattractant, cAMP, tPH CynA -KikGR dissociated from the membrane and moved to the cytosol, indicating a decrease in PIP 2. Simultaneously, PIP 3 on the membrane increased as previously shown. The PIP 2 decrease was transient with levels returning to baseline and exceeding it by 380 s. The magnitude of the response in individual cells varied, but the kinetics were similar. Using a fixation protocol, we also detected a drop of cPH TAPP1 -RFP binding to the membrane. We also assayed phosphoinositide levels and phosphorylation of downstream Ras effector PKBR1 following lysis in the presence and absence of cAMP plus GTPγS. Consistent with previous results, PIP 3 and p-PKBR1 levels increased and PIP 2 levels were unchanged; however, PIP 2 levels decreased. Furthermore, in cells expressing constitutively active Ras mutant, RasC Q62L, which are known to have elevated PIP 3 levels, tPH CynA -KikGR was no longer detectable on the membrane. When latrunculin A-treated cells were exposed to a gradient of chemoattractant, PIP 2 levels initially decreased, and then within several minutes showed a continuous accumulation toward the low side of the gradient. Interestingly, the angle of orientation of the rear-facing crescent of PIP 2 oscillated with respect to the axis of the micropipette. Oscillations in the orientation of PIP 3 crescents facing the gradient have been reported. Taken together, these observations show that the behavior of PIP 2 is diametrically opposed to that of front events like PIP 3 generation and Ras activation. Deletion of OCRL Homolog Dd5P4 Leads to Lowered PIP 2 and Elevated Ras and Rap Activity. Purified Lowe oculocerebrorenal syndrome protein homolog, Dd5P4, has been shown to generate PIP 2 from PIP 3 in vitro, and we reasoned that deletion of Dd5P4 might lower levels of PIP 2. Indeed, the membrane-to-cytosolic ratio of tPH CynA -KikGR was 3.3 ± 0.2 in wild-type cells but 1.2 ± 0.1 in Dd5P4 − cells, suggesting that the PIP 2 levels are lower. We noted that the Dd5P4 − cells were also larger than wild-type cells. Expression of Dd5P4-GFP restored Dd5P4 − cell size to wild-type proportions and partially restored cell motility, further demonstrating the important role of this activity. Fig. 2. Deletion of OCRL homolog Dd5P4 leads to lowered PIP 2 and elevated Ras activity. Representative confocal images of tPH CynA -KikGR in growth-stage, wild-type Ax3 and Dd5P4 − cells treated with 5 μM latrunculin A.... The Dd5P4 − cells displayed significantly increased random migratory behavior and enhanced Ras and Rap activity, consistent with the role of these GTPases in regulating protrusive activity. Wild-type cells expressing Ras activity sensor, RBD-GFP, showed typical amoeboid profiles with several 1- to 2-µm-sized pseudopods with elevated activity at the membrane. In contrast, the Dd5P4 − cells were dramatically spread with large wide fronts decorated with RBD-GFP. Kymographs and quantification of the cell perimeter showed that, while wild-type cells typically display one to three discreet patches of activity, the Dd5P4 − cells displayed higher Ras activity, which occupied a significant portion of the cell perimeter. The basal surface area and relative extent of Ras activation in wild type were 97 ± 4.4 µm 2 and 0.11 ± 0.02, while in Dd5P4 − cells, they were 256 ± 13 µm 2 and 0.32 ± 0.04. Also, PIP 3 levels were elevated. Similar increases of Rap activity were observed using Rap biosensor RalGDS in Dd5P4 − cells. Furthermore, levels of phosphorylation of PKBR1 were elevated in Dd5P4 − cells. Consistent with these elevated activities, the Dd5P4 − cells were often observed to oscillate, displaying a nearly isometric protrusion with high Ras activity, a strong retraction during which Ras activity was extinguished, followed by another global spreading event. Even though they appeared less polarized, the Dd5P4 − cells moved apart and scattered more rapidly than wild-type cells. The relative decrease in PIP 2 levels during stimulation with cAMP was blunted in the DdP5P4 − versus wild-type cells. Lowering of PIP 2 by Exogenous INPP4B Leads to Hyperactive Cell Behavior. We sought to synthetically lower PIP 2 using 4-phosphatase, INPP4B, to further demonstrate its role in regulation of cell behavior. We expressed a fragment of INPP4B fused to FRB, INPP4B 510–924 -FRB, in wild-type cells together with a plasma membrane-tethered FKBP and various biosensors. Upon rapamycin addition, INPP4B 510–924 -FRB was recruited to the membrane, and tPH CynA -GFP dissociated and moved to the cytosol. The decrease in PIP 2 on the membrane occurred gradually and reached its lowest levels within 10 min. Fig. 3. Lowering of PIP 2 by exogenous INPP4B leads to hyperactive cell behavior. Growth-stage, wild-type Ax3 cells expressing mCherry-FRB-INPP4B 510–924, N150-tFKBP and tPH CynA -GFP were treated with 5 μM latrunculin A for... Lowering PIP 2 led to an increase in cellular spreading and protrusive activity. Fig. 3 D shows a control cell expressing FRB, and two examples of cells expressing INPP4B 510–924 -FRB. FRB recruitment had little effect, while bringing INPP4B 510–924 -FRB to the membrane led to a substantial increase in area, perimeter, and protrusive activity. Many cells intermittently displayed oscillations, undergoing periods of spreading and retraction, upon recruitment of INPP4B 510–924 -FRB. In contrast, control cells with recruitment of FRB showed only infrequent gentle oscillations. The highly active cells with recruited INPP4B 510–924 -FRB displayed greater random motility. The average speed increased from 3.6 ± 1.2 to 8.9 ± 2.9 µm/min. We combined the two independent perturbations of lowering PIP 2 by expressing INPP4B 510–924 -FRB in the Dd5P4 − cells. As shown in Fig. 3 I and J, the cells became extremely spread on the surface with larger basal area, suggesting that the effects of the two perturbations were additive. Recruitment of INPP4B 510–924 -FRB is not expected to increase PIP 3 levels as likely occurs in Dd5P4 − cells. This suggests that the increase of cell spreading and enhanced random motility in these cells are primarily due to lowered PIP 2. The Contribution of PIP 3 to Ras Activity. We further dissected the relative contributions of PIP 3 to PIP 2 levels and Ras activity by inhibiting PI3K. The sensitivity of the elevated Ras activity in wild-type and Dd5P4 − cells to PI3K inhibition was time dependent. Wild-type cells treated with LY294002 immediately round up with few RBD patches; after about 30–45 min, the RBD patches largely return, and the cells resume random motility. Surprisingly, PIP 3 depletion led to dramatically increased PIP 2 levels as the cells rounded up. As the cells recovered, they had increased polarity. The Dd5P4 − cells are more resistant to LY294002 treatment, remaining more active than wild-type cells. The broad bands of RBD along the cell perimeter were broken into two to three smaller patches, but after about 25–40 min the cells recovered toward the original phenotype. Also, in Dd5P4 − cells, the increase in PIP 2 upon PIP 3 depletion was blunted. Fig. 4. The contribution of PIP 3 to Ras activity. Confocal representative images of vegetative, wild-type Ax3 and Dd5P4− cells expressing RBD-GFP treated with 50 μM LY294002 for −1, 5,... Next, we examined PIP 2 levels and Ras activities in pten − cells that have elevated PIP3 levels and compared them with those in the Dd5P4 − cells. In latrunculin A-treated cells, the relative PIP 2 levels were 1, 0.94, and 0.53 in wild-type, pten −, and Dd5P4 − cells, respectively ; Ras activity is confined to 0–2 patches in Ax3 cells, whereas in Dd5P4 − cells the patches occupied almost the entire cell perimeter. In pten − cells, the patches of Ras activity were smaller than those in wild-type cells; however, there were many more patches over time. Taken together, these observations suggest that the elevated Ras activity in Dd5P4 − cells is largely dependent on decreased PIP 2. Nevertheless, there is a contribution of feedback from PIP 3. RasGAP2 and RapGAP3 Bind to and Are Regulated by PIP 2. To further explore the activation of Ras and Rap coinciding with the decreases in PIP 2, we examined the behavior of RasGAP family member, RasGAP2, and RapGAP family member, RapGAP3. The position of these proteins in the family hierarchies and domain structures are shown in Fig. 5 A and B. We first noticed that these proteins localized to cup-shaped protrusions at the leading edge of the cell but were displaced to the base of the structures away from F-actin biosensor LimE. In addition, RG2 and RG3 associated strongly with the rear of the cell, away from the sites of protrusion. Careful examination of the kinetics of the formation of the cup-shaped protrusions showed that RG2 and RG3 appeared late in the lifetime of these structures as the levels of LimE were waning. Although the lifetime of different protrusions varied, we were able to compile the kinetic behavior of LimE versus RG2 or RG3 by dividing the total duration of each protrusion into 10 time segments. Fig. 5. RasGAP2 and RapGAP3 bind to and are regulated by PIP 2. Unrooted phylogenetic trees of Dictyostelium genes with consensus RasGAP and RapGAP domains. Uniprot IDs are listed for uncharacterized genes. Domain organization of RasGAP2, accession... Further evidence suggested that RG2 and RG3 behave kinetically like PIP 2 biosensors and in fact bind to PIP 2. In latrunculin A-treated cells, RG2 and RG3 distributed uniformly around the cell perimeter. Within 10 s of addition of chemoattractant, RG2 and RG3 dissociated from the membrane, moved to the cytosol, and then returned to the membrane by 40 s. Controls showed that the response was specific for chemoattractant. On PIP strips, both RG2 and RG3 bound to PIP 2 and PIP 3. However, depletion of PIP 3 by the inhibition of PI3K led to a small increase, <15%, in the ratio of membrane associated to cytosolic levels of RG2 and RG3 biosensors, suggesting that in living cells these biosensors bind preferentially to PIP 2. To further demonstrate the role of PIP 2 in regulating RG2 and RG3, we investigated the distribution of these proteins in Dd5P4 − cells, which have low levels of PIP 2. While F-actin activity was excessively elevated in the form of rapidly propagating actin waves in Dd5P4 − cells, RG2 and RG3 were absent from the membrane. Taken together, these results suggest that RG2 and RG3 bind to PIP 2 and are regulated by the dynamic distributions of this phosphoinositide. Deletion of RasGAP2 and RapGAP3 Leads to Ras and Rap Activation and the Hyperactive Phenotype. RG2 and RG3 suppressed Ras and Rap activity and controlled protrusion size and number. Deletion of RG2 led to significantly elevated Ras activity. In wild-type cells, activity patches are confined to about 1 µm, while in RG2 − cells they nearly covered the cell perimeter. Similarly, in RG3 − cells, patches of Rap activity and protrusions were also elevated. In latrunculin A-treated RG2 − and RG3 − cells, the respective patches occupied more than one-half of the cell perimeter, whereas in wild-type cells, they occupied less than 20%. Kymographs of latrunculin A-treated cells further demonstrated the dramatic change in the amount of active Ras and Rap in RG2 − and RG3 − cells, respectively. Fig. 6. Deletion of RasGAP2 and RapGAP3 leads to Ras and Rap activation and the hyperactive phenotype. Ras patch dynamics in wild-type and RG2 − cells. Selected frames from time-lapse movies of Raf1-RBD-GFP–expressing wild-type and RG2 −... These elevated activities led to increases in random motility. Tracks of individual cells demonstrated that the RG2 − and RG3 − cells moved further from starting points compared with the wild-type cells. The average speed of wild-type cells was 5 ± 0.25 µm/min, while those of the RG2 − and the RG3 − cells were 8 ± 0.34 and 8 ± 0.3 µm/min, respectively. Expression of RG2-GFP and RG3-GFP in their respective null backgrounds reduced the size of the patches and restored the wild-type phenotypes. These results implicate RG2 and RG3 as important regulators of protrusion dynamics and motility. Deletion of Dd5P4 Allows Axenic Growth in the Presence of NF-1. Elevated Ras activity is associated with increased macropinocytosis, and previous studies have shown that mutations that confer axenic growth to Dictyostelium cells map to the RasGAP, neurofibromin homolog, NF-1. Since Dd5P4−, RG2 −, and RG3 − cells have more protrusive activity than wild-type axenic cells, we tested the extent to which NF-1 expression would prevent their growth in axenic media. The growth of wild-type, RG2 −, and RG3 − cells was largely inhibited. However, Dd5P4 − cells expressing NF-1 were able to grow, albeit slowly, in axenic media. Consistently, pinocytosis was elevated in NF-1–expressing Dd5p4 − cells. These results show that significant lowering PIP 2 elevates Ras activity sufficiently to allow cells to grow under axenic conditions. Simulation of Cell Behavior Based on Mutually Inhibitory Positive-Feedback Loop. The mutual inhibition between Ras activity and PIP 2 described here would be expected to comprise a positive-feedback loop, providing a molecular basis for the excitable network hypothesis. Previous implementations of these models employed an activator that positively regulates itself, and a delayed inhibitor that returns the system to basal. Here, we introduce three states: F, B, and R, in which mutual inhibition between F and B constitutes the positive-feedback loop, and R serves as the delayed inhibitor. Computational analysis showed that, during activation, F rises rapidly as B falls. These events are followed by a delayed rise of R, which returns the system toward its basal state. There is an undershoot in F and an overshoot in B before they return to the basal state, which is generated by the transient excess in R over F. When F, B, and R are allowed to diffuse, spontaneously triggered waves of F and R propagated laterally as in previous models. Correspondingly, regions devoid of B create shadow waves in the F-enriched zones. Fig. 7. Simulation of cell behavior based on mutually inhibitory positive-feedback loop. Three state model of excitability. Front in red, back in green, and refractory in blue are connected by positive-feedback and delayed negative-feedback... We used a 1D model of this modified excitable system coupled to a viscoelastic cell model in the level set framework to determine the distribution of F, B, and R states on the protrusive structures that drive migration. In the absence of a protrusion, the membrane is in the B state. As noise triggers a protrusion, there is a local decline in B state, and a corresponding rise in F state. These activities propagate outwardly, generating a cup-like protrusion. At the base of the cup-like protrusion, B-state activity transiently rises above its basal level, corresponding to the overshoot of B. These simulations are consistent with our observations of the distributions of front and back markers along the membrane and at the cup-shape protrusions. As expected, R-state activity trails the outwardly propagating F state. Discussion Our results reveal a mutual inhibitory interaction between Ras activation and PIP 2 that is central for cell migration. We show that chemoattractants, which activate Ras, as well as expression of RasC Q62L, lead to a reduction of PIP 2. Since RG2 binds to PIP 2, its dissociation from the membrane leads to a further increase in Ras activity, which in turn further decreases PIP 2, creating a powerful positive-feedback loop. There is a similar loop involving RG3. Rap1 has been reported to lie upstream of RasC, but the regulation of both GAPs by PIP 2 suggests there are separate, interconnected loops. This model is consistent with our observations of the patterns of Ras and Rap activities and PIP 2 in migrating cells and the phenotypes resulting from perturbations. Moreover, the discovery of these positive-feedback loops provides critical insight to molecular mechanisms of excitability. The Role of PIP 2 in Cell Migration. The localization of PIP 2 at the back of the cell as well as at protrusions at the leading edge of the migrating cells can be explained by our model. High-resolution time-resolved observation of protrusions at the leading edge revealed that PIP 2 is actually depleted during the early stage of a protrusion but then becomes enriched late in the cycle as PIP 2 rebounds onto the membrane during retraction at the central region of the protrusion. Thus, back proteins can transiently localize to the front at the base of the protrusions. The fact that the TAPP1 biosensor underrepresents PIP 2 at the back likely explains why most previous investigators have reported that PIP 2 is exclusively a leading edge component. Gene deletions that modify PIP 2 levels have been previously reported to create migratory and growth phenotypes in mammalian cells. SHIP1-null granulocytes have been reported to show increased responses to cytokines and chronic progressive hyperplasia. The hyperactive phenotypes in SHIP1 gene deletions have been attributed to elevated PIP 3 levels present in these cells. However, our results raise the possibility that these phenotypes are due to lowered PIP 2 rather than elevated PIP 3 levels. PI3K inhibition only partially reduced the hyperactivity of Dd5P4 − cells, strongly suggesting that the lowered PIP 2 leading to high Ras activity, is the major mediator of this phenotype. 7 F ). Our observations that inhibition of PI3K partially reduced Ras activity and elevated PIP 2, while loss of PTEN increased Ras activity, are consistent with the existence of a PIP 3 -Ras feedback loop. Other RasGAPs including NFaA, NF-1, and C2GAP have also been implicated in the regulation of Ras activity in Dictyostelium. The reported loss of functions of these phenotypes are consistent with our observations of RG2 − and RG3 − cells. Remarkably, this suggests that each of these five GAPs independently contribute to the regulation of Ras or Rap activities. Going forward, it will be important to determine whether NFaA, NF-1, and C2GAP are also regulated by PIP 2 as are RG2 and RG3. Only deletion of NF-1 confers the ability to grow in axenic media, suggesting that it might be the major regulator of macropinocytosis. Interestingly, deletion of Dd5P4 did allow cells to grow in axenic media, indicating that depleting PIP 2 might produce a level of Ras activation similar to the loss of NF-1. However, the exact relationship between Ras activity and axenic growth remains to be determined. PIP 2, Excitable Networks, and Cellular Protrusions. There appears to be a consistent pattern of phospholipid regulation involved in cup-like protrusions in migrating cells and in various internalization events. The PIP 2 found in the central region of an expanding protrusion persists at that zone and is internalized on macropinosomes. It has been previously reported that PIP 2 decorates phagocytic cups and internalized phagosomes. This suggests that, as we found here for macropinocytosis, PIP 2 may also act as a negative regulator during phagocytosis. PIP 2 is associated with the late stage of endosomes, indicating similarity to phagosomes and macropinosomes. The regulation of the localization of PIP 2 -interacting GAPs RG2 and RG3 is also consistent with the observed elevation of Ras and Rap activity at the initiation and edges of an expanding protrusion and its rapid decline in the central, older region of the cup-shaped protrusions. Furthermore, the back-to-front gradient, which we observed with all of the PIP 2 biosensors, is largely derived from the depletion of PIP 2 at the protrusions at the leading edge, while PIP 2 production at the back might also play a role. The excitable network hypothesis, which comprises positive and delayed negative loops between hypothetical F and R states, has been remarkably successful in accounting for wave propagation and the spectrum of behaviors of migrating cells. The Ras-PIP 2 feedback loop we identified provides significant insights into the molecular mechanism of excitability. Our findings suggest that, in addition to F and R states, a separate B state is characterized by high PIP 2 and low Ras activity, whereas the F state is characterized by low PIP 2 and high Ras activity. The switch between the states is controlled in part by the reversible recruitment of PIP 2 -binding RasGAPs, and as-yet-uncharacterized regulation of the enzymes that control PIP 2. The excitable network model is therefore consistent with the observed localization of B-state–associated proteins along the membrane and at the base of protrusions at the leading edge of the cell. The interaction between Ras and PIP 2 that we identified here provides the most complete description of a feedback loop that mediates cell migration and raises interesting questions for further research. First, what are the key enzymes, in addition to Dd5P4, that control PIP 2 levels and how are all of these enzymes regulated by Ras? How is this regulation achieved in the presence and absence of PIP 3 ? Second, what is the mechanism by which the GAPs, RG2 and RG3, bind to PIP 2 ? What are the key domains in these proteins that mediate the binding? Do other Ras Gaps, such as NF-1 and C2Gap, also bind to PIP 2, and are they coordinately regulated with RG2 and RG3? Finally, how are the various Ras regulatory loops, which have been previously suggested, synchronized with the Ras-PIP 2 positive-feedback loop delineated here? Materials and Methods For all experiments, Dictyostelium discoideum AX3 and AX2 strains were cultured in HL5 medium. A detailed description of materials and methods is provided in SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods. Supplementary Material Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. 