 The stiffness of adherent mammalian cells is regulated by the elasticity of substrates due to mechanotransduction via integrin-based focal adhesions. Dictyostelium discoideum is an ameboid protozoan model organism that does not carry genes for classical integrin and can adhere to substrates without forming focal adhesions. It also has a life cycle that naturally includes both single-cellular and multicellular life forms. In this article, we report the measurements of the elastic modulus of single cells on varied substrate stiffnesses and the elastic modulus of the multicellular “slug” using atomic force microscopy as a microindenter/force transducer. The results show that the elastic modulus of the Dictyostelium cell is regulated by the stiffness of the substrate and its surrounding cells, which is similar to the mechanotransduction behavior of mammalian cells. Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Keywords: Dictyostelium, Mechanotransduction, Stiffness, Elastic modulus, Atomic force microscope, Nanoindentation Introduction Cells communicate with the surrounding environment through both chemical and physical signals. While there are extensive biochemical and cell biology data to support observations and explain mechanisms of cellular responses to chemical signals, the confirmation and explanation of cellular response to physical, or more specifically mechanical signals, is relatively new. In the past decade or so, there have been an increasing number of reports in the literature on “mechanotransduction,” a word used for the fact that the softness or stiffness of the surroundings of a cell can be sensed, propagated, and transduced into conformational and biochemical changes within a cell. For example, many adherent mammalian cells show very different morphologies and adhesion structures on soft substrates compared with cells on rigid substrates. In another case, the microenvironment’s elasticity was found to direct stem cell lineage more selectively than soluble induction factors in the stem cell differentiation process. When the microenvironment of a cell includes other cells in addition to a substrate made of hydrogel, researchers found that although cell-cell contact may provide additional signals, differentiation processes such as the striation of myotubes can happen regardless for cells on top of gels or for cells on top of other muscle cells, as long as the stiffness of the gels matches that of normal muscle tissue. Mechanotransduction also causes conformational changes to proteins within the cell. It has been shown that the ability of cells to sustain their shape under mechanical stress is primarily governed by the structure of the cytoskeleton, especially the actin filament proteins. A reasonable hypothesis is that mechanotransduction also causes changes in the mechanical properties of a cell, which has both elastic and viscous characteristics. In this paper, we focus on the elastic property or the stiffness of a cell. One important way to characterize the stiffness of a cell is to measure the elastic modulus of a cell, and several reports have shown that the elastic modulus of adherent mammalian cells changes as a function of substrate stiffness on various cell types. These studies show the stiffness of adherent mammalian cells corresponds to that of elastic substrates, with higher cell elastic modulus on stiffer substrates. The precise mechanism for the dependence of the elastic modulus of cells on the substrate stiffness is still not clear, though it is commonly agreed that the nature of cell-substrate adhesion plays an important role in this type of mechanotransduction. It has been proposed that in mammalian cells integrin-based focal adhesions provide both the structural support required to maintain connection to the substrate and abundant biochemical switches to activate many important signaling pathways to alter the biochemistry of the cell. Integrin interacts with extracellular matrix proteins on the substrate and also links to the actin network of the cytoskeleton. Both image analysis of endothelial cells fluorescently stained for actin and western blot analysis of extracts of fibroblast cells showed that there is a higher amount of actin in cells grown on stiff substrates than those grown on soft substrates. While much is known about the structure and function of focal adhesion complexes of mammalian cells binding to proteins of the extracellular matrix, such specialized complexes are not always necessary for cell-substrate adhesion. Dictyostelium discoideum is an ameboid protozoan model organism that does not carry genes for integrin and can adhere to substrates without forming focal adhesions. Much of the adhesive strength of these cells is thought to be mediated by van der Waals nonspecific attraction. However, Dictyostelium contains Sib proteins that are not genetically similar to integrins, but seem to have some structural similarities and some similar functions, like binding talin and regulating adhesion. It is still unknown if Sib proteins directly bind to extracellular proteins or influence adhesion through another method. Additionally, it is unexplored if Dictyostelium can sense substrate stiffness even without integrins, either by using Sib proteins or another method, but studies by Luo et al. have shown the general ability of Dictyostelium to do mechanosensing. By using micropipette aspiration to apply varied pressure on the surface of the cell, they indicated that mechanosensing helps govern Dictyostelium cell shape progression during cytokinesis. They further proposed that in the absence of focal adhesions, the actin cortex of the Dictyostelium cell plays an important role in sensing force and transmitting it to the cytoskeleton through interactions with myosin II and actin cross-linking proteins. Can the elasticity of a Dictyostelium cell also respond to substrates of differing stiffness as adherent mammalian cells do, which is a subtler change for the cell than the large-scale shape changes induced by micropipette aspiration? This question deserves investigation in order to fully explore the spectrum of mechanotransduction in cells. In addition to mechanotransduction at the cellular level, this process has also been demonstrated at the tissue or organismal level. Mechanotransduction has been implicated in tissue formation, blood pressure regulation, muscle contraction, and bone remodeling. However, the mechanism remains unclear as to how mechanotransduction propagates from a single cell to multiple cells and to tissues and what the roles are for cell-ECM contact versus cell-cell contact in three-dimensional mechanotransduction such as in organogenesis. In the wild, Dictyostelium grow as single cells in the soil and eat bacteria, but if starved the cells send chemical signals to each other and around 100,000 cells aggregate, forming a multicellular organism with multiple cell types, including even primitive immune cells. With a life cycle that naturally includes both single-cellular and multicellular life forms, Dictyostelium is a good model system to compare individual Dictyostelium cells to a multicellular “slug” and to examine if there are similarities in the cell stiffness of cells in a slug and cells in the single-cellular form on substrates of different stiffness, thus providing some insights to the aforementioned questions. In this article, we report the measurements of the elastic modulus of single cells on varied substrate stiffnesses and the elastic modulus of the multicellular slug using atomic force microscopy as a microindenter/force transducer. Cells and other biomaterials often show nonlinear elasticity, in which the elastic modulus increases by orders of magnitude as the applied strain increases, and it is vital to measure properties at the same length scales that cells interact and sense, specifically at the nanometer scale. AFM has become a widely used tool to study the mechanical properties of cells because it is capable of delivering mechanical load on the order of nanonewtons and detecting displacement on the order of nanometers. The elastic modulus of individual Dictyostelium cells has been previously examined by Haupt et al. using AFM with a sharp conical AFM tip as an indenter and focusing on the asymmetric local stiffness across individual cells. The purpose of our work is to examine the modulus dependence on the substrate stiffness and the modulus difference between the single and multicellular forms. We chose a spherical AFM tip as the indenter in our work because there is no need for elasticity mapping of individual Dictyostelium cells and the spherical tip geometry greatly simplified the regression analysis of the force curve data. Using AFM nanoindentation as the primary tool to characterize the elasticity of the substrates, single cells, and slugs, we were able to find out that elasticity of a Dictyostelium cell is dependent on the stiffness of the substrate and its surrounding cells. The results presented in this work demonstrate that the elasticity of Dictyostelium cells is affected by mechanotransduction, similar to that of adherent mammalian cells. Materials and methods Cell culture and development for slug formation Dictyostelium discoidium KAX3 cells were grown in HL5 axenic media shaking in flasks or attached to plastic Petri dishes. To induce development, cells were spun down at low speed at 20 °C and washed twice with Sorenson’s buffer and resuspended to give 2.5 × 10 7 cells in 50 μL of Sorenson’s buffer. A 2% agar in 100 mL distilled H 2 O) was autoclaved to dissolve and then transferred to 35 mM plastic Petri dishes. One autoclaved black nucleopore filter with 0.2-μM pore size was placed in the center of the 2% agar plate, and 50 μL of the washed Dictyostelium cells was dotted in the middle of the filter. Plates were placed in a light tight box with one thin slit running vertically down the center of one of the sides of the box. A light was placed exactly 10 cm in front of the slit in the box in a 19–21 °C room and left for 16–20 h. The filters enabled the slug to remain attached to the agar even after buffer was added over the top for the AFM work. In order to make plates of single cells on agar, nonconfluent cells were lifted from a plastic Petri dish and dropped onto 2% agar plates. Nucleopore filters were not used for the single cells because they interfered with seeing the cells precisely using the inverted optical microscope in order to land the AFM tip directly on them. For additional individual cell experiments, 2%, 0.50%, and 0.25% agar plates were made by microwaving agar with the water until dissolved and then pipetting 4.5 mL into the 35-mM plastic Petri dishes. For all experiments, plates were kept in the dark after preparation or slug development until the AFM analysis, which occurred within 4 to 5 h. AFM measurements The AFM nanoindentation measurements were carried out using an atomic force microscope, which integrates regular AFM function with an inverted optical microscope. An adaptor was fabricated in a machine shop at the University of Wisconsin-Platteville to allow the 35-mM plastic dishes with agar to be held slightly below the level of the stage so that the top of the agar was level with the stage and the cells and slugs were within the working distance of the inverted microscope’s objectives. The inverted microscope allowed the AFM probe to be precisely positioned on and off a cell or a slug according to the image from the optical microscope. As shown in Fig. 1, during the nanoindentation measurement, an AFM probe was brought close to the cell or slug surface, indented into the cell/slug surface, and then retracted from the surface. The deflection of the AFM cantilever and the position of the AFM probe were monitored during the indentation process resulting a force-indentation curve for each indentation measurement. Fig. 1 Experimental setup of atomic force microscopy-based nanoindentation on Dictyostelium single cells and the multicellular slug. The figure is not drawn to scale. During the nanoindentation measurement, an AFM probe was brought close to the cell or slug... Although both the single- and multicellular forms of Dictyostelium can survive in air at room temperature on an agar plate without liquid medium, the indentation measurements were done with the AFM tip completely immerged in Sorenson’s buffer liquid on the agar surface in the plastic dishes. This reduced the adhesion force caused by breaking off the water bridge between the tip and the slugs or the cells in air. Microsphere AFM probes with a standard V-shaped silicon nitride cantilever and a silica sphere 5 μm in diameter were used for nanoindentations. In our experiments, the height of a single Dictyostelium cell on the agar gel is around 2 μm and on average the radius of a cell is around 4 μm. Because the size of the spherical indenter is on the same order of magnitude as the size of single Dictyostelium cells, the local stiffness differences within a cell reported by Haupt et al. were largely averaged out in our experimental setting. Our data did show variations in the regressed modulus values from force curves taken at slightly different locations on a cell. However, since the main focus of this paper is on the possible mechanotransduction property of Dictyostelium cells in response to substrates or other cells, we chose only to report the average modulus value of the cell from multiple force curves that were taken at different locations of a cell. Before nanoindentations on cells or slugs, the spring constant of the cantilevers were calibrated using the thermal noise method, and the optical lever sensitivities were calibrated using the hard surface of a plain Petri dish in liquid. Because the cell/slug is viscoelastic in nature, the loading velocity/frequency will impact the regressed elastic modulus. The frequency response of cells measured with several mechanical measurement techniques shows strong power law dependence at a high-frequency regime but weak dependence in a low-frequency regime. In our experiments, our loading rate is limited by our instrument’s capacity and also the fact that we conducted all the indentation measurements in a liquid environment. To avoid bringing in significant liquid dragging force into the force curve analysis, we limited our loading rate to the low-frequency regime. We tested the indentation with 0.1 Hz, 1 Hz, and 5 Hz loading rates and did not see significant difference in the regressed elastic moduli in the resulting force curves. Since the main focus of our study is on the possible adaptation of the mechanical properties of Dicytostelium cells to the stiffness of the substrate and surrounding cells, it is important for us to use the same loading rate in all our measurements so that the data are comparable. Thus, we kept the approaching velocity of the AFM cantilever during indentation at 1 μ/s and a loading rate of 1 Hz for all measurements. A maximum force trigger of 1.1 ± 0.4 nN was implemented for all force curves on agar substrates. For cells and slugs, a maximum force trigger of 3.0 ± 0.4 nN was used. We measured a total of 21 different cells on agar substrates of three different concentrations/stiffness, with a minimum 6 cells per type of substrate. The measurements were taken over at least four different days of experimentation. Around 700 force curves were collected on 6 different slugs with a minimum of 2 locations of measurements per slug over at least three different days of experimentation. The agar substrates in the experiments were of three different concentrations, 0.25%, 0.50%, and 2.0%. To determine the stiffness of the agar substrates with different concentrations, we collected a total of about 300 force curves on different locations of the agar substrates using the same indentation speed as for the cell and slug data. We took force curves both on agar substrates without any cells and on the regions of substrates not occupied by cells along with the data collection for individual cells. Typical raw data set showing force sensed by the AFM cantilever and the Z position of the cantilever for agar substrates, cells, and slugs are available in Fig. S 1, Fig. S 2, and Fig. S 3 in supporting information, respectively. The raw data were converted to force-indentation curves by the force analysis software tool from Asylum Research, which utilizes the method outlined in H.-J. Butt et al.. Force curve analysis The force-indentation curves, in addition to a nanomechanical model appropriate for the material and tip shape, are used to extract an elastic modulus. For our work, the Hertz model best represents the tip-sample interaction. A typical force-indentation curve on a single Dictyostelium cell on the 2% agar substrate and with the Hertz model fitting is shown in Fig. 2. Both the extension and retraction parts of the force curve are shown. The hysteresis of the force curve is due to the effect of the drag force in liquid and the viscous nature of the cell. The extension part of the force curve with the data up to 200-nm indentation depth is used to regress the modulus of the cell based on the Hertz contact mechanics model. The dashed line shows the fit line of the Hertz model. Theoretically speaking, both the extension and retraction parts of the force-indentation curve can be used for Hertz model fitting. We only used the extension part of the force curve in model fitting because it is easier to find the contact point with the extension part of the force curve for soft biological samples. The Hertz model neglects any adhesion and friction forces between the tip and the sample. This is a significant assumption given that these forces are always present to some degree. In our AFM experiments, we conducted all of the measurements on the agar substrates, single cells, and slugs when the tip and samples were completely submerged in liquid. As shown in Fig. ​ Fig.2, 2, the liquid “screens” the adhesive force between the tip and the cell. The load for the indentation is much greater than the adhesive force; thus, the adhesive forces are negligible. The application of the Hertz model to extract an elastic modulus for biological materials is common, but some specific requirements must be met. For soft materials including cells, typically the stress is proportional to the strain under small deformations. However, under larger deformations, the stress-strain relationship is nonlinear, and the stress increases more rapidly under application of large strains. The Hertz model requires a small strain assumption, which is satisfied when the AFM tip radius is sufficiently large compared with the depth of indentation. Special attention should be paid to the indentation depths when the size of the indenter is comparable with the size of cells. Ding. et al. pointed out that when the indent depth is close to the equivalent radius defined by the combined cell and indenter geometry, the Hertz model would overestimate the elastic modulus of a cell if the ratio of the indenter radius to cell radius is larger than 0.3. In addition, the elastic modulus of the substrate will impact the overall force-indentation curve and bring significant error in the measured elastic modulus when the indentation depths are close to the thickness of the overall height of the cell or any sample under investigation. In our experiments, the height of a single Dictyostelium cell on the agar gel is around 2 μm and on average the radius of a cell is around 4 μm. The spherical indenter has a radius of 2.5 μm, which gives an equivalent radius of about 1.5 μm of the cell and indenter geometry. To fulfill the small strain assumption of the Hertz model and to reduce any indenter size and substrate effect on the force curves, we restricted all the analysis to measurements in force ranges resulting in shallow indentations of 200 nm as shown by the range in the Hertz model fitting in Fig. ​ Fig.2, 2, which is far smaller than the equivalent radius or the average cell height. The Poisson ratio of the cell and slug was taken to be 0.5, as is typical for soft biological materials. Fig. 2 A typical force versus indentation curve measured on a Dictyostelium single cell on an agar substrate of 2% concentration. Both the extension and retraction parts of force curve are shown. The hysteresis of the force curve of all data sets from different locations for a particular concentration of agar substrate was calculated. The uncertainty/variance/SD for this concentration was calculated on the quadratic sum of the SD for each set of data. The same approach of calculating a weighted average was used to represent the elastic modulus of each cell. The data sets here are from slightly different locations of a cell. At the same location, data sets were collected using both manual loading and automatic loading. On average, 30 force curves were collected per individual cell on a total of 21 different cells on agar substrates of three different concentrations/stiffness, with a minimum 6 cells per type of substrate. Around 700 force curves were collected on 6 different slugs with minimum of 2 locations of measurements per slug over at least three different days of experimentation. We collected force curves at 15 different indentation sites on a total of 6 slugs; the distance between different indentation sites on the same slug is significant enough for us take it as an independent sampling point. The weighted average elastic modulus obtained from the force curves on each single cell Dictyostelium is one sample point, and all the single cells from the same kind of agar substrate form a data set. The data sets from all three substrate groups were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance with a Tukey post hoc test. Statistical t test analysis was performed to compare elastic modulus values of the single- and multicellular form of Dictyostelium both on agar substrates of the 2.0% concentration. The value p ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Results and discussion The agar substrates of 0.25%, 0.50%, and 2.0% concentrations were different in their elastic modulus by orders of magnitude. The 0.25% agar plate was the softest of the three with a modulus of 0.057 ± 0.004 kPa. Doubling the concentration of agar to 0.50% made the modulus more than 40 times greater, 2.3 ± 0.1 kPa. The stiffest substrate we used in the experiments was the 2.0% agar plate, with a modulus of 34.7 ± 0.6 kPa. Several other studies reported agarose gel stiffness dependence on its concentrations. Normand et al. reported that in the large deformation regime, the elastic modulus of an agarose gel follows a power law dependence of the agarose molar concentration. For high-viscosity agarose, the power factor is around 1.7, and for low-viscosity agarose, the power factor is around 2.6. Our results follow a similar trend as the low-viscosity agarose, yet the elasticity values are not directly comparable because our measurements are in the nanometer deformation regime. Using AFM nanoindentation with a similar experimental setup, Stolz et al. found the elastic modulus of a 2.5% agarose gel to be 35 ± 5 kPa. Our results are of the same order of magnitude as the results from Stolz et al. The elasticity of different types of agar plates in the experiments provided us a wide range of mechanical stimuli to test if Dictyostelium demonstrate mechanotransduction of substrate stiffness. Fig. 3 The elastic moduli of the agar substrates with three different agar concentrations obtained using AFM nanoindentation measurements and subsequent regression analysis based on the Hertz contact mechanics model. Each column represents the weighted average... The elastic modulus of single-cell Dictyostelium on agar substrates of three different concentrations showed differences. For the cells on the 0.25% agar plate, the values of the elastic modulus ranged from 0.06 to 0.22 kPa with a mean value at 0.13 kPa. Compared with the modulus of the 0.25% agar substrate, the cells were equal to or slightly stiffer than the substrate. The mean modulus for the cells on the 0.50% agar plate was 1.39 kPa, which is on the same order of magnitude as the modulus of the 0.50% agar plate alone. The range of elastic modulus for the cells on the 0.50% agar plate was from 0.63 to 1.74 kPa. For the 2.0% agar plate, the mean modulus of the cells was 2.94 kPa, which was the highest among all three groups of cells. However, it still did not match the order of magnitude of the modulus of the agar substrate, which we found to be much stiffer. 3 ). The elastic modulus of cells distributed with increased variation as the agar concentration/substrate stiffness increased. The values of the elastic modulus for the cells on the 2.0% agar plates ranged from 1.35 to 7.14 kPa. The range of elasticity for cells on 2.0% agar in our experiments is on the same order of magnitude as data reported previously on stiff agar substrates in Haupt et al’s paper. Fig. 4 Distributions of the elastic modulus of the single-cell Dictyostelium on substrates with different agar concentrations/stiffness. The center line of each box is the median of the data set. The asterisk indicates that the calculated p value was less... The p value from the ANOVA confirms that there is a significant difference between the elastic modulus of cells on a 0.25% agar plate and cells on a 2.0% agar plate. For the data we obtained, the elastic modulus of the cells on 0.25% agar is not significantly different from those on 0.50% agar. However, a p value of 0.051 for the comparison between cells on the 0.50% and the 2.0% agar suggests a trend. This is fairly common in experiments with cells because of all the natural variability in biological samples. Overall, the data in Fig. ​ Fig.4 4 show that the elastic modulus of Dictyostelium single cells is regulated by the substrate rigidity, as least for substrates differing in stiffness by two or more orders of magnitude. The experimental evidence in the paper by Solon et al. suggested that fibroblasts tune their internal stiffness to match that of their substrate. The results from our study show that substrate stiffness regulates the elastic modulus of Dictyostelium single cells. However, our results also indicate that although the elastic modulus of Dictyostelium single cells increases as the elastic modulus of the agar substrate increases, there is not a proportional relationship between the two. With very soft substrates, cells can be stiffer than the substrate as in the case of the 0.25% agar plate. With very hard substrates as with the 2.0% agar plate, cells grow stiffer but do not exceed a limit of a few kilopascals. One interesting observation we found in our experiment is that the time required for the cell stiffness-related mechanotransduction to happen in Dictyostelium is at most just a few hours. All the single cells were cultured on rigid polystyrene Petri dishes before transferring to the soft agar plates with different stiffnesses. The cells were plated on agar for 1 to 3 h before AFM indentation measurements, yet the AFM measurements show a difference in elasticity between the cells on the different agar plate concentrations. This confirms the highly dynamic nature of the actin network in cells, which has been shown to primarily determine the elasticity of cells and suggests that the method the Dictyostelium cells have of detecting and transmitting information to the cytoskeleton is also rapid. Research from other studies has shown that the rate of turnover of actin filaments in living cells is within 1–2 min, and the time scale for cytoskeletal-level mechanosensing and subsequent biochemical signaling is between minutes and hours. A mechanical signal-triggered cell behavior and functional change can involve mechanical force transmission to the nucleus and changes in gene expression, which has a time scale of days. The fact that we can observe a difference in elastic modulus on cells plated on different substrates within only a few hours indicates that the mechanotransduction involved in our experiment does not involve the nucleus and gene expression changes. Future work should investigate if the Sib proteins are involved in this mechanism. Regression results of force curves obtained in our experiments show that the elastic modulus values of the multicellular “slug” range from 0.12 to 3.07 kPa. The mean value of all the data points is 0.78 kPa. For comparison, Fig. 5 displays the distribution of the elastic modulus values of the single-cellular and multicellular “slugs”, both on 2.0% agar plates. Using Student’s two-tailed t test for two independent means, we found a p value of 0.00039, indicating a statistically significant difference between the two data sets. Could the results imply that the stiffness of the actin cytoskeleton decreases upon the formation of a multicellular organism in comparison with single free-living cells? The process of multicellular development in Dictyostelium involves cell signaling and important cell adhesion events, as the individual cells need to communicate with one another and physically join together. Several cell adhesion proteins show increased expression in the development process in Dictyostelium including homologs of β- and α-catenin that bind to actin. We had expected that due to the cell-cell contact in 3D that the actin cytoskeletal structure would have greater mechanical stiffness in a multicellular organism as compared with a single cell, which was not supported by the data. Fig. 5 Elastic modulus of single-cell Dictyostelium and the multicellular form of Dictyostelium both on 2% agar plates. The center line of each box is the median of the data set. Asterisk indicates a p < 0.05 determined from a... To understand the results in Fig. ​ Fig.5, 5, we examined the experimental conditions and the structure of the Dictyostelium. The multicellular slug form of Dictyostelium has a surface sheath structure of around 10 nm in thickness made of polysaccharides and proteins that encompasses all the cells and defines the shape of the slug. Overall, the structure of the slug includes an anterior part that is not entirely in contact with substrate and contains primarily cells that express genes that will cause them to form the stalk of the fruiting body after culmination. The posterior part of the slug is in contact with the substrate and primarily consists of cells that will become the spores. Sometimes the slug will also leave a trail with collapsed sheath as it phototaxes. In the experiments, we took care to use the optical microscope to make sure the AFM tip landed on the posterior part of the slug that was in contact with the agar. We also made sure the indentation was deeper than 10 nm, and that the indentation range of the force curves used in the regression analysis was between 10 and 200 nm. Thus, we are confident that the measured elastic modulus is from the top layer of cells on the posterior part of the slug. The seemly small elastic modulus of the cells in the slug was not due to probing at the sheath or the anterior part of the slug that does not rest on the surface. It should be emphasized that the data for the slugs in Fig. ​ Fig.5 5 was from the top layer of cells in the slugs. Due to the nature of AFM nanoindentation measurements, we did not have access to the cells beneath the top layer or any cells of the slug in contact with the substrate directly. The limitation of the measurable cells in the slug led us to another explanation of the experimental results. Data in Fig. ​ Fig.5 5 should be interpreted as the stiffness of cells-on-agar compared with the stiffness of cells-on-cells. It cannot be generalized as a simple comparison between cells in the single-cellular form and the multicellular form. Several studies have reported that cell-cell contact appears to induce similar cell-on-gel effects in mechanotransduction. In our experiments, the top layer of cells in the slug senses the cells directly beneath them, not the 2.0% agar substrate. Assuming mechanotransduction happens to the cells in the slugs, the elastic modulus of the top layer of cells would be affected by the stiffness of the cells beneath and surrounding them through cell-cell contact. Assuming the elasticity of the cells in direct contact with the substrate may be similar to those single cells on the 2.0% agar substrate due the cell-gel contact, they would not be the same stiffness as the agar substrate. This bottom layer of cells would serve just like a much softer substrate to the cells on top of them, and our data for single cell elasticity indicates that a softer substrate leads to softer cells which suggests a reason why cells in the top of the slug were much softer than the single cells on the 2.0% agar. Our experiment did not reveal if the cells across the entire slug body are homogeneous with similar values of elastic modulus or if there is a gradient of elasticity from the bottom to the top of the slug. Although in the slug cell-cell contact is 3D instead of 2D as in the case of the single cells on the substrates, according to our data, these additional physical and chemical signals provided by the cell-cell contact do not appear to increase the stiffness of cells on the top of other cells. Conclusions We observed that Dictyostelium cells adapt their stiffness to the compliance of their substrate. The stiffness of the top layer of cells in the multicellular slug is lower than that of the single cells on rigid substrates but similar to those on soft substrates. The results show the elastic modulus of a Dictyostelium cell is regulated by the stiffness of the substrate and its surrounding cells, which is similar to the mechanotransduction behavior of mammalian cells. Electronic supplementary material ESM 1 