 How the collective motion of cells in a biological tissue originates in the behavior of a collection of individuals, each of which responds to the chemical and mechanical signals it receives from neighbors, is still poorly understood. Here we study this question for a particular system, the slug stage of the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. We investigate how cells in the interior of a migrating slug can effectively transmit stress to the substrate and thereby contribute to the overall motive force. Theoretical analysis suggests necessary conditions on the behavior of individual cells, and computational results shed light on experimental results concerning the total force exerted by a migrating slug. The model predicts that only cells in contact with the substrate contribute to the translational motion of the slug. Since the model is not based specifically on the mechanical properties of Dd cells, the results suggest that this behavior will be found in many developing systems. Keywords: Dictyostelium discoideum, Cell movement, Motive force, Cell-based model, Visco-elastic elements, Migrating slug 1. Introduction The individual and collective or tissue-like movement of cells is an important component of many processes, including morphogenesis and embryonic development, the immune response, wound healing, and angiogenesis and metastasis in cancer. In these processes individual cells detect chemical and mechanical signals in their environment and alter their pattern of movement in response. An example occurs in the chemotactic response of cells to attractants, which involves both a determination of the appropriate direction in which to move, and organization of the motile machinery to initiate movement. In some instances cells modify their environment by secreting signals, or by selectively degrading the matrix immediately surrounding them to facilitate movement or to amplify signals. In the immune response leukocytes migrate through the extracellular matrix as individuals, but in early embryonic development of vertebrates large-scale reorganization of cells occurs via a collective, tissue-like movement in which cells interact strongly. Movement of the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum and other amoeboid cells involves at least four different stages: protrusion, attachment to the substrate, translocation of the cell body, and detachment of the rear. Cells first extend localized protrusions at the leading edge, which take the form of lamellipodia, filopodia or pseudopodia. Most current models explain force generation at the leading edge by localized actin polymerization and cross-linking of actin filaments. Behind the protrusion there is a region of actin disassembly, where filaments are disassembled, cross-links broken and the actin monomers resulting from disassembly freed to diffuse to the site of active polymerization. Not all protrusions are persistent, in that they must anchor to the substrate or to another cell in order for the remainder of the cell to follow. Protrusions are stabilized by formation of adhesive complexes, which serve as sites for molecular signaling and also transmit mechanical force to the substrate. In fibroblasts adhesive complexes are regions of the plasma membrane where integrin receptors, actin filaments and associated proteins cluster together. During migration the small nascent adhesive complexes at the front of the cell grow and strengthen into larger, more organized focal adhesions that serve as traction ‘pads’ over which the cell body moves. The molecular nature of the contacts is poorly characterized in Dd, which does not express integrins, but one candidate molecule has recently been discovered. Next, actomyosin filaments contract at the front of the cell and pull the cell body toward the protrusion in fibroblasts, whereas in Dd, contraction is at the rear and the cytoplasm is squeezed forward. Finally cells detach the adhesive contacts at the rear, allowing the tail of the cell to follow the main cell body. Of course, to move cells must exert force on their surroundings, and how much force a cell exerts is also a function of the substrate: on a rigid, adhesive substrate they can generate large contractile forces transmitted through actin bundles and adhesion complexes, but on a pliable substrate they exhibit less organized actin and smaller, weaker adhesion complexes. In Dd the adhesive contacts are relatively weak and free-ranging cells move rapidly, whereas in fibroblasts they are very strong and cells move slowly. 1.1. Models of cell and tissue movement Numerous models for the motion of individual cells on a substrate have been proposed. DiMilla et al. analysed a one-dimensional model in which a cell consisted of discrete subunits, each with an elastic spring, dash-pot and contractile element connected in parallel. Interaction with the substrate was modeled by additional Maxwell elements at the front and rear. The movement cycle was divided into three parts: the time needed for protrusion, the time of cytoskeleton contraction, and the time for cytoskeleton relaxation. Suitable choices of parameters lead to the ‘bell-shaped’ dependence of speed on adhesive properties of the substrate observed experimentally. A continuum model that incorporates further detail and leads to similar results was developed by Gracheva and Othmer. A 1D model for the steady gliding movement of fish keratocytes was developed in Mogilner et al., where it was shown that the dynamics of self-alignment and contraction of the actin–myosin network can explain forward translocation of the cell body. developed a model for the crawling movement of nematode sperm consisting of a system of coupled differential equations that describe cell protrusion, contraction and adhesion. Under suitable biochemical regulation it produces steady motion of the cell. A two-phase flow model of cytoplasm designed to understand cytoplasmic streaming and oscillations was studied in Alt and Dembo. There are several other approaches to modeling cell deformations using a continuum description. The most widely used is the ‘cortical shell-fluid core’ model, in which the cortex is treated as a pre-stressed elastic medium and the core is treated as a fluid. This has been successful in explaining aspiration experiments and large, axisymmetric deformations of leukocytes, but to date there is no 3D model based on this paradigm that incorporates active forces and arbitrary shape changes. 2 However, to understand the collective tissue-like movement exhibited by cellular aggregates, one must understand how local interactions between moving cells affect the collective motion. In this paper we focus on the movement of Dd, and therefore we briefly review pertinent aspects of its life cycle. In early aggregation the cells move autonomously, but in late aggregation they form connected streams that migrate toward the pacemaker. These streams converge in a loose mound of cells that usually topples over to form a cigar-shaped mass called the slug. The slug frequently moves in a pulsatile fashion by first elevating and extending the front and then pulling up the rear. At each stage, cells receive signals from the environment, and must integrate these signals, decide what direction to move, and organize their motile machinery to achieve this. A key issue is what force the slug exerts on a substrate and how this relates to the number of cells in the slug. Several early experimental studies by Inouye and Takeuchi and Inouye focused on the forces involved in slug movement, and their results will be discussed in detail later. A cell-based model for motile Dd cells that can generate active forces, that interact via adhesive forces, and that can detect and relay chemotactic signals, was developed in Palsson and Othmer. In the Palsson–Othmer model cells were treated as deformable viscoelastic ellipsoids, and signal transduction and cell–cell signaling was described using a previously developed model. The shape constraint restricts the admissible deformations, but makes the simulation of thousands of interacting cells feasible. Since arbitrary ratios of semi-axes are allowed, subject only to the constraint of conserving the volume, the model admits a very wide range of shapes, from spherical to very long and slender. While single cells on rigid substrates are ‘fried-egg’-shaped, cells in 3D matrices are more elliptical in shape, and thus the shape restriction is not so severe in that context. This model can reproduce the observations on the chemotactic behavior of single cells, streaming during aggregation, and the collective motion of planar aggregates of cells driven by a small group of pacemakers. The model predicts that the motion of 2D slugs results from the same behaviors as are exhibited by individual cells; it is not necessary to invoke new mechanisms or behaviors. In another cell-based model of Dd, movement is governed by the minimization of a free energy. In this approach each cell is composed of several connected automata which change configuration according to prescribed rules, with the objective of minimizing the energy associated with bonds between cells. The objective was to model aggregation from single cells through the movement of a slug, and while the model can formally reproduce qualitative features of the aggregation and later stages, it is not clear how biochemical details about signal detection, rheological properties of the cytoplasm, and force generation can be incorporated into the rules of the model and related to energy minimization. For instance, active forces bias the energy function used in the minimization, but in reality these forces cannot be derived from a potential, and it is not clear whether this method can be made consistent with mechanical laws. Other work has focused on continuum descriptions of either pattern formation in the Dd slug or on the movement of the slug. In the former category Pate and Othmer developed a model for scale-invariant patterning based on chemotaxis and cell sorting, and Umeda expanded on this work. In both cases the slug was represented as a continuum comprising prespore cells and pre-stalk cells at a constant total density. In Pate and Othmer chemotaxis equations were developed based on the differences of forces at the ends of a cell, while in Umeda an equation for the fraction of pre-stalk cells was formulated that incorporates adhesive differences that enter into a free energy which governs the evolution. The authors concluded that differences in chemotaxis was sufficient to cause sorting, and differential adhesion could create clear boundaries between the different cell types. Other continuum models that deal with the forces involved in movement of the slug will be discussed later. Our objective here is to extend the PO model to make it applicable to 3D moving slugs by incorporating better descriptions of cell–cell and cell–substrate interactions, and to use the modified model to address some long-standing issues concerning the force exerted by a translocating slug. This involves several modifications in the way the forces are determined. For instance, in Palsson and Othmer net translocation of the center of mass of an aggregate required that all cells make contact with the substrate, but the 3D cell-sorting experiments done there do not require this. Here we remove this restriction, and the resulting model and software will provide a powerful tool for investigating many of the processes described above. Experimental data is now available which describes the mechanical behavior of individual cells, and it is desirable to include these details in a mathematical and computational model of individual cells. However, one must make simplifications if the objective is to study the interactions of many cells, and the major one in the PO model and here is that the cells are constrained to be ellipsoids. As we remarked earlier, results which show that the PO model can accurately represent the dynamics of 2D slugs suggest that the characterization of the interactions between cells is adequate and the shape constraint is not a severe limitation. Here we focus on how cells in a Dd slug contribute to the overall motive force of the slug. In the following section we discuss some theoretical considerations that shed light on how cells can transmit stress to a substrate via other cells. We then describe in detail the properties of each cell, how they interact with each other, and how the boundary conditions are implemented in the PO model and how they are modified here. We also describe the algorithm for time stepping the equations of motion, and discuss the results of computational experiments aimed at understanding slug movement. 2. Theoretical analysis of multicellular movement One difficulty in understanding the movement of the 3D slug in Dd is described by Odell and Bonner, who say “… in a close-packed 3D mass of cells, each amoeba trying to crawl can exert traction only upon its neighbors which, in turn, exert traction on it. In the interior of the grex, with no rigid agar substratum to crawl upon, equal efforts by a cohort of amoebae to crawl in the same direction, each upon similarly crawling neighbors, cancel and produce no net mechanical result.” One might expect that only the cells in contact with the rigid agar can move the slug forward, and that other cells are in effect carried by those cells in contact with the agar or substrate in a ‘piggy-back’ mechanism. On the other hand, some experiments suggest that the total motive force produced by the slug is proportional to its volume, and hence the total number of cells, which would rule out a ‘piggy-back’ mechanism. As will be discussed in more detail later, many have simply postulated that the active motive force is a volumetric force in their macroscopic description of slug movement. Others have also proposed descriptions in which interior cells can transfer momentum to the substrate without a detailed analysis of how this occurs. Our first objective is to identify conditions under which a single-phase continuum model with suitable rheological properties derived from cell-level descriptions of movement will predict that the motive force is proportional to the volume of the slug. A comparison and critique of the Bonner–Odell model and other continuum models of the slug is given in Section 5. Before describing a formal analysis of the problem, we can gain some insight into that analysis by the following heuristic argument. The question is what conditions in the interior of a slug would enable a cell to transmit force to the boundary and thereby to the substrate. In the absence of either action at a distance, or allowing cells to extend long filopodia to the substrate, it is clear that the force exerted by a cell has to be transmitted through other cells. However, if all cells are identical and attempt to transmit force simultaneously, Newton’s third law shows that forces in the interior will cancel, which is the essence of the Bonner–Odell statement above. However, suppose that a portion of the cells are rigid and connected to other rigid cells in a chain that can transmit stress to the boundary. Then a motile cell in the interior can attach to a rigid cell and pull itself forward. We call this the bedspring model, since the rigid cells form a network that transmits stress to the boundary and allows other cells to crawl through it. This is similar to what occurs when a cell migrates through a tissue, but in order for mechanism to work in the Dd slug, the network must be dynamic and cells must be able to ‘freeze’ when stress is applied, but also to move. The following analysis formalizes this heuristic argument. Suppose there are N cells in the slug, and for simplicity let us frame the discussion in terms of axial forces that are oriented in the direction of motion so as to make the problem 1D. How cells select an orientation will be described in the following section. At present we do not stipulate that the total force on any cell, or on the slug itself, be zero, so there may be non-vanishing accelerations in the slug. Moreover we ignore deformations at present and regard all forces as acting at the center of mass. Deformation of cells and volume exclusion effects will be treated in detail later. The forces on a cell are those due to the active forces it exerts on neighboring cells or the substrate, the reaction to forces exerted by other cells on it, dynamic drag forces that arise as a moving cell forms and breaks adhesive bonds with neighboring cells, and static frictional forces that exist when cells are rigidly attached to each other or to the substrate. The first three are self-explanatory and the latter will be defined precisely later. The active force cell i exerts on the substrate or a neighboring cell is denoted T i,j, wherein j = 0 denotes the substrate, and the reaction force to this is denoted M j,i to indicate that this is the motive force. We have M j,i = − T i,j. Let N i a denote the neighbors, including the substrate, of i upon which it can exert traction. By definition, the ‘neighbor’ relation is symmetric for all cells; if cell i can exert traction on cell j, then cell j can exert traction on cell i, but this is not true for the substrate. The substrate is assumed to be passive, in that it does not generate stress. The total motive force generated by i is M i = ∑ j ∈ N i a M j, i. Similarly, the total traction force which other cells exert on cell i is T i = ∑ j ∈ N i a T j, i. In addition to traction forces, cells may exert drag forces on their neighbors as a result of their relative motion, and we define the dynamic friction force on cell i due to interaction with j as D j, i = μ i j, where μ ij is the friction coefficient. This force satisfies the relationship D i,j = − D j,i, which implies that μ ij = μ ji. If D i is the total dynamic friction force on cell i, and N i d is the set of cells that interact with i via a frictional force, then D i = ∑ j ∈ N i d D j, i = ∑ j ∈ N i d μ i j. Note that in general N i d ⊆ N i a since cells may extend pseudopods to cells at some distance, but not be in contact with them in the sense of giving rise to a frictional force. Finally, there is a static friction force on some cells, which is the means for constructing a network that can transmit stress to the boundary. This can be defined formally as a force that arises from infinitely tight binding between cells or from binding of a cell to the substrate. As a consequence of this binding, statically bound cells function as one rigid object. One might think of this force as a limiting case of the dynamic friction in which the friction coefficient goes to infinity, but a more precise description is that of the force between two ‘welded’ materials. Not all cells statically bind to other cells and we will use N i s to denote the set of cells that statically bind to cell i. This is a transitive relation in that if i is bound to j and j is bound to k, then i is bound to k. In particular, if i is statically bound to the substrate either directly or indirectly then it can transmit forces applied to it to the substrate, thereby forming a component of the bedspring network. In fact these are the only type of chains that can transmit stress from the interior; a chain of say four cells statically bound to each other but not bound to the substrate simply functions as a larger unit. If S ji denotes the static binding force on the i -th cell when bound to the j -th, then S ji = − S ij and the cell–cell forces cancel on all but those cells attached to the substrate. The physical mechanism that mediates the static binding response and the adhesive interaction that enables a cell to generate active motive force is the same, but the underlying processes that initiate these are different. The active force arises when a cell initiates actin polymerization locally, extends a pseudopod, and anchors it on a neighboring cell via an adhesive complex. The target cell may then initiate the static frictional response in that it becomes rigid and binds very tightly to its neighbors. Of course the temporal sequence could be reversed, in that a cell extending a pseudopod only anchors to a cell that is statically attached to other cells. In reality the processes may occur simultaneously; contact of a pseudopod on a cell may initiate strain hardening in that cell and simultaneously lead to strengthening of the attachment via a complex feedback loop. The total force on the i -th cell is F i = M i + T i + D i + ∑ j ∈ N i s S j i = ∑ j ∈ N i a M j, i + ∑ j ∈ N i a T j, i + ∑ j ∈ N i d μ i j + ∑ j ∈ N i s S j i. Some of these terms may be zero: for instance, M i is zero for those cells that are not generating active motive force. If we sum these over all cells we see that the sum of the tractions and motive forces, as well as sum of the dynamic friction force, vanish for all cell–cell interactions in the interior of the slug. The only surviving terms are those due to direct interaction of a cell with the substrate, or the indirect interaction via a chain of statically connected cells that is connected to the substrate. The latter takes the form of a force on an interior cell equal and opposite to the traction force it exerts on a statically connected chain of cells. Thus in the absence of static binding there is no mechanism by which an interior cell can transmit stress to the boundary, and accordingly, there can be no volumetric forces on the slug in a continuum description in the absence of other mechanisms. Bonner and Odell introduce additional mechanisms in the form of a gradient of cellular properties transverse to the direction of motion, but these have not be been confirmed experimentally. A cell i is said to be ‘frozen’ if it statically binds to the substrate directly or indirectly, that is, if there exists a sequence j 1, j 2 ;…; j k, such that i statically binds to j 1, j 1 statically binds to j 2 ;…, and j k statically binds to the substrate. The set of all frozen cells is called the frozen network of the slug. Thus the foregoing can be summarized as follows: in the absence of a frozen network in the slug, the total force on the substrate is the active force exerted by cells in direct contact with the substrate, and for a slug translocating at a constant velocity, this exactly balances the dynamic frictional interaction with the substrate. 3. The computational model 3.1. An outline of the assumptions The PO model and the implementation of it that we describe here is based on two major assumptions: the cells are oriented ellipsoids and the passive response of the cytoplasm is that of an incompressible viscoelastic solid. In addition, there are assumptions as to how cells interact, how they orient to stimuli, and how active forces are exerted on neighboring cells. The shape constraint restricts the allowable deformations and in doing so makes possible the simulation of large populations of interacting cells. As remarked earlier, this constraint is not so important for cells in a 3D matrix, but it is less clear how important it is when cells are cheek-by-jowl and interact strongly. Work on a cell-based model that is free of this constraint is currently in progress. Since cells are assumed to be ellipsoids, non-spherical cells are assumed to reorient their major axis to coincide with the stimulus direction before translocation begins, which is a mathematical reflection of the biological observation that cells that have received stimuli tend to be polarized, thus have an orientation, and absent restraints from neighboring cells move in the direction of their orientation. The three major differences between the present implementation and that in Palsson and Othmer are the way in which the forces are determined, how the shape of the cell is calculated, and the interaction of cells with a fixed substrate. In addition to these major changes there are several implementational details, including the way in which the cells reorient and the numerical algorithms used for solving the equations of motion. Fig. 1. The figure shows a schematic of a cell and the nomenclature used in the simulations. The labeled vectors a, b, and c indicate the major axes of the ellipsoid. The cell is oriented in the direction of vector a which corresponds with the direction of motion.... Directed cell motion in amoeboid cells is a complex process that can be separated into two independent subprocesses: the determination of a direction in which to move, which we call orientation, and the motion itself, which involves the conversion of chemical energy into mechanical energy. The former involves a complex signal transduction pathway, the main steps of which are used in numerous amoeboid cells. Here we are not concerned with how the cell determines a direction or how it decides when to move, but only with the motion itself. Thus the model has two different inputs corresponding to the two processes: an orientation stimulus and a motion stimulus. The orientation stimulus provides a direction of orientation d ^ o, which is the direction the cell will turn towards as it starts to move and then it will continue moving in that direction. The motion stimulus determines one of two states for the motion, high motility or low motility. In the case of Dd, both inputs are derived from the cAMP signal. For the simulations in this paper low motility motion means no motion and therefore we do not distinguish between the terms high-motility motion or active motion. The process of orienting a cell in the model is called an orientation cycle, and this consists of an ordered sequence of steps. The direction of motion may either be chosen randomly, if there is no directional signal, or it may be determined by the signal. Thus when cell motion is initiated, a cell will always start an orientation cycle, but a cell can continue to move after an orientation cycle has completed. The orientation cycle lasts a predetermined length of time, t c. The orientation stimulus is considered only at the beginning of an orientation cycle and is then ignored until a new cycle is started. If an orientation cycle has been started and is not complete but the motion stimulus indicates high motility motion should stop, the orientation cycle will be terminated as will the motion. When high motility motion is terminated a new orientation cycle is initiated and low motility motion is started. These rules are chosen for two reasons. First, in previous modeling of Dd it was found that if a cell follows the gradient of the chemoattractant too closely, it will get lost in local peaks of the chemoattractant and cells cannot aggregate successfully. However the modeling also indicates that a successful strategy for aggregating is to maintain the same direction for a period of time and only change directions occasionally. Thus in the model cells do not constantly alter their course, but only use the direction stimulus at the beginning of an orientation cycle. Yet once a direction is chosen motion can persist for as long as the motion stimulus indicates. Second, experimental evidence indicates that Dd cells can alter their direction within 20 s after the location of a source of cAMP is changed. After determining if a cell is in an orientation cycle or not, the forces acting on the cell are used to determine its motion. Three types of interactions are considered in the model and they give rise to the four types of forces described in Section 2. The three types of interactions are: cell adhesion, which gives rise to dynamic drag forces denoted D and static frictional forces denoted A ; active cell motion, which generates active forces giving the cell traction denoted T ; and interactions due to the physical presence of other cells including their viscoelastic nature, which are denoted R and R*, and the reactive force to tractional forces M. In addition to these forces, the model also takes into consideration drag due to the surrounding fluid. A detailed discussion of how these forces are calculated is contained in Appendix A. When determining how the forces affect a cell, the forces are resolved into the coordinate vectors defined by the three major axes of the cell. In addition, the forces in each of these coordinate axes act either on the plus side of the cell with respect to an axis or on the minus side of the cell with respect to an axis. 3.2. The rheological model of the cytoplasm The cytoplasm in many amoeboid cells has been characterized as a viscoelastic material whose properties are dominated by actin filaments and microtubules, collectively termed the cytoskeleton. Actin filaments are organized either as a meshwork in the leading edge, or as transient bundles of actin filaments that extend along the length of cells. The elastic modulus of actin solutions is concentration dependent, and they exhibit strain hardening, a property that may be important in slug movement. Some even characterize the cytoplasm in Dd as an ‘active viscoplastic’ material, because it exhibits viscoelastic behavior above a yield stress, but little deformation below this level. The details of how actin networks are reorganized under the membrane in response to extracellular signals is a complex process that is only partially understood, and it is not feasible to incorporate the level of detail required to describe this in a multicellular model at present. In the PO model and here the opposite extreme in descriptions is adopted; cells are treated as incompressible viscoelastic solids and their stress–strain response characteristics are lumped into three elements that coincide with the three major axes. Along each axis the stress–strain behavior is described by a nonlinear version of a standard Kelvin element, as shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 2. A schematic of the element of a standard solid, or Kelvin element along each axis of the ellipsoid. It consists of a nonlinear spring in parallel with a Maxwell element, which comprises a linear spring in series with a dashpot. Since there is an elastic element in each branch the immediate response to a step change in the applied force is a step change in displacement in the elastic elements, followed by slower flow in the viscous element. Release of the external forces leads to a return to the rest length of the element, and since we assume that the elements are identical along the three axes, the equilibrium shape is spherical. However, the three deformations are not arbitrary, because the total volume of the cell must be conserved. 3 In Palsson and Othmer the constant volume constraint was satisfied by first computing the deformation and then correcting the change in all radii so as to correct the volume. Here we adopt a method more in line with a continuum description of the material. Suppose that we write the Cauchy stress for a material in the form T = − p δ + τ, where p is the mean isotropic stress and τ is the viscous stress tensor, which we assume is traceless. Suppose, for illustrative purposes, that the cytoplasm is a linear viscoelastic fluid, and thus assume in analogy with the Maxwell mechanical element that the rate of deformation tensor D ≡ 1 2 T ) comprises an elastic part and a viscous part. That is, assume that the constitutive relation for the traceless part of the elastic component is τ ˇ = k D o and for the viscous element τ = μ D o, where o denotes the traceless part of a tensor and ˇ denotes an invariant time derivative, such as the Lie or the Jaumann derivative. Then τ ˇ k + τ μ = 2 D o. For the isotropic part we assume a similar decomposition and thus write κ p ˙ + p λ = − t r, where κ ≡ ∂ ln V/ ∂ p is the compressibility, λ is the bulk viscosity, and tr denotes the trace of a tensor. If the fluid is nearly incompressible κ is small, and the pressure in a viscoelastic fluid equilibrates rapidly with the trace of the deformation rate. In the limit this is a singularly perturbed equation and sets a constraint on the deformation. In the same way, we can decompose the total stress on an ellipsoid into the shear along the axes of the ellipsoid and an additional ‘isotropic’ part reflected in a pressure that constrains the overall deformation so as to satisfy the constraint that the volume remain constant. The rheological model we adopt is more complex than the Maxwell model used for illustration, but the same principle applies. In what follows the pressure is the deviation from a rest state and therefore may have either sign: a negative pressure causes the cell to compress and a positive pressure causes the cell to expand. In reality the cell must also be involved in setting the pressure, but the present formulation allows us to deform the cell as a viscoelastic substance and maintain a constant volume without modeling the complicated cell membrane. The equation governing the length of an axis of a cell is u a ′ = + p ¯ − f 2 ] + f a ′ ) × d u a + k a ) − 1, where u a is the change in the length of the a axis, f 2 is the force from the spring in parallel, μ a is the viscous coefficient of the dashpot, k a is the spring constant for the spring in the Maxwell element, f a is the magnitude of the force applied at each end in opposite directions, and p ¯ is the force due to pressure. There are three such equations one for each axis and one equation due to the volume constraint given by 0 = u a ′ + u b ′ + u c ′. where a 0, b 0, and c 0 are the initial lengths of the cell axes. This system of ordinary differential equations determines the shape of a cell and is solved using the software package dlsode.f at each time step. Depending on the external forces acting on a cell, it will move, change shape or both. Consider the external forces acting on a cell parallel to the a ^ axis. Let f a + be the sum of the magnitude of the forces acting on the side a + and f a − be the sum of the magnitude of the forces acting on the side a −. The net force translates the cell and the change in shape in the direction a ^ is determined by f a in Eq. which is given by f a =. 3.3. The equations of motion The equation of motion for the i -th cell can be written as A i f μ f A μ c e l l v i + A i s μ s A μ c e l l v i + ∑ j ≠ i A i j A + 1 6 π r i b μ c e l l ) = 0. As before the first subscript indicates the source and the second indicates the target of a force. Recall the subscript 0 denotes the substrate, A denotes the total area of an undeformed cell, and A ij, A if, and A is denote the contact, area between cell i and cell j, cell i and the fluid, and cell i and the substrate respectively. The parameters μ cell, μ s, and μ f are determined by the degree of adhesiveness between cells, between the substrate and cells, and the fluid viscosity. Finally, r ib = u b + b 0 for cell i, and v i denotes the velocity of cell i. The terms depending on velocity are drag forces, and because the Reynolds number for this system is very small we ignore the acceleration. The system is solved using two different methods. The first is a quasi-implicit method based on the trapezoidal rule and the second is an Adams fourth-order predictor–corrector method. The final results of simulations using both methods compare well, but the quasi-implicit method requires more computational time. Thus for all the simulations shown in this paper, the predictor–corrector method was used. For more details on the quasi-implicit numerical method see Appendix A. 3.4. Parameters There are several important parameters necessary for our model. It is possible to obtain estimates for several of these and in this section we discuss how the values used in the simulations were determined. Values of forces for several types of cells are given in Table 1. For typical simulations we use a high motility motion force of 4 × 10 −3 dyn. Table 1 Measured active forces and cell speeds The viscoelastic properties of leukocytes have been measured and we use those values as a guide to determine the spring constants and the dasphot constant for the viscoelastic elements in our model. The observations from experiments on leukocyte deformations were fitted to a standard linear solid model of a cell. The parameters found are given in Table 2. Table 2 Viscoelastic parameters The values given are for a passive cell and slight displacements; they do not account for active deformation of a moving cell, which is important here. By examining the creep function and the relaxation function of a standard linear solid and considering the values of the above table, we determined the following parameter set which is used for a typical simulation: k a = k b = k c = 163.8 dyn/cm, k 2 = 147.5 dyn/cm, and μ a = μ b = μ c = 123 dyn min/cm. With these parameter a force of 400nN will deform the cell about 2:5 μm in 4 min and it will return to its original shape 7 min after all forces are removed. The results of the paper are not sensitive to these parameter values, for example simulations have been run with k 2 ranging from 1.475 to 1475.0 and the same force relationship holds. If the parameters are chosen so that the cell is too stiff, numerical difficulties do arise. When the cell is compressed sufficiently it becomes much stiffer due to the different response of the nucleus, and to capture this we assume that f 2 is given as follows: f 2 =, where x n is the location of the center of the n -th cell and N i a =. The force applied to the j -th cell by the i -th cell due to pulling is given by T i, j = { 0 if j = ∅, k if ‖ s 0, i ‖ ⩽.2 and j ≠ ∅, T i otherwise. When an unstimulated cell is stimulated by the motion stimulus, it orients itself and generates active force in order to move in high motility motion for as long as it is being stimulated by the motion stimulus. In our simulations the active force is ramped up and down. In addition there is some random variation given to the force due to the random differences in cells. Not only is this biologically realistic but it is computationally simpler. The forces and ramping for the active force are applied in the following manner: ‖ T j, i ‖ = r r a g f, where g f is a parameter defining the magnitude of the active force, r a is a randomly generated number in the interval and r = { t − t a for 0 < t − t a < t r, 1 for t r ⩽ t − t a ⩽ t d, 1 − for 0 < t − t d ⩽ t r, where t r is the time duration of the ramp, t a is the first time the cell is stimulated to move since not being stimulated and t d is the time the cell stops receiving the motion stimulus. If the cell is not being stimulated by the motion stimulus, it will either generate force for low motility motion which includes no force depending on the parameters used. For all simulations t d = 20 h where h is the time step. Forces are ramped down in a similar fashion when cells are no longer stimulated to move. A.1.3. Internal forces Two abutting cells may produce a local deformation of the membranes to accommodate the volume of each cell which would otherwise occupy the same space. This local compression is characterized by overlapping cell membranes, and when a cell is deformed at a point of contact, it will push or pull on neighboring cells depending on what the net forces acting on it. If a cell is stretched and relaxing and another cell is deforming it, the relaxing cell will pull the other cell towards it provided the adhesion is strong enough. Fig. 11. The figure shows two cells whose membranes are overlapping. The dashed lines represent the ellipsoidal shape of the cells as represented in the model. The solid lines more accurately represent how the cells would locally deform. The cell with the pressure... When cells overlap, we assume that one or both cells are being locally compressed. In our implementation, the cell with the smallest absolute value internal pressure, | p k | is the cell which deforms and is locally compressed the most. The value p represents the change in internal pressure. If it is a large, positive value, the cell is turgid due to the internal fluid. If the value is large and negative, the cell is stiff due to the internal cytoskeleton. When the values are not large the true situation is more complicated and how easily deformable the cell is depends on the combined influences of the internal fluid and the state of the cytoskeleton i.e., if the viscoelastic element is expanding or contracting. The force due to locally compressed cells is given by R j, i = { − G + G s ^ j, i ⋅ h ^ j, i = − 1 ︷ cells overlap and − G + G ⩽ ‖ A j, i ‖ ︷ body forces do not pull more than adhesive forces, 0 otherwise, where G = q a a ^ i + q b b ^ i + q c c ^ i and d i = 0.5 max ℓ ∈ N i o ‖ s ℓ, i ‖ | ). The values d i and d j represent the amount cell i and cell j are deformed and their sum gives the total deformation d i + d j = || s j,i ||. The values q a, q b, and q c are determined by the viscoelastic elements in the cells and N i o is the set of cell indices whose cell membranes overlap with the membrane of cell i. To determine the force with which the cell resists compression we solve Eq. for each cell assuming the cell shape changes from its current shape to a new shape where it has been compressed by d i s ^ in time d t. We resolve the vector d i s ^ into the direction of the axis of the cell, thus d i s ^ = α i a ^ i + β i b ^ i + γ i c ^ i where α i =, β i = and γ i =. Solving Eq. using an integrating factor we get q a = − f a, f a = e − ζ d t f a + f 2 − e − ζ f 2 − p ¯ + k 1 e − ζ × ∫ t c t c + d t e ζ t d a d t d t, where ζ = k a / μ a, t c is the current time and a = a and is the length of one of the axes. Compression against the substrate works in the same manner with R s, i = { 0 if d i > 0, − G otherwise, where d i is the distance from cell i to the substrate in the direction of z i =. A.1.4. Cell rotation In the PO model, cells are oriented ellipsoids but here the details of how and when a cell changes its orientation are different. When a cell is engaged in directed motion it is assumed that two stimuli are provided, an orientation stimulus and a motion stimulus. The orientation stimulus provides a direction of orientation d ^ o, and the motion stimulus indicates if the cell should be engaged in directed motion. Consider cell i orientated in the direction of a ^ i, one of its major axes. When cell i moves in high motility motion it does so in the direction of a ^ i. When an orientation cycle starts there are three possibilities. First, the cell is already oriented in the direction of the direction stimulus, a ^ i = d ^ o, in which there is no need to change orientation. Second, the cell is oriented in the opposite direction of the stimulus, a ^ i = − d ^ o. Experimentally it is observed that a cell either changes its leading edge to the opposite side and reverse its direction or the cell makes a “U” turn maintaining the same leading edge. In our model we only allow the cell to change its leading edge by switching its orientation. Finally, if the orientation of the cell and the direction stimulus are not parallel, the cell changes its direction. Again it is experimentally observed that when a cell has established a leading edge, depending on the circumstances it can change directions by extending more pseudopods in one half of the leading edge causing the cell to veer in that direction. Consider a cell surrounded by other cells, in order to extend a pseudopod it may have to push a neighboring cell out of the way. In our model we approximate this by gradually rotating the cell about the vector v ^ = = a ^ i × d ^ o / ‖ a ^ i × d ^ o ‖ until, upon completion of the orientation cycle, the cell orientation is the same as d ^ o. Before explaining why this is a good representation of the experimental observations, we first observe that as a simplification, in our model we do not take into account torque. When a cell pulls on another cell it will have multiple contacts with the other cell spreading the force over a segment of the membrane. Where the center of mass of the cell is with respect to the segment of the membrane will determine the strength of the torque. Because of this simplification, the rotation of the cell is equivalent to the cell retracting in the old direction and extending in the new direction. The neighboring cells are pushed as if the cell was extending a pseudopod. Of course, depending on the other forces, the cell may not be able to extend the pseudopod and may even retract in that direction. When a cell changes direction via an orientation cycle, it may rotate until it is oriented in the new direction. Specifically in our model, the cell is rotated by a rotation matrix. A.2. Numerical methods Our system is x. = M − 1 b, where M is a 3 N × 3 N real matrix, v = x. and b are vectors with 3 N real components and N is the total number of cells. The entries of M and b are defined in terms of an intermediate function, the radii of the cells. Let r = where r i = is the vector of the radii for the i cell and let x = where x i is the location of the center of the cell i. Therefore, the matrix M depends on x and r, whereas b depends on x, r and t. The difficulty arises since r also depends on b. Thus we have a recursive definition for r with r. The quasi-implicit method is described in the following manner. Initially we discretize using the trapezoidal rule: x n + 1 − x n = h 2, where x n = x, t n = hn and h is the time step. We formulate a new problem so at each time step we can use the iterative nonlinear solver NKSOL. Let g be defined by g = y − x n − h 2. Note that g = 0. The cell radii represented in r are difficult to express as a function of y and t. Yet it is possible to determine r if b is given. Thus it would be simple to lag r in time and have a “quasi-implicit” scheme, but numerical tests indicate that this is not very efficient due to stability problems. Thus we use the most current information possible to calculate r. For a fixed time step n we approximate g for each iteration by first finding r, evaluating g, and updating r in the following manner: r n + 1, i, − = r, g ≈ y i − x n − h 2, r n + 1, i, + = r. To start the process y 0 = x n, r n +1,0,− = r and i = 0;1, …. A.3. Parameters and data To determine the parameters for the viscoelastic elements we examined the creep function and the relaxation function of a standard linear solid. The creep function is the time evolution of the length of the element and the relaxation function is the time evolution of the force the element exerts. Fig. 12 shows these functions with the standard parameters used for the viscoelastic elements. If the cell is acted on by 10 other cells, it will deform 2:5 μm in 4 min and will return to it original shape about 7 min after the force is removed. The relaxation function shows that if a cell is stretched to double its length then it will initially exert 3000 nN of force. These parameter values which may seem on the low end compared to measured values still make the cells quite stiff. Fig. 12. The creep function for a standard linear solid and the applied force are plotted in and the relaxation function is plotted in with parameters k 1 = 163.8 dyn/cm, k 2 = 147.5 dyn/cm, and μ a = 123 dyn min/cm. The thin black line in is... Unless otherwise specified the parameters used in the simulations are g a = 4 × 10 − 3 dyn, S ad = 0.1 dyn, t c = 0.33 min and α = 2.414 × 10 6 nN/mm 2. The initial cell size is a sphere of 5 μm radius thus a 0 = b 0 = c 0 = 5 μm. Footnotes 2 A recent step toward a continuum-based description of individual cells in which cells are treated as deformable spheres in epithelial layers is reported in Galle et al.. 3 In reality this is probably not strictly correct, since osmotic fluxes may well change the total volume during deformations. However this has not been characterized experimentally, and incorporating it would add a great deal of complexity for an as yet unquantifiable increase in accuracy. Article information J Theor Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 Apr 10. Published in final edited form as: J Theor Biol. 2004 Nov 21; 231: 203–222. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2004.06.015 PMCID: PMC6457452 NIHMSID: NIHMS1011831 PMID: 15380385 John C. Dallon a, * and Hans G. Othmer b, 1 John C. Dallon a Department of Mathematics, Brigham Young University, 312 TMCB, Provo, UT 84602-6539, USA Find articles by John C. Dallon Hans G. Othmer b Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Inselstrasse 22, Leipzig, Germany Find articles by Hans G. Othmer a Department of Mathematics, Brigham Young University, 312 TMCB, Provo, UT 84602-6539, USA b Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Inselstrasse 22, Leipzig, Germany 1 Present address: School of Mathematics, 270A Vincent Hall, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. * Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-801-422-1205; fax: +1-801-422-0504. ude.uyb.htam@nollad. PMC Copyright notice The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at J Theor Biol 