 Open in a separate window Highlights • WRC harbors two Rac binding sites, A and D, with distinct functions in vivo • A site is the major WRC activation site • Rac-D site interaction optimizes WAVE-mediated actin filament assembly • Both sites are obligatory for WRC activation, but not its lamellipodial accumulation Schaks et al. use gene disruption combined with re-expression of point mutants of the Sra-1/PIR121 subunit of mammalian WRC or the PIR ortholog in Dictyostelium to unravel differential functions of the two Rac interaction surfaces on WRC in vivo. These functions are crucial to both lamellipod/pseudopod protrusion and cell-migration efficiency. Results and Discussion Sra-1/PIR121 Double-KO B16-F1 Melanoma Cells Fail to Form Lamellipodia Mammalian WRC displays various isoform combinations of its five essential subunits, which is why functional interference with individual subunits was hitherto mostly done using RNAi, revealing defects in cell-edge protrusion in organisms as evolutionarily distant as Drosophila, mouse, and human. Essential functions for individual subunits in the formation of lamellipodia and membrane ruffles were revealed and complemented by genetic deletions in Dictyostelium and mouse. Aside from knockouts of individual, murine subunit isoforms such as WAVE1, WAVE2, or Abi-1, we currently lack a mammalian cell line permanently and entirely devoid of functional WRC. We thus engineered B16-F1-derived cell lines in which the two genes encoding Sra-1 and PIR121, termed CYFIP1 and CYFIP2 in the mouse, respectively, were stably disrupted using CRISPR/Cas9. Apart from confirming the essential function of WRC in lamellipodia formation and membrane ruffling, such a system should allow dissecting in vivo interactions between Sra-1/PIR121 and Rac recently established in vitro. Sra-1 and PIR121 are 87% identical at the amino acid level, and can both incorporate into WRC and share highly conserved, direct binding sites for Rac and the WASP homology 2, connector, acidic module of WAVE, the actin- and Arp2/3-complex-binding end of WRC. Simultaneous CRISPR/Cas9-mediated targeting of both CYFIP genes allowed establishing several clonal lines devoid of detectable Sra-1/PIR121 expression. In analogy to disruption of the Dictyostelium ortholog Pir, Sra-1/PIR121 removal also diminished WAVE isoform expression, whereas it only partially reduced the expression of Nap1. The reasons for affecting just one posttranslationally modified Abi variant remain to be established. The three clones analyzed further were completely devoid of lamellipodial protrusions, even upon strong stimulation of these structures using aluminum fluoride. Quantitation revealed lamellipodia formation in more than 90% of control cells, whereas not a single cell with lamellipodia could be discerned in respective KOs. This correlated with the absence of Arp2/3 complex accumulation at the cell periphery of KO lines. KO cells also migrated at strongly reduced rates, indicating that migration speed in B16-F1 strongly depends on their ability to form lamellipodia. An apparent increase of bi- or multinucleation upon Sra-1/PIR121 deletion indicated problems with cytokinesis, as observed previously for WRC subunit KOs, but this did not affect growth rates significantly. Sra-1/PIR121 null cells could be specifically rescued to form lamellipodia, express Nap1 and WAVE proteins at wild-type levels, and migrate on laminin by transfection with EGFP-tagged Sra-1. Figure 1 Contribution of Distinct Rac Binding Sites in Sra-1 to Lamellipodia Formation Video S1. Reduction of B16-F1 Cell Migration upon Sra-1/PIR121 Ablation, Related to Figure 1: Phase contrast, time-lapse microscopy of B16-F1 wildtype, Sra-1/PIR121 KO clone #3 and the latter re-expressing EGFP-tagged Sra-1, as indicated, for restoration of lamellipodia-dependent migration. Time is in hours and minutes, scale bar is valid for all panels and equals 100μm. Click here to view. The Rac-Binding A Site in Sra-1 Is Required for WAVE Complex Activation Among multiple signals impacting on WRC function, Rac appears obligatory for lamellipodia formation, at least in fibroblasts, so we explored whether and under which conditions physical interactions between Rac and WRC, mediated by Sra-1, are essential for this process. Sra-1 possesses two Rac binding sites: the A site, located at the N terminus and homologous to the Rac binding site found in the WRC inhibitor CYRI, and the D site. Both sites are required for Arp2/3 complex-mediated actin assembly in vitro. Within WRC, Sra-1 sequesters the WCA domain of WAVE by binding to both W and C regions, thereby inhibiting the complex’s activity. Rac binding, in turn, competes with WCA sequestration, thereby releasing WCA for Arp2/3 complex activation. We compared the in vivo relevance of the A site and D site in Sra-1 by re-expressing WT Sra-1 and mutants deficient in Rac binding through either or both sites in Sra-1/PIR121 null cells. We also combined these Sra-1 variants with mutations causing disruption of Sra-1 binding to WAVE, termed WCA ∗, assumed to render WRC constitutively active. WCA ∗ dramatically augmented the interaction between Rac1 and the WAVE complex in Rac1 pull-down assays, assuring that Rac binding to WRC competes with WCA domain sequestration. Additional mutation of the A site strongly reduced binding to levels comparable to WT Sra-1. Mutation of the D site in the WCA ∗ mutant background reduced binding to virtually undetectable levels, much like combinatorial mutation of both sites and in full accordance with published data. We also confirmed that the strong increase of Rac binding to WCA ∗ was specific for active, GTP-bound Rac1, as it was not detectable with N17-Rac. Next, we explored all these mutants upon transient transfection concerning their ability to rescue lamellipodia formation in Sra-1/PIR121-deficient cells migrating on laminin. Cells were categorized as forming or lacking lamellipodia as well as a group in which lamellipodia were not fully developed. In these conditions, >70% of cells were rescued in lamellipodia formation with WT Sra-1, although only half of those lamellipodia were fully developed. Notably, a mutant blocking the interaction between WRC and factors harboring the WRC-interacting receptor sequence did not display a statistically significant defect in lamellipodia formation. This suggests that such interactions operate in specific regulation processes, but not as a general mechanism of lamellipodial WRC recruitment and/or activation. Returning to Rac binding, mutation of the A site caused an almost complete failure of restoration of lamellipodia formation. Both C179R and R190D mutants were tested individually and in combination, with comparable results. The rare examples of immature lamellipodia found were still weakly tipped by the rescue mutant, consistent with the view that these structures are elicited by the rescue mutant displaying reduced but detectable Rac binding in pull-down assays. Thus, in spite of the previously observed low affinity for Rac mediated by this site, in particular as compared to the D site, the A site is crucial for lamellipodia formation. To explore whether this was due to a failure of WRC activation or other reasons, we combined the A site mutation with disruption of WCA interaction. Importantly, this combinatorial Sra-1 mutant rescued lamellipodia formation with an efficiency indistinguishable from WT. These data suggest that the A site is crucial for allosteric activation of WRC, but not needed in the absence of the inhibitory interaction of Sra-1 with WCA. Consistent with lamellipodial phenotypes, A site+WCA ∗ binds to Rac1 better than WT Sra-1 or the A site-alone mutant. However, the increase of Rac binding caused by constitutive WRC activation in the A site-mutated construct was much less robust than in the WT background, indicating a major contribution of the A site to allosteric activation. To test whether this function of the A site is conserved in evolution, we used an equivalent assay with Pir121-deficient Dictyostelium discoideum cells. Figure S2 A emphasizes the degree of sequence conservation around A and D sites between both murine isogenes and the Dictyostelium ortholog. Pir121 KO in this organism causes defects in migration and loss of Scar/WAVE expression, just as in B16-F1 cells. These defects are correlated less with loss of lamellipod formation in Dictyostelium, because WASP can—inefficiently—produce pseudopods when WRC is lost. Yet, EGFP-tagged Pir121 WT prominently targeted to the cell periphery of Pir121 null cells and induced Arp2/3 complex-enriched structures, but A site mutants, A183R or K193D/R194D, failed to do so. This phenotype was uncoupled from Scar/WAVE expression, which was fully restored by both EGFP-tagged WT and A site-mutated Pir121. Altogether, these data suggest the A site operates in WRC activation throughout evolution at least after the plant-animal split. Figure 2 Functional Comparison of Rac Binding Sites in Mouse and Dictyostelium Cells Video S2. Confocal Imaging of Dictyostelium Cells Migrating under Agarose, Related to Figure 2: AiryScan imaging of cells to visualize WRC complex and Arp2/3 complex localization in wild type and PIR121 null cells expressing wild type and mutant Pir121-EGFP. Cells were imaged every 2 s, and resulting time-lapse movie is displayed at 10 frames/second. Click here to view. The D Site in Sra-1 Is Dispensable for WRC Activation but Contributes to the Efficiency of Protrusion and Lamellipodial Actin Polymerization Expression in Sra-1/PIR121 double null cells of mutants defective in Rac interaction through the D site caused comparably moderate effects. In particular, the frequency of lamellipodia formation was unchanged. This was puzzling initially, as D site mutation abolished Rac binding almost completely, consistent with previous data. However, the majority of lamellipodia found in these cells appeared immature, indicating compromised WRC function in spite of its principal activation. A lack of an activation defect was experimentally confirmed by combining one of the D site mutants with WCA ∗, as this failed to rescue important phenotypes, including lamellipodial morphology and protrusion velocity. Figure 3 The D Site in Sra-1 Is Needed for Proper Lamellipodia Formation Again in analogy, D site-mutated Pir121 targeted to the cell periphery of Dictyostelium cells, unlike A site-mutated Pir121. However, as opposed to WT, activation of the Arp2/3 complex by D site-mutated Pir121 was compromised. Differences in D site mutant targeting were also illustrated by the evanescent nature of these Pir121 patches. Consequently, the lifetimes of Pir121 Y961A patches at the cell periphery were strongly reduced from WT, and these short-lived patches were formed more frequently. This was again consistent with reduced residency time at the lamellipodium tip of the mammalian D site mutant as revealed by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching. Furthermore, the immature lamellipodia seen in the mammalian system appeared particularly narrow and were tipped by filopodia, not typically seen in cells expressing WT Sra-1. These phenotypes were at best partially rescued by constitutive WAVE complex activation, as D site+WCA ∗ behaved more like the D site mutant than WT. Finally, lamellipodia protrusion was reduced in a statistically significant fashion with or without constitutive WRC activation, and less homogeneous. In spite of all these phenotypes, D site+WCA ∗ -Sra-1 fully rescued Arp2/3 intensity values in lamellipodia, which were strongly reduced with the D site mutation alone. Surprisingly, this rescue was not accompanied by rescued lamellipodial actin network polymerization or F-actin intensity. Thus, most phenotypes caused by elimination of Rac binding through the D site cannot be bypassed by eliminating the necessity of WRC activation, except for efficient Arp2/3 complex incorporation. Continued Rac binding through the D site might thus favor a function mostly uncoupled from Arp2/3 complex activation yet promoting both lamellipodial actin filament assembly rates and quantities. To what extent this activity corresponds to the “distributive polymerase” activity recently ascribed to WAVE family proteins remains an exciting question for future study. Figure 4 Further D Site-Associated Phenotypes and Analysis of the D Site Interaction Surface on Rac Video S3. Compromised Protrusion with WRC Harboring the D Site Mutant of Sra-1, Related to Figure 3: High magnification, phase contrast video microscopy of individual Sra-1/PIR121 double KO B16-F1 melanoma cells transfected with EGFP-tagged versions of wild type Sra-1, the D site mutant or the latter additionally activated through release of the WCA domain. Note that cells positioned in center of each panel correspond to transfected ones. Time is in minutes and seconds; bar is valid for all panels and equals 20μm. Click here to view. To solidify the view that all these defects can solely be explained by compromised Rac-D site interaction, additional experiments were performed. These included artificially mimicking an increase of endogenous Rac-GTP by AlF. Among cells forming lamellipodia, only those expressing D site+WCA ∗ were significantly shifted toward harboring fully developed versions of these structures, presumably because of unlimited access to the A site in these conditions. In line with this, additional A site mutation caused complete failure to generate canonical lamellipodia irrespective of AlF treatment. As a final, complementary experiment, full rescue of the D site phenotype could also be achieved by increasing the spatial proximity of WRC and active Rac through expressing D site+WCA ∗ in fusion to constitutively active Rac1-L61. Albeit a bit more variable in localization than WT Sra-1, the respective fusion protein was able to accumulate at the tips of fully developed lamellipodia and prominently induce their formation in Sra-1/PIR121 double KOs even without AlF treatment. Overall, we conclude that lack of continuous WRC-Rac interactions and/or reduced avidity of WRC for Rac aside from deficiency in WRC activation generate the complexity of functional defects associated with D site mutation in Sra-1. Both A and D Sites Are Relevant for Migration in Murine Melanoma and Dictyostelium Cells We also analyzed the relative relevance of each binding site for the efficiency of migration. In Pir121 null Dictyostelium cells, only re-expression of WT Pir121 rescued migration speed in the null mutant to levels comparable to Ax3 control. In contrast, both A site and D site mutants improved the performance of the Pir121 KO line at best marginally. These data emphasize the importance of each of the two binding sites for migration, albeit for distinct reasons. In B16-F1 cells, analysis of migration was separated for cells with and without lamellipodia, due to the large differences in migration efficiency between these two conditions. Sra-1/PIR121 KO cells forming lamellipodia by A site mutant-containing WRC migrated inefficiently, suggesting lamellipodia function in this case to be highly compromised. A site+WCA ∗ reverted migration efficiency to WT levels, clearly confirming that the defect in the A site mutant can be solely attributed to abrogated WRC activation. In contrast, D site mutant-mediated migration was much more efficient, but, as expected, neither the D site mutant nor its constitutively active counterpart reached WT migration levels. These data imply that effects on dimension and dynamics of B16-F1 lamellipodia can quite directly be translated into rates of random cell migration. Video S4. Migration Patterns of Dictyostelium Cells Lacking or Harboring Distinct WRCs, Related to Figure 2: Pseudopod formation in wild type parental strain Ax3, Pir121 knock out and cells expressing wild type and mutant Pir121-EGFP. Cells were imaged every 3 s, and time-lapse movie is shown at 10 frames/second. Click here to view. Historical Rac Effector Loop Mutants Act through D Site-Mediated Interaction with WRC To address the relevance of Rac-WRC interactions by complementary experiments, we generated Rac-free B16-F1 melanoma cells using CRISPR/Cas9-mediated disruption of all Rac genes, RAC1, 2, and 3. As expected, Rac null B16-F1 cells lacked lamellipodia entirely. Interestingly, two effector loop mutants of Rac1 described previously, F37A and E31V, used here in the background of Rac1-L61, stimulated lamellipodia highly reminiscent in morphology of those seen above upon D site mutant rescue. Again, respective cells displayed jagged, concave, and narrow lamellipodia frequently tipped by filopodial bundles. Due to the striking similarity in mutant phenotypes, we docked atomic models of Rac and WRC onto each other, guided by the published cryoelectron microscopy map of Rac occupying the D site in the WAVE complex, and found that Rac1 residues mutated in these two variants directly contact the D site of Sra-1. Thus, these data suggest the defects in lamellipodia formation previously described for these mutants to be caused by loss of Rac interaction with the D site of Sra-1 rather than p160ROCK, a now well-established key effector in RhoA signaling to myosin II-mediated contraction. Physical Interactions between Rac and WRC Are Crucial, but Not Obligatory, for Lamellipodia Formation by Active WRC As mentioned above, we also mutated both Rac interaction sites in Sra-1 simultaneously, which caused complete abolishment of detectable interaction with constitutively active Rac1 in pull-down assays. Importantly, not a single cell expressing the A+D site mutant was recorded that displayed lamellipodia. To distinguish between potential functions of these Rac interactions in activation of WRC versus its recruitment and/or maintenance at the lamellipodium tip membrane, we generated a potential, constitutively active WRC incapable of Rac interaction. However, the frequency of lamellipodium formation induced was still low with this mutant, with the subfraction of cells classified as forming at best immature lamellipodia. Although immature, these lamellipodia were still able to partially rescue the migration defect of Sra-1/PIR121 double null cells. These data suggest that as opposed to activation, direct Rac-WRC interactions are not obligatory for recruitment and/or maintenance and turnover of WRC at the lamellipodium, and additional contributors to these processes must exist. To explore whether both the A site and D site contribute to the accumulation of WRC at the lamellipodium tip, independent of WRC activation, we moved on to assess the dwell time of EGFP-tagged Sra-1 variants by FRAP. WT Sra-1 showed a half-time of recovery at the lamellipodium tip of approximately 22 s, moderately slower than observed previously for WRC subunits expressed on top of endogenous proteins. However, the WCA ∗ mutant displayed strongly delayed turnover of more than 3-fold. To test to what extent this effect was possibly caused by direct interactions of activated WRC with Rac, both A site and D site mutants were explored in the context of WCA ∗, and both were found to be reverted to turnover rates close to WT. The A site-alone mutant could not be tested in this context, but turnover of the D site mutant was even accelerated as compared to WT. Collectively, these data suggest that Rac interactions with A and D sites display differential contributions to the allosteric activation of WRC in vivo, but both crucially contribute to the maintenance and stability of WRC following its activation at the lamellipodium tip. STAR★Methods Key Resources Table Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Klemens Rottner. Experimental Model and Subject Details B16-F1 cells were purchased from ATCC, and authenticated in a recent, official lab screen by local authorities to be mycoplasma-free, of murine origin and to lack any unexpected sequences such as commonly used antibiotic resistance genes or viral sequences. Dictystelium discoideum strain Ax3, haploid, mating type matA, derived from wild-type NC4 was obtained from Dictybase. Method Details Cell culture B16-F1 cells and derived CYFIP1/2 double or Rac1/2/3 triple knockout clones were cultured in DMEM, supplemented with 10% FCS, 2 mM glutamine and penicillin /streptomycin. B16-F1 cells were routinely transfected in 35 mm dishes, using 0.5 μg DNA in total and 1 μL JetPrime for controls, and 1 μg DNA in total and 2 μL JetPrime for CYFIP1/2 and RAC1/2/3 knockout cells. After overnight transfection, cells were plated onto acid-washed, laminin-coated coverslips for microscopy, or onto plastic dishes for obtaining samples for Western Blotting. Stimulation with aluminum fluoride as in Figures S1 B, S3 B, and S3C was performed in pre-warmed, full growth medium upon addition of AlCl 3 and NaF to final concentrations of 50 μM and 30 mM, respectively. Treatments were carried out for 20 min and followed by fixation and staining as detailed below. Dictyostelium discoideum strains were grown and maintained in Petri dishes or multiwell plates in filtered HL5 medium, including glucose, vitamins and microelements with 100 μg/mL penicillin- streptomycin. For transfections, 1 × 10 7 cells/mL were washed once with buffer, followed by electroporation with 500 ng extrachromosomal plasmid at 500 V using ECM399 electroporator. Transfected cells were transferred into HL5, and 24 hr later, transformants selected and maintained using 50 μg/mL hygromycin. DNA constructs pEGFP-C1 and –C2 vectors were purchased from Clontech. The wild-type Sra-1 sequence, fused into pEGFP-C2 and used for all further mutants generated below corresponded to the splice variant CYFIP1a, sequence } AJ567911. All Sra-1 mutations employing primers as listed in Table S1 were carried out by site-directed mutagenesis using Phusion DNA polymerase. mCherry-tagged Sra-1 constructs were generated by swapping EGFP with mCherry, kindly provided by Dr. Roger Tsien using NheI/BsrGI restriction sites. For generating pEGFP-C1-Rac1-Q61L, the Rac1-Q61L fragment immobilized from pGEX-2T-Rac1-Q61L with BamHI/EcoRI was ligated into pEGFP-C1 vector digested with BglII/EcoRI. Rac1 mutants were generated in analogy to Sra-1. For EGFP-tagged Sra-1-Y967A+WCA ∗ -Rac1-L61, Rac1-L61 was fused with an 6 -linker to the C terminus of Sra-1-Y967A+WCA ∗ using overlap extension PCR, and cloned into pEGFP-C2 vector using XhoI/SalI restriction sites. All constructs were sequence-verified. Antibody generation For generation of polyclonal antisera, recombinant Abi1 or the WCA-domain of WAVE2 were employed for immunization of rabbits with five boosts. Sera from rabbits 6794 and 5502, respectively, were used for further experiments. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing B16-F1 cells lacking CYFIP1 and CYFIP2 genes were generated using CRISPR/Cas9 technology. Specifically, both genes were simultaneously disrupted targeting a highly conserved DNA region in respective exon 2. Selected targeting sequences were cloned into pSpCas9-2A-Puro, and equimolar amounts of resulting vectors targeting genomic regions of GACAGAAATGCATTTGTCAC or GACAGGAATGCATTTGTCAC transfected in combination. After puromycin selection for transfected cells, cells were extensively diluted and a few days later, macroscopically visible colonies picked, to obtain single cell-derived clones. Cell clones were screened for the absence of both gene products using a pan-CYFIP antibody, and defined as CYFIP1/2 double knockout clones following confirmation of the absence of any wild-type allele by sequencing of respective genomic regions. For generation of Rac1/2/3 KO cells, B16-F1 cells were transfected with equimolar amounts of plasmids targeting ATGCAGGCCATCAAGTGTG and ATGCAGGCCATCAAGTGCG genomic regions. Derived cell clones were screened for the absence of Rac expression by Western Blotting. Pir121 disruption, REMI, and site-directed mutagenesis in Dictyostelium For disruption of the gene encoding Pir121 in Ax3, termed pirA, 5′ and 3′ arms of the knockout vector were PCR-amplified with primers provided in Table S1 and cloned upstream and downstream of a blasticidin cassette, respectively, into pAD70 vector. The resulting vector was electroporated into Ax3 cells and pirA disruption confirmed by resistance to blasticidin, PCR and Western Blotting. Constructs for Pir121-EGFP REMI were made by amplifying Pir121 including the 5′ UTR promoter region with appropriate primers, followed by cloning in fusion with EGFP into pDM1209 REMI vector. Appropriate residues in Rac binding sites were mutated by site directed mutagenesis using primers listed in Table S1. All constructs were verified by sequencing. For genomic integration by REMI, clones were selected with G418, and stability of Pir121 expression examined by Western Blotting after single cell expansion with bacteria for several generations. Western Blotting For preparation of whole cell lysates, cells were washed with PBS, lysed using lysis-buffer and sonicated to shear genomic DNA. An aliquot was used for protein measurement, and the remaining volume treated with β-mercaptoethanol and bromphenolblue to yield Laemmli buffer and boiled for 5 min. Western blotting was carried out using standard techniques with equal amounts of protein. Primary antibodies are listed in the Key Resources Table. HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were purchased from Invitrogen. Chemiluminescence signals were obtained upon incubation with ECL Prime Western Blotting Detection Reagent, and were recorded with ECL Chemocam imager. Densitometric quantification of protein expression was performed using MetaMorph. Dictyostelium cells were lysed in 1 x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer containing 20 mM DTT, HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, followed by boiling for 5 min. After SDS-PAGE, transfer onto nitrocellulose membranes and blocking, primary antibodies were used at a dilution of 1:1000. Fluorescently conjugated secondary antibodies were detected by Odyssey CLx Imaging system. Fluorescence staining and quantification B16-F1 cells and Sra-1/PIR121 KO cell clones were seeded onto laminin-coated, 15 mm-diameter glass coverslips and allowed to adhere overnight. Next morning, cells were treated or not with aluminum fluoride, fixed with prewarmed, 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 min, and permeabilized with 0.05% Triton X-100 in PBS for 1 min. For sole visualization of the actin cytoskeleton with phalloidin and in case of samples lacking EGFP expression, cells were fixed with 0.25% glutaraldehyde and 4% PFA followed by staining with Alexa 488-conjugated phalloidin. PFA-fixed cell samples following transfections with plasmids mediating expression of EGFP-tagged proteins were counterstained with ATTO-594-conjugated phalloidin. For stainings with ArpC5A antibodies, permeabilized cells were blocked with 5% horse serum and 1% BSA in PBS, followed by staining with monoclonal anti-ArpC5A antibody. Primary antibody was visualized with Alexa Fluor 594-coupled anti-mouse IgG. For fluorescence intensity measurements of ArpC5A- and phalloidin-stainings, respective lamellipodial regions were encircled using Metamorph software, and a larger, extracellular region defined as background. Average intensities of respective background regions were subsequently subtracted from pixel intensities derived from lamellipodial regions. Time-lapse microscopy For random migration assays, B16-F1 or Sra-1/PIR121 KO cells were seeded subconfluently into laminin-coated μ-slide 4-well glass bottom microscopy chambers. After about 6 h, the chamber was mounted onto an inverted microscope, equipped with 37°C incubator and CO 2 atmosphere. Phase-contrast movies were simultaneously acquired on multiple, randomly chosen positions using a 10 x /0.15 NA Plan Neofluar objective and a frame rate of 12 frames per hour for at least 10 hr. For analysis, cells were manually tracked using ImageJ. For the reconstitution experiment shown in Figure 1 C, all B16-F1 control and Sra-1/PIR121 double KO cells were analyzed. Note that all B16-F1 control cells formed lamellipodia at some stage during the observation period. For the reconstitution experiment and in analogy to controls, only those double KO-cells transiently transfected with EGFP-Sra-1 that formed lamellipodia at some stage during the observation period were defined as successfully transfected and thus included into analysis. For the migration analyses of KO cells transfected with various Sra-1 constructs shown in Figure 2 E, all cells were analyzed, but separated into cells forming lamellipodia at any time during the observation period and those lacking lamellipodia throughout the observation period. For measuring protrusion velocities of lamellipodia induced by distinct Sra-1 mutants, live cell imaging was done with Sra-1/PIR121 KO #3 cells transfected with respective EGFP-tagged Sra-1 variants and migrating on laminin-coated glass coverslips. Cells were observed in an open heating chamber with a heater controller at 37°C. Cells were maintained in microscopy medium, including 10% FCS, 2 mM L-glutamine and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Conventional video microscopy was performed on an inverted microscope equipped with an HXP 120 lamp for epifluorescence illumination, a halogen lamp for phase-contrast imaging, a Coolsnap-HQ2 camera and electronic shutters driven by MetaMorph software. Live cell images were obtained using a 63 x/1.4 NA Plan apochromatic oil objective. Lamellipodial protrusion velocities were determined based on kymographs obtained from time-lapse images, recorded for a time period of at least 4 min acquiring images every 5 s. Microscopy and analysis of Dictyostelium cells Cell migration was examined by under agarose folate chemotaxis assay. Initially, 0.4% SeaKem GTG agarose was melted in Lo-Flo medium. After cooling of agarose, 10 μM folic acid was mixed and 5 mL poured into 50 mm glass bottom dish pre-treated with 1% BSA in Lo-Flo. After setting of the agarose, 5mm wide troughs were cut using a scalpel, and troughs filled with vegetative cells. Cells were allowed to migrate for 4 hr and routinely imaged with 10 x/0.3 NA or 60 x/1.4 NA DIC objectives on a Nikon ECLIPSE TE2000-R inverted microscope equipped with a monochromatic Retiga Exi cooled CCD camera. 10 x images were taken at 1 min intervals for 45 min, DIC images were captured every 3 s for 10 min. To determine localization and dynamics of Pir121-EGFP and mRFPmars-ArpC4, AiryScan superresolution imaging was performed on a Zeiss 880 inverted confocal microscope equipped with a 63 x/1.4 NA objective. All images were converted to tiff and processed by ImageJ. Chemotactic speed was calculated using home-made plug-in of ImageJ. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching FRAP experiments were performed using an inverted Axio Observer microscope equipped with an automated stage, a DG4 light source for epifluorescence illumination, a VIS-LED for phase-contrast optics and a Coolsnap-HQ2 camera driven by VisiView software. In addition, bleaching was performed using a 405 nm diode laser at 70–80 mW output power) controlled by the 2D-VisiFRAP Realtime Scanner. For analyzing the dwell time in the lamellipodium, EGFP-Sra-1 variants were transfected into Sra-1/PIR121 KO cells and bleached within rectangular regions covering subfractions of lamellipodia, individually drawn for each experiment as indicated in the Figure. Movies were acquired at a rate of 2 s per frame. Intensity values in bleached regions were measured over time and background intensities obtained from close extracellular regions subtracted for each frame. Acquisition photobleaching was performed by correcting data to average intensities over time obtained from lateral, non-bleached lamellipodial tip regions. Data were curve-fitted with SigmaPlot 12.0 using single exponential equation: f = y0+a ∗ ), and half times of recovery derived from fitted data. For determination of actin assembly rates, Sra-1/PIR121 KO cells were cotransfected with mCherry-tagged Sra-1 constructs and EGFP-tagged actin, plated on laminin, and followed by bleaching of the latter and its analysis of recovery. Rates of lamellipodial actin network growth were directly obtained from measuring average widths of newly generated actin networks over time. GST-pull-down assays For Rac1 pulldown assays, GST–Rac1-L61 was immobilized on glutathione–Sepharose beads in buffer B. Sra-1/PIR121 KO #3 cells were transfected with different EGFP-Sra-1 constructs and lysed two days after transfection with lysis buffer. Lysates were cleared and incubated with GST-Rac1-L61 beads for 60 min. Subsequently, beads were washed three times with lysis buffer lacking Triton X-100 and protease inhibitor, mixed with Laemmli buffer, boiled for 5 min and subjected to Western Blotting. In silico interaction analysis The structural model of Rac1 binding the WAVE complex at the D site was generated using HADDOCK, coordinates of the WAVE complex, a model of Rac1 and a deposited electron microscopy map. For the docking, residues within a distance of 5Å to residues of the other model were defined as active and within a distance of 8Å as passive, after fitting the models into the map utilizing UCSF Chimera. Additional restrains were defined to fix issues with the magnesium ion bound to Rac1 wandering off during the second step of the docking. Based on the HADDOCK score, the best model from the biggest cluster was chosen as final model. The figure was generated using PyMOL software. Quantification and Statistical Analysis Quantitative experiments were performed at least in triplicates to avoid any potential impact of environmental influences or inadvertent error, but not routinely subjected to analyses blinded to the experimenter, for practical reasons. Effects on lamellipodial phenotypes derived from analyses on fixed samples and living cells were systematically obtained from sample sizes of hundreds and at least dozens of cells, respectively. Data points were not intentionally excluded from analyses at any time. Statistical analyses of manually categorized lamellipodial phenotypes and distinct lamellipodial parameters such as width, protrusion rate and actin assembly rate were routinely performed using non-parametric statistical tests, such as Mann-Whitney Rank Sum Test, since the latter does not require compared datasets to be normally distributed. Experimental groups were explored for normal distribution using SigmaPlot 12.0. Sample sizes of statistical analyses are routinely provided in Figure legends, and n usually corresponded to cells analyzed, except for statistics done on Western band intensities. All statistics on mouse cell data were performed using SigmaPlot 12.0. For statistics of Dictyostelium data, Mann-Whitney was used in case of side-by-side comparisons of two experimental groups. For comparison of multiple experimental groups, one-way ANOVA to assess principal statistical differences between groups followed by more informative Dunnett’s multiple comparison test were performed using Prism 7 software. 