 Recently, it has been reported that the cells of the immune system, as well as Dictyostelium amoebae, can swim in a bulk fluid by changing their shape repeatedly. We refer to this motion as amoeboid swimming. Here, we explore how the propulsion and the deformation of the cell emerge as an interplay between the active forces that the cell employs to activate the shape changes and the passive, viscoelastic response of the cell membrane, the cytoskeleton, and the surrounding environment. We introduce a model in which the cell is represented by an elastic capsule enclosing a viscous liquid. The motion of the cell is activated by time-dependent forces distributed along its surface. The model is solved numerically using the boundary integral formulation. The cell can swim in a fluid medium using cyclic deformations or strokes. We measure the swimming velocity of the cell as a function of the force amplitude, the stroke frequency, and the viscoelastic properties of the cell and the medium. We show that an increase in the shear modulus leads both to a regular slowdown of the swimming, which is more pronounced for more deflated swimmers, and to a tendency toward cell buckling. For a given stroke frequency, the swimming velocity shows a quadratic dependence on force amplitude for small forces, as expected, but saturates for large forces. We propose a scaling relationship for the dependence of swimming velocity on the relevant parameters that qualitatively reproduces the numerical results and allows us to define regimes in which the cell motility is dominated by elastic response or by the effective cortex viscosity. This leads to an estimate of the effective cortex viscosity of 10 3 Pa ⋅ s for which the two effects are comparable, which is close to that provided by several experiments. Introduction Amoeboid motion, wherein the cell repeatedly undergoes significant shape changes, is a common mode of locomotion for several types of cells, such as leukocytes. This mode is observed both for cells crawling on a two-dimensional substrate and for cells moving in a three-dimensional medium. 2D migration involves focal adhesion to a substrate, whereas typical 3D migration generally relies on traction forces with surrounding tissues. In adhesion-based crawling, the cell creates a protrusion via actin polymerization in the front of the cell. This forward protrusion attaches to the substrate through integrin molecules. Subsequently, contraction due to myosin II leads to retrograde forces, which pull the cell forward. In 3D migration, the cell protrusions tether to the surrounding tissue. The traction forces involved are generally much weaker than the adhesion forces, leading to a fast motion in 3D. Another form of amoeboid migration relies on the blebbing mechanism of the cell deformation, in which the underlying actin cortex of the cell detaches from the cellular membrane, probably because of internal extra pressure. This develops a more or less hemispherical protrusion known as a bleb. A newly assembled cortex is then formed by actin polymerization at the inner surface of the detached region of the membrane. Successive bleb formation and retraction can thus lead to an amoeboid motion of the cell. There is now evidence of cells being able to move efficiently without the assistance of focal adhesion. For example, cells of the immune system can move in extracellular matrix without the expression of adhesion molecules. Furthermore, it was shown that neutrophils can efficiently swim toward chemoattractant sources in a pure fluid medium. The topic of swimming microorganisms has been a very active field of research for approximately two decades ). Different passive factors, such as viscoelastic stresses or plastic events, can affect the deformation and displacement of moving cells. Depending on timescales, the cytoskeleton may confer a fluid-like or elastic-like behavior to cells. For example, at a sufficiently short timescale, elastic forces can play an important role. This elastic behavior has been attributed to intermediate filaments and organelles. However, a complete in vivo characterization is still needed before drawing conclusive answers about the role of mechanical properties of the cells in different modes of locomotion. Earlier studies of amoeboid swimming focused on the basic physics of the translation due to shape changes ; for a recent review on amoeboid motion, see ). The cell was considered as a closed surface with a fixed area and allowed to deform as dictated by a cycle of forces. The only forces considered were the active force and the area conserving force. Other forces such as bending and elastic forces were neglected. To gain further insight into the interplay between different forces in the process of locomotion, we extend our previous study based on a purely fluid membrane to the case in which the membrane is elastic. This allows us to decipher the role of different mechanical parameters of the cells and provide estimates of timescales corresponding to each relevant parameter. This is achieved by a systematic numerical study, the results of which we summarize as approximate scaling laws. In the context of amoeboid motion of cells, such scaling laws have been derived for the first time to our knowledge. The scaling results allow us to analyze the competition between elastic and viscous effects. Our estimates show that both elastic and viscous properties of the cell are relevant for amoeboid swimming. Finally, we relate our study to the problem of active swimmers, which has attracted considerable interest over the last decade ). In particular, we classify the far-field behavior of the flow produced by the amoeboid swimmer. The rest of this article is organized as follows: in Materials and Methods, we describe the model equations as well as the numerical method. In Results, we present the numerical results. The approximate scaling law is derived and discussed in application to real cells in Discussion. Concluding remarks and future perspectives are given in Conclusions. Some technical details are given as an Appendix. Materials and Methods This study is based on numerical simulations of amoeboid motion of a cell within a fluid environment. The cell is modeled as an inextensible elastic capsule enclosing a viscous liquid. We will return to a discussion on extensible capsules later in the manuscript. We also note that the cytoplasm of a cell might also show effects of elastic behavior in addition to the viscous effects, but we neglect this behavior in this simplified model. A time-dependent distribution of active forces is used to induce the deformation of the cell. Cell model We model the cell as an elastic capsule, whose mechanics combines the elasticity of the cytoskeleton with the inextensibility of the phospholipid membrane. The geometry of the cell is characterized by its volume V and surface area A. We impose the condition that these quantities remain fixed during simulation. The conservation of the surface area of the capsule is justified by incompressibility of the phospholipid bilayer, which constitutes the cellular membrane. We also neglect the fluid exchange across the membrane, which, together with the incompressibility of the inner medium, results in the conservation of the volume of the cell. The volume and the surface area can be combined into a single dimensionless parameter used to characterize the cell geometry. This parameter can be chosen to be either the reduced volume ν r or the excess area Γ given by v r = 3 V 4 π 3 / 2, Γ = A 4 π 2 / 3 − 1. Note that the spherical shape corresponds to ν r = 1.0, Γ = 0, with ν r ≤ 1 and Γ ≥ 0 for any other shape. The active forces used by the cell during locomotion create bending, stretching, and shearing stresses within the membrane and the cytoskeleton. The cell resists these stresses thanks to passive elastic forces associated with its structural properties. Tension forces within the membrane act against dilatation or compressive deformations. Similarly, the finite values of the shear elastic modulus and of the bending modulus imply forces that resist shearing and bending modes of cell deformation. Thus, the total force acting on an infinitesimal region of area dA is given by f dA, where the surface density of force f is composed of the active part f act plus the passive ones: f = f a c t + f b e n d + f t e n s + f e l, where f bend is the bending force density, f tens is the tension force density, and f el is the density of the elastic forces due to shearing deformations of the cytoskeleton. We first define the passive forces one by one and then proceed with the description of the active force. Let us consider first the bending force. The energy cost of bending of the cell’s membrane is related to the local mean curvature H, defined at a given point r on the membrane as H = −½ + C 2 ), where C 1 and C 2 represent the principal curvatures, whose dimensionality is that of inverse length. For a unit sphere, the mean curvature is −1. The expression for the bending energy is given by E b e n d = 2 κ ∫ H 2 d A, where κ is the bending modulus. It can be shown by taking the functional derivative of Eq. 4 with respect to the shape that the bending force density is given by f b e n d = − κ n, where Gaussian curvature K is defined as the product of the principal curvatures and n is the normal to the cell surface. Here, Δ s is the Laplace-Beltrami operator, defined as Δ s = ∇ s ⋅ ∇ s, where ∇ s is the surface gradient operator, given by ∇ s = ⋅ ∇, I being the 3D identity matrix. Next, we discuss the tension force. We assume the model capsule to have a locally incompressible surface, as is closely satisfied by the phospholipid bilayer. For that purpose, we use a local Lagrange multiplier ζ that must be solved for to satisfy the local conservation of the surface area. The corresponding energy can thus be written as E t e n s = ∫ ζ d A. This expression suggests that ζ formally plays the role of a position-dependent surface tension. The tension force density is written as f t e n s = 2 ζ H n + ∇ s ζ, The first term in Eq. 8 is akin to the usual Laplace pressure term, whereas the second one is reminiscent of the Marangoni term. It must be kept in mind, however, that here ζ is not an intrinsic property of the membrane but depends on the bending forces, size of the cell, active forces, etc., and has to be solved for consistently by imposing the local conservation of the surface area. The latter condition is expressed by the surface divergence of the velocity field, u, being equal to zero, ∇ s ⋅ u = 0 at the surface of the cell. This constitutes an implicit equation from which ζ is calculated. Finally, let us deal with the contribution of the shear elasticity. The phospholipid bilayer in fluid state has almost no resistance to shearing. However, the cytoskeleton is composed of protein filaments which impart finite elastic moduli to it. We account for this effect by endowing the model capsule with an elastic modulus μ s that corresponds to the shearing deformations of the surface. To limit the extent of the deformations under strong loads, we use a strain-hardening dependence of the shear modulus on the membrane deformation, similar to a finitely extensible nonlinear elastic model. To quantify the deformation of the membrane, it is necessary to specify the stress-free reference configuration from which the elastic strain is evaluated. A priori, there is no clear guidance regarding this question. The situation is further complicated by the constant remodeling of the cytoskeleton due to actin polymerization and depolymerization, which could make the stress-free state of the cytoskeleton time dependent. Even for simple cells, such as red blood cells, the question of the stress-free state of the cytoskeleton remains a topic of an ongoing debate in literature and references therein). In this study, we choose the stress-free configuration to correspond to the equilibrium shape that an inextensible membrane would adopt in the presence of bending forces only. With this definition, the stress-free shape depends on the reduced volume only, as was shown for a classical problem of minimizing the bending energy of a closed membrane with given area and enclosed volume. Fig. 1 shows the shapes which are taken as a reference configuration in our study. The resulting shapes are axisymmetric. We use this symmetry below to maintain the axisymmetric shape of the cell during the swimming. Figure 1 Equilibrium shapes minimizing the bending energy for fixed surface area and enclosed volume for several values of the reduced volume ν r. From left to right, ν r = 0.80, 0.85, 0.90, and 0.95. These shapes are taken as the stress-free... Local deformation of a 2D surface is characterized by the 2D strain tensor, as discussed in. The two eigenvalues of this tensor represent the principal stretches ε 1 and ε 2 of the surface. Because the product ε 1 ε 2 is fixed to 1 by the incompressibility of the capsule in our case, the density of the elastic energy of the cell can be defined as a function of only one combination of the principal stretches, such as ε 2 = 2. According to the FENEM-like model, the elastic energy E el is given by E e l = μ s ε m 2 2 ∫ 1 1 − ε 2 / ε m 2 d A, where μ s is the shear modulus and ε m is the maximal allowed value of ε. The explicit expression of the elastic force on the membrane can be calculated as a functional derivative of Eq. 10 with respect to the deformation of the cell. This expression, however, is not used in our study because we calculate the functional derivative numerically, as explained below. Active forces We use a simple model of active forces to induce deformation and propulsion of the cell. The model consists in prescribing a time-dependent distribution f act of forces on the surface of the cell, where t denotes time. The purpose of these forces is to model the active processes that the cells use to move or deform. We do not specify the exact origin of the active forces for the purposes of this study, nor do we set the goal of actually reproducing the distribution of the forces within cells. For this reason, we chose a simple form of f act that nevertheless leads to a reliable propulsion of the cell model and allows us to interpret the role of different viscoelastic properties of the cell during the locomotion process. We assume that the cell performs regular strokes to move forward. Thus, the active forces are taken to be periodic in time with a period corresponding to the duration of the stroke cycle. There are conditions that must be satisfied by the active forces: the total force and the total torque acting on the swimmer should be equal to zero at any time because the active forces are assumed to be produced by the internal machinery of the swimmer and not by an external motor. This condition can be written as ∫ f a c t d A = 0 and ∫ r × f a c t d A = 0 because the passive forces defined above satisfy automatically the zero force and torque conditions. Furthermore, the active forces must be chosen in such a way that the full cycle of shape configurations breaks the time symmetry, as required by the Purcell theorem, to lead to a net displacement of the swimmer after a full stroke cycle. Within these requirements, the active forces can be chosen freely. In this study, we modify the model introduced in the case of a purely fluid membrane to adapt it to the case of an amoeboid swimmer with an elastic membrane. The active force densities are written as f act = f a d d + n ≡ f a d d + f a, where F 20 and F 30 are constants representing the amplitudes of the force density harmonics, Y l, m is a spherical harmonic function, and ξ = x /| x | is the unit vector along the direction of x. The vector x in Eq. 13 refers to a point on the reference configuration defined above for the calculation of the elastic forces. The force given by Eq. 13 is applied at the same material point r of the actual shape of the swimmer. The spherical harmonic Y l, m is calculated by choosing the symmetry axis of the stress-free configuration as the zenith direction. Consequently, the distribution of active forces is axisymmetric for an axisymmetric shape of the swimmer because the harmonics Y 2,0 and Y 3,0 are invariant upon rotation about the zenith direction. The force density f add is added to satisfy the conditions of Eqs. 11 and 12. Following the recent study in 2D for more details), the additional force density is chosen in the following form: f a d d = β + α × n, where β and α are position-independent functions of time. We have thus six parameters, which can be all determined as functions of F 20 and F 30 by the six equations. A straightforward calculation gives the following expressions for α and β : β = − 1 A ∫ f a c t d A and α = − 1 2 V ∫ r × f a c t d A − 1 2 V ∫ r × β d A. The active forces are directed along the normal to the surface without any tangential component. A tangential force in the absence of retrograde flow will not lead to any flow tangential to the membrane and will be balanced by the shear elasticity and area conservation. We do not include retrograde flows in this work because we are focused on motion purely due to shape changes. Further, in this article, we only show results in which F 20 = F 30 = F, where F refers to the active force amplitude. Fluid flow The forces defined above are coupled back to the deformation and propulsion of the cell through the flow of fluids inside and outside of the cell. Both internal and external fluids are assumed to be Newtonian, with viscosities η I and η E, respectively. For the purpose of this article, we consider the case in which η I = η E = η. A difference in viscosities will lead to different timescales for motion but not lead to any overall change. Given the microscopic size of the cells involved in our study, the Reynolds number of the problem is negligibly small. This allows us to use the Stokes equations to describe the fluid flow η Δ u − ∇ p + ∫ f δ d A = 0 ∇ ⋅ u = 0, where u represents the fluid velocity at a point r, p is the pressure field, and f is the force per unit area applied by the swimmer on the fluid at a point r ′ on the surface of the swimmer. We impose continuity of the velocity and no-slip boundary conditions at the cell surface, as well as zero flow at infinity. With these assumptions, the flow field on the membrane and in the bulk fluids u can be related to the force field on the surface using the boundary integral method η u i = ∫ G i j f j d A, which includes the Greens function G ij. Here, we restrict the problem to a swimmer in an unbounded free flow, in which case the Green’s function is given by G i j = 1 8 π i j | r − r ′ | 3 ). Dimensionless numbers Here, we summarize the model by introducing dimensionless numbers that characterize the swimmer. The geometric properties of the swimmer are specified by the reduced volume, which we choose in the range 0.80–0.95. The value 0.95 corresponds to a quasispherical swimmer, whereas ν r = 0.8 corresponds to a rather deflated one. The mechanical properties of the swimmer are characterized by the following numbers: S = F η ω, S μ = μ s R η ω, S κ = κ η R 3 ω, where F refers to one of the two force density amplitudes F 20 or F 30, which we take to be equal for simplicity; ω is the stroke frequency ; and η is the viscosity of the fluid. R is the mean radius of the cell, given by 1/3, and is the characteristic length scale. Recall that F has dimensions of force per unit area. S compares the active force to the viscous stress in the fluids inside and outside the cell. S μ compares the elastic stress, characterized by shear modulus μ s, to the viscous stress. S κ relates the bending stress, characterized by bending modulus κ, to the viscous stress. These dimensionless numbers can also be viewed as ratios of timescales T s = 2 π ω, T v = 2 π η F, T μ = 2 π η R μ s, T κ = 2 π η R 3 κ, where T s is the stroke period, T v is the shape-relaxation time due to viscous stress upon application of a force density F, T μ is the shape-relaxation time due to elastic stress, and finally, T κ is the relaxation time of bending modes. We can thus write S = T s T v, S μ = T s T μ, S κ = T s T κ. S is a measure of the stroke period over the time needed for the shape to deform upon application of the active force. A small value of S means that the stroke cycle is fast compared to the shape adaptation time. A large value of S means that the shape has sufficient time to adapt to the changes of the active force. S μ and S κ compare stroke length to the relaxation time of the shear and bending modes. The choice of parameters in this study is based on typical values for real cells, and comparisons to cellular motility will be presented in Application to Cellular Motility, but we briefly give some justification of the range of parameters here. Experiments on red blood cells indicate that the typical bending modulus of a cell is of the order of 10 −12 dyne/cm. Using typical values of R ∼ 10 μ m, w ∼ 1 s −1, and η ∼ 1 cP, this gives a value of S κ ∼ 0.1. As discussed in Application to Cellular Motility, we expect a much smaller value because the effective viscosity of cells is much larger. Thus, even for amoeboid cells, we expect a value of S κ to be much smaller than 1. Similarly, if we take the effective shear modulus of the cell as 2–4 × 10 −3 Pa ⋅ m and an active force amplitude of 1–10 nN/ μ m 2 with a value of the effective viscosity of 10 3 Pa ⋅ s, we obtain a value of S μ ∼ 0.1 and S ∼ 1–10. In other words, the bending stress over the active stress and elastic stresses are small, of the order of 0.1–0.01. This means that the bending modes are fully deployed. In this analysis, we have chosen a small constant bending modulus such that S κ = 0.2, varied S μ equals between 1 and 40, and S equals between 1 and 160. These ranges largely cover those typically encountered for real cells. Numerical procedure The model is solved closely, following the numerical procedure described in detail in. Here, we only briefly outline the main steps of the numerical algorithm. The surface of the cell is represented by a triangular mesh. For this study, we use a spherocylindrical mesh, which allows one to simulate highly deflated shapes. The typical number of mesh vertices is 1282 and the number of triangles is 2560 in our simulations, as shown in Fig. 1. During simulations, both the actual position r and the reference position x are stored for each mesh vertex. The bending force is calculated by quadratic interpolation of the cell surface in vicinity of each vertex. The tension and shear forces are calculated by computing numerically the functional derivative of the corresponding energy. For the shear force calculation, we use a cutoff value ε m = 1.49. The Lagrange multiplier ζ is solved for using an iterative procedure. The values of α and β are calculated by solving the discretized versions of Eqs. 11 and 12. Once the forces are calculated, the integration of is performed numerically. The singular behavior of Eq. 19 for r → r ′ is regularized by the singularity subtraction technique. Further improvement of the precision is achieved by using a refined mesh for the calculation of the boundary integral near the singularities of the Green’s function. The boundary integral calculation provides the velocity of the fluid at the surface of the swimmer, which is used to update its shape and position using a Euler method with a time step of 0.01 T s. Results Starting from a set of chosen initial conditions, we successively calculate the shapes as a function of time. On the timescale of several strokes, the swimming dynamics relaxes to a periodic evolution of the shape accompanied by a continuous displacement. The resulting periodic dynamics does not depend on the initial shape of the cell but is a function of its stress-free shape and mechanical parameters. The axial symmetry of the stress-free configuration and of the active force suggests that the shape of the swimmer should be axially symmetric once the periodic regime is attained. This is indeed the case for most of the parameters explored in this study. The swimming direction is compatible with the direction of the symmetry axis of the cell, which we call the z axis. Nevertheless, for some parameters, we observe the cell to undergo buckling and loose its axial symmetry. For the extreme values of the parameters, the cell can change its swimming direction because of the buckling. The latter situation is excluded from this analysis. Shapes adopted by the swimmer In this section, we provide characteristic shapes seen during swimming for several sets of the relevant parameters. A periodic cycle of shape changes defines the swimming stroke of the cell. The forces are fixed while the shape is left free to adapt to these forces. The typical shape cycle depends on the various parameters defined earlier and, in turn, affects the displacement per cycle or, equivalently, the average velocity of the swimmer. Fig. 2 displays four snapshots at different instances during the swimming cycle for the case of reduced volume ν r = 0.80. In Figs. 2, ​,3, 3, and ​ and4, 4, we indicate the mean curvature on the right half of each snapshot and the shear stress anisotropy on the left half. This anisotropic stress is computed as the difference of the principal surface stresses. Because the tension part of the surface stress is isotropic, only shear elasticity contributes to the anisotropy of the surface stress. Figure 2 Four representative shapes during the swimming cycle for ν r = 0.80, S = 20, S μ = 5, and S κ = 0.2. The direction of swimming in this and all other graphs is vertically upward. The graph... Figure 3 Four representative shapes during the swimming cycle for ν r = 0.95, S = 40, S μ = 5, and S κ = 0.2. The color shading is the same as in Fig. 2. To see this figure in color, go online. Figure 4 Four representative shapes during the swimming cycle for ν r = 0.90, S = 40, S μ = 15, and S κ = 0.2. The color shading is the same as in Fig. 2. To see this figure in color, go... It is clearly seen that the swimmer is able to make ample deformations despite the constraint of membrane inextensibility. The deformation amplitude depends on the available excess area with respect to a sphere. This would mean a priori that a more deflated swimmer would move faster than a swimmer whose shape is nearly spherical. This expectation is not always correct, as we show below. For a fixed reduced volume, an increase of shear modulus leads to a reduced deformation, implying a smaller swimming velocity, as is also seen in Swimming Velocity. Finally, some shapes exhibit buckling. This buckling leads to a reduction in the elastic energy at the cost of the bending energy. We have confirmed that increasing the bending modulus within a certain range can reduce the buckling. Swimming velocity Here, we quantify the effect of the mechanical properties of the cell on the swimming velocity. We call ΔZ the distance by which the swimmer is displaced after one cycle of the active forces. This defines the average swimming velocity ν = ΔZω / As a nondimensional velocity of the swimmer, we choose the ratio ν / = ΔZ /. First, we analyze the dependence of the swimming velocity on S μ for several values of the dimensionless active force density S, as well as for different reduced volumes. For each reduced volume considered, we see that increasing the shear modulus reduces the velocity, but the dependence is not uniform for different forces and different reduced volumes. For reduced volumes 0.80 and 0.85, the velocity falls rapidly with increasing shear elasticity at low shear modulus and decreases more gradually at higher shear modulus. The same behavior is observed for reduced volume 0.90 and 0.95, but only for a force density amplitude such that S ∼ 1. For larger forces, the behavior for reduced volumes 0.90 and 0.95 is inverted, with a gradual decrease at low shear modulus and a rapid fall-off at higher shear modulus. Figure 5 The dependence of scaled swimming velocity on scaled shear modulus for four different dimensionless active-force-density amplitudes indicated in each figure. The four figures correspond to different reduced volumes indicated. For the limit... The swimming velocity in Fig. 5 increases as S goes from 20 to 80 for fixed values of S μ and Γ. This means that increasing the amplitude of active forces increases the deformation and thus the swimming speed. However, the swimming speed becomes almost independent of S in the limit of S μ → 0, at least for ν r ≤ 0.9. The limit of S μ → 0 implies that shear elasticity is not involved in the shape dynamics. This limit was explored in previous work for swimmers with a fluid membrane. It has been shown that the swimming velocity exhibits a saturation as a function of the amplitude of active force densities. Namely, the velocity has a finite value in the limit of the infinite amplitude of active forces. This effect is attributed to the inextensible nature of the swimmer’s membrane. The deformations and thus the velocity of the swimmer are limited by the available amount of the excess area in the limit of strong active forces. In our study, the finite value of the shear modulus imparts further complexity to this behavior. For small values of S μ, the deformation and velocity of the swimmer follow the same function of S as in the case of swimmers with fluid membrane. However, for moderate or large values of S μ, the deformation of the swimmer is limited by the shear elasticity of the membrane. This explains the increase of the swimming speed as a function of S for fixed values of S μ and Γ. We provide a more quantitative framework for this behavior in Discussion. We further analyze the behavior of the swimming velocity as a function of the force amplitude, quantified by the dimensionless number S. We can qualitatively see from Fig. 6 that the swimming velocity initially increases with the force amplitude but seems to saturate for larger forces. The initial rise in Fig. 6 at small S appears to be quadratic. This observation is consistent with recent results in 2D. Figure 6 The dependence of scaled swimming velocity on scaled active-force-density amplitude S for different reduced volumes and scaled shear moduli S μ indicated in the figure. We have also shown the results of the scaling analysis with Eq.... Additionally, a priori, one may expect that for a given force amplitude, more deflated cells would move faster than the less deflated ones. This expectation is based on the fact that the more deflated cells have access to larger amplitudes of deformation to execute amoeboid swimming. This proves to be incorrect in general, as can be appreciated in Fig. 6. For example, the green curve corresponds to reduced volume ν r = 0.95 and the red curve to ν r = 0.8. Thus, the first case corresponds to a less-deflated cell than the second case, but we observe that at small force, the less-deflated cell moves faster. Beyond a certain force amplitude, we see the reverse. Stresslet coefficients and the flow fields Here, our goal is to show that 1) the swimmer can switch from pusher to puller in the course of time, which is a result shared by other microswimmers ; and 2) on the average over one cycle, the swimmer can behave either as a puller or as a pusher depending on physical parameters. This last property is less common and was reported recently for amoeboid swimmers. For example, it was found that an amoeboid swimmer can behave as a pusher in certain geometries and as a puller in other geometries. Here, we shall show that even for an unbounded swimmer, the average nature depends on physical parameters, such as the active force amplitude. The pusher or puller nature of a swimmer is encoded in the long-range flow field. Let us first analyze the instantaneous nature of the swimmer and the corresponding flow field. To characterize the nature of the swimmer, we evaluate the stresslet tensor S ij. When the fluids inside and outside the swimmer have the same viscosity, S ij is given by S i j = ∫ f i r j d A, where f i is the force density at point r. For a detailed description of the stresslet tensor, see the Appendix. The traceless part of the above stresslet tensor, which we call Σ ij, specifies the long-range behavior of the velocity field induced by the swimmer. The axial symmetry of the swimmer implies that the off-diagonal components of Σ ij are zero and Σ xx = Σ yy. The sign of the component Σ zz = /3 specifies whether the swimmer is a puller or a pusher. The flow fields observed in our study for small shear and bending moduli are similar to those reported for a pure fluid membrane, as seen in Fig. 7. Figure 7 The flow fields around the swimmer shown for four snapshots during the periodic motion with the nature of the swimmer indicated in each snapshot for reduced volume ν r = 0.80, dimensionless active force S = 160, dimensionless shear... As a function of time, Σ zz goes through a periodic cycle of changes, alternating between positive and negative values, as shown in Fig. 8. This is consistent with the results in Fig. 7, in which the swimmer switches from pusher to puller over time. Note that in the case of small amplitude of active force and large shear modulus, we see buckling during the swimmer motion, indicated by additional oscillations in the stresslet coefficient. In Fig. 8, averaged values of stresslet obtained for different physical parameters are shown inside the frame. We see there that the value of the average stresslet can be positive or negative depending on these physical parameters. In other words, the pusher or puller nature is not intrinsic but depends on the amplitude of the force deployed by the swimmer. Figure 8 Time dependence of scaled traceless stresslet coefficient Σ zz for ν r = 0.80 and S κ = 0.2, for different values of dimensionless shear modulus S μ and the dimensionless active force amplitude S. We also show... Discussion Scaling analysis In the previous section, we have reported the dependence of the swimming velocity on the mechanical properties of the swimmer and the amplitude of the active force. Here, we summarize these observations using qualitative scaling arguments. We call δR the characteristic amplitude of the deformation of the swimmer. As we have seen, δR is closely related to the propulsion velocity of the swimmer. The deformation is subject to four limiting factors: viscous stress in the fluids, shear elastic forces, tension forces, and bending forces. These four contributions together should balance the active force. The order of magnitude of the viscous stress can be written in terms of fluid viscosity η, stroke frequency ω, and characteristic length scale R = 1/3 as ηωδR / R, where ωδR is the characteristic velocity of the fluid. The elastic force density can be qualitatively expressed as μ s δR / R 2, where μ s is the shear modulus. Similarly, the tension force density can be written as ζδR / R 2, where ζ is a characteristic value of the Lagrange multiplier representing the tension in the membrane. Finally, the bending force density is of the order of κδR / R 4, where κ is the bending modulus. These expressions are derived assuming the characteristic wavelength of the deformation to be comparable with the size of the cell R. Combining, we obtain the following relation between the active force density amplitude F and the deformation amplitude δR : F = δ R. Recall that F has dimensions of force per unit area. In the small F limit, this relation gives us that δR ∼ F. The quadratic dependence of the swimming velocity ν on the force amplitude in Fig. 6 at small S suggests that ν ∼ δR 2. The membrane tension, manifested as the Lagrange multiplier ζ in, is close to its equilibrium value in the small F limit. At equilibrium, when the active force is equal to zero, the shape of the swimmer coincides with the stress-free shape of the elastic energy, which implies that the shear forces are equal to 0. Furthermore, the stress-free shape is chosen to be the equilibrium shape of the bending energy for given surface area and volume of the swimmer. This suggests that the equilibrium value of ζ is of the same order as κ / R 2. We therefore can exclude the tension contribution from the factors limiting the shape deformation in the limit of small active force in. Depending on the relative magnitude of the other contributions to the right hand side of Eq. 24, different mechanical factors limit the deformation of the swimmer for small active forces. In our study, we consider the case of μ s > ηω and μ s > κ / R 2 or, equivalently, S μ > 1, S μ > S κ. In this case, the deformation is limited by the elasticity of the swimmer. As the active force increases, the characteristic tension starts to increase proportionally to the active force amplitude, as required by the conservation of the surface area of the swimmer. Similarly, the characteristic shear modulus increases at high deformations according to the strain-hardening constitutive law. Consequently, the deformation reaches saturation in the large F limit. As a test of this scaling hypothesis, we estimated the amplitude of deformation by calculating the difference between the maximal and minimal extension of the swimmer in the swimming direction i.e., the z direction. We plotted this deformation ΔZ max as a function of the active force amplitude in Fig. 9. The linear dependence at small forces and the saturation at larger forces are clear for both the cases considered. The saturation value at large force for is clearly proportional to Γ. This saturation is also manifested in the force-velocity dependence in Fig. 6 for large S. Figure 9 Log-log plot of the dependence of the estimated deformation amplitude ΔZ max scaled by the R as a function of the scaled active force amplitude S for swimmers with two different excess areas indicated in the legend. In these calculations, we have... The crossover between the linear dependence of the deformation on the active force and the saturated regime appears when the tension contribution in Eq. 24 becomes comparable with the rest of the right-hand side. When μ s / R 2 is the dominant coefficient in Eq. 24, this implies that ζ ∼ μ s. Because ζ ∼ F, we obtain the approximate position of the crossover as S = S μ. This position is marked for S μ = 5 and S μ = 15 by the vertical lines in Fig. 6. As can be seen, these lines indeed correspond approximately to the crossover position. Further observation from Fig. 6 is that higher values of the active force are required to reach the saturation regime for a more deflated swimmer than for an almost spherical one. To understand this behavior, we need to investigate the dependence of Eq. 24 on the excess area of the swimmer. In the limit of large active forces, the characteristic deformation δR reaches its maximal value, which is of order Γ R, as discussed, for example, in. To get this value from Eq. 24, we need to assume that the characteristic tension ζ scales as Γ −1/2 for large active forces: ζ ∼ R F Γ. There is no a priori reason to add any power-law dependence on Γ to other coefficients in Eq. 24 such as μ s or η because they tend to a finite value in the case of almost-spherical swimmers. Based on Eq. 25, we indeed observe that the crossover from linear behavior to saturation of deformation occurs at a value of S that scales as Γ. The analysis above defines a scaling ansatz for the swimming velocity. Based on the quadratic dependence of ν on S for small S, we introduce the following scaling: v ∼ δ R 2 ω R. It is natural that velocity has a quadratic dependence on the deformation: indeed, the terms linear in deformation must vanish after averaging over one stroke cycle because of the periodic nature of the shape dynamics of the swimmer. Equation 26 can be understood as a ratio of the time-averaged deformation-induced traction ∼ ηδR and the viscous drag coefficient ∼ ηR of the swimmer’s body. Here, ηδR is the characteristic variation of the viscous drag during one stroke cycle, and δRω is the characteristic rate of deformation of the swimmer. Combining Eqs. 24, 25, and 26, we get the following scaling for the swimming velocity: v = a F 2 ω 2 R = a Γ ω R S 2 2, where a and b are phenomenological numerical prefactors and we have set S κ / S μ and 1/ S μ, which are small in our simulations, exactly to zero for simplicity. The expression captures qualitatively the dependence of the swimming velocity on S, S μ, and Γ : the saturation of velocity for strong active forces, the quadratic behavior at small forces ), the proportionality of the swimming velocity to Γ in the saturated regime, and the position of the crossover from weak-force regime to the saturation are reproduced. Nevertheless, we have found that a much better fitting can be achieved with a slightly modified expression v = a Γ ω R S 2 b 2 Γ S μ 2 + S 2, as shown in Fig. 6. A possible explanation for the better fit with the above expression is that the scaling of tension with force is given by ζ ∝ F 2 R 2 / Γ + c 2 μ s 2 − c μ s, where c is a numerical prefactor. This is consistent with scaling Eq. 25 at large F but has the virtue that the tension does not change sign when the direction of the active forces is reversed, as required by the symmetry of the problem. Our analysis of the scaling of the deformation of the swimmer as a function of the amplitude of the active force shows that the simplistic nature of the approximations Eqs. 24 and 25 prevents them from capturing the quantitative details of strongly nonlinear deformation laws of the model capsule. Equation 28 is exploited below to assess the effects of viscoelastic processes on the motility of cells. Extensible swimmers The presentation above uses an inextensible capsule as a model for the swimming cell. The situation in reality is more complex, as the cortex of motile cells is extensible. The phospholipid membrane, which forms the outer cell boundary, is virtually inextensible. However, a significant portion of the surface area of the membrane is stored in nanoscale deformations excited by thermal fluctuations. These deformations can be smoothed out under sufficient mechanical load, which would liberate additional surface area for cell-scale deformations of the membrane. Thus, certain effective extensibility can be ascribed to the cell surface. It is known that several animal cells seem to change area during spreading on substrate. It is therefore important to verify which of the above conclusions remain valid for moderately extensible swimmers. We explore this question by using an extensible capsule consisting of an isotropic mesh of elastic filaments as a model for the swimmer. We still use a FENEM-like model; however, both the dilatational and shear deformations are allowed in this subsection. The FENEM-like nature of the model ensures that both the dilatation and the shearing of the capsule do not exceed a fixed range independent of the active force. The elastic energy due to extension can be derived from the principal stretches ε 1 and ε 2 defined in Cell Model ; however, their product is not equal to 1, as was the case for the inextensible capsule. We first write the deformation invariants I 1 = ε 1 2 − ε 2 2 − 2 and I 2 = ε 1 2 ε 2 2 − 1 and write the elastic energy for extensible swimmers U ext as U e x t = μ s C 3 2, where 0 < C < 1 controls the maximal deformation of the swimmer. Forces are calculated by numerically taking functional derivatives of the energy in Eq. 29. We take a sphere as the initial shape and the stress-free reference configuration of the swimmer. The same distribution of active forces is applied as described above. The typical velocity-force behavior for an extensible capsule is shown in Fig. 10. Initially, the velocity growth with force is quadratic. However, for larger amplitudes of the active force, the FENEM-like nature of the elastic model hinders further increase of the deformation of the capsule, and the velocity dependence on the force starts to deviate from a quadratic function. At larger forces, a hint of saturation is observed. Overall, the main features observed for inextensible capsules are also reproduced for extensible ones. We note that the magnitude of swimming velocity can be controlled by varying the parameter C, which characterizes the maximal dilatation of the extensible swimmer while retaining the same qualitative behavior. Figure 10 The velocity as a function of force for two different shear moduli for the case of the extensible capsule. Varying the parameter C, which controls the maximal deformation, changes the magnitude of the velocities. To see this figure in color, go online.... Application to cellular motility Here, we use the expression Eq. 28 to estimate which mechanical properties of biological cells play a significant role in their locomotion. For this purpose, we use the typical values of relevant parameters for real amoeboid swimmers. Based on these values and the scaling relation, we discuss the regimes in which the motion is dominated by the elasticity or by the viscosity of the cell. Several experiments have provided typical values for active forces of real cells. Assuming that most eukaryotic cells exert active forces of a similar order, we select some available experimental data to guide our analysis. Measurements of the traction force on rat embryonic fibroblasts provide values for the force per unit area on the order of nN/ μ m 2. From dimensional analysis, one expects a force per unit area to be given by a typical molecular bonding energy E per unit volume ℓ 3, where ℓ is the typical length of a molecule. A typical molecular bonding energy acting in cells is on the order of 1 eV per molecule. Taking the length scale ℓ on the order of 1 nm, one obtains active force of ∼1 nN/ μ m 2. In the swimming case, we do not evoke bonding energies but rather traction forces of the actomyosin network and/or actin polymerization. A fiber of actin and myosin is known to exert forces on the order of a pN, and by taking the typical section of a fiber, one gets the force per unit area to be on the order of 1 nN/ μ m 2. We thus use this order of magnitude as a rough estimate. Swimming cells using amoeboid strategies emit a bleb about every few seconds, so the period of the swimming cycle can be taken to be about 10 s. This gives the stroke frequency ω of order 2 π /10 ≈ 1 s −1. Lastly, an estimate of the viscosity is needed. The only viscosity in our model is that of the external fluid, which we assume to be close to the viscosity of water. By setting η ≈ 10 −3 Pa ⋅ s, one obtains S ≈ 10 6. This is well beyond the crossover into the saturation regime, in which the cell spends most of its time waiting before deploying new elementary stroke cycles to move forward. This value appears quite unrealistic, indirectly pointing toward the fact that the appropriate dissipation mechanism for the cellular motion is actually found in the cytoplasm, as one may naturally expect. Therefore, we choose to treat η as the effective viscosity of the cell. The effective cell viscosity has been measured for different cells, in particular for fibroblasts. The cell effective viscosity is reported to be equal to 2 × 10 3 Pa ⋅ s, that is, six orders of magnitude larger than that of water. With this value, one obtains S ∼ 1. This is interesting because this value corresponds to the crossover from weak to large force in Fig. 6. This would imply that the cell operates in a regime that is close to the shape-saturation regime in which the timescale of the stroke period T s is close to the natural shape-relaxation time governed by the cytoplasmic viscosity. By operating in that regime, the cell has a velocity that is not far from its maximal possible value. Let us finally discuss the relative importance of the cytoskeleton shear elastic effect as compared to the viscous one. From our scaling expression, the elastic effect dominates if μ s R η ω ≫ 1, whereas the viscous effect dominates in the opposite case. From the same above-mentioned experiment on fibroblasts, the effective 2D shear elastic modulus is estimated around 2–4 × 10 3 Pa ⋅ m. Using the above values for viscosity, and R ≃ 10 μ m, one finds that the left-hand side of Eq. 30 is on the order of about 1–10. That means that the two effects are of comparable orders, making it difficult at present, given the lack of a more precise estimates, to discriminate between the two situations. Conclusions This work has dealt with a cell swimming model in which both elastic and viscous effects are taken into account. The detailed analysis here has contributed to our understanding of amoeboid swimming and also given insights into possible amoeboid motion of real cells. The next extensions will be directed toward confinement effect as well as bridging between the swimming strategy and the crawling one. An interesting direction is to analyze the motion close to a single flat wall with and without adhesion to clarify the interplay between pure swimming, hydrodynamic interaction with a wall, and the nonhydrodynamic aspects such as adhesion and friction. Here, we considered for the sake of simplicity normal forces only. In general, we expect both normal and tangential forces to be present. Thus, besides pure amoeboid motion, tangential forces can lead to flow along the membrane, which should lead to migration even if the shape remains fixed in the course of time. For example, when cells become tightly confined within a channel, the ability to deploy ample shape deformation may be hindered, and therefore other locomotion modes, such as recirculation along the membrane, may become a leading mode. Author Contributions M.R. performed the simulations and analyzed the data. A.F. developed the method and the mathematical analysis. C.M. designed the research. All authors wrote the manuscript together. 