A Gβγ Effector, ElmoE, Transduces GPCR Signaling to the Actin Network during Chemotaxis You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF A Gβγ Effector, ElmoE, Transduces GPCR Signaling to the Actin Network during Chemotaxis Dev Cell. 2012 Jan 17; 22: 92–103. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Developmental cell Author Manuscript HHS Public Access A Gβγ Effector, ElmoE, Transduces GPCR Signaling to the Actin Network during Chemotaxis Jianshe Yan, Vassil Mihaylov,, and Tian Jin Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials 1. NIHMS1066533-supplement-1.pdf GUID: 947571CD-A0B3-467A-ABE3-1E487DA6CB59 2. NIHMS1066533-supplement-2.avi GUID: 8FC32A99-C782-4308-BEE6-57FA13092B89 3. NIHMS1066533-supplement-3.avi GUID: D38A86EE-0265-4D27-A183-687AB3EBCBF0 SUMMARY Activation of G protein-coupled receptors leads to the dissociation of heterotrimeric G-proteins into Gα and Gβγ subunits, which go on to regulate various effectors involved in a panoply of cellular responses. During chemotaxis, Gβγ subunits regulate actin assembly and migration, but the protein linking Gβγ to the actin cytoskeleton remains unknown. Here, we identified a Gβγ effector, ElmoE in Dictyostelium, and demonstrated that it is required for GPCR-mediated chemotaxis. Remarkably, ElmoE associates with Gβγ and Dock-like proteins to activate the small GTPase Rac, in a GPCR-dependent manner, and also associates with Arp2/3 complex and F-actin. Thus, ElmoE serves as a link between chemoattractant GPCRs, G-proteins and the actin cytoskeleton. The pathway, consisting of GPCR, Gβγ, Elmo/Dock, Rac, and Arp2/3, spatially guides the growth of dendritic actin networks in pseudopods of eukaryotic cells during chemotaxis. INTRODUCTION G protein-coupled receptors regulate many physiological responses to hormones, neurotransmitters, chemokines and other stimuli. The chemokine GPCRs detect extracellular chemical gradients to guide directional movement of eukaryotic cells toward the chemical source in a process known as chemotaxis. Activation of chemokine GPCRs promotes the dissociation of the heterotrimeric G proteins Gα and Gβγ, which, in turn, activate downstream signal transduction pathways that ultimately regulate the spatiotemporal organization of the actin cytoskeleton to drive cell migration. Downstream pathways that control the actin network during migration have been identified. At the leading edge, Arp2/3 complexes initiate the formation of new actin filaments, branching from existing ones. The growth of the dendritic actin-network pushes the membrane forward, resulting in pseudopod extension. The dominant leading front is supported through the suppression of errant pseudopods at the sides and rear of the cell by action of the cortical actin/myosin II network. In neutrophils, chemokines activate Rac1 and Rac2 to induce the growth of actin-filaments by removing capping proteins and stimulating the Arp2/3 complex, respectively. GPCR-induced Rac activation requires guanine nucleotide exchange factors, one being the evolutionarily conserved Elmo/Dock180 complex, which functions to regulate chemotaxis. However, it is not known how Rac-GEF proteins link GPCR signaling through the heterotrimeric G protein subunits to direct the dynamic organization of the actin network during chemotaxis. Dictyostelium discoideum is a well established model system for studying eukaryotic chemotaxis. This organism utilizes the GPCR cAMP receptor 1 coupled with the heterotrimeric G protein Gα2Gβγ to detect the chemoattractant cAMP and control cell migration. Mechanisms of cAMP gradient sensing by cAR1/Gα2Gβγ have been studied extensively. Many components that regulate or constitute the actin-based moving apparatus for chemotaxis have been identified. The cAR1/Gα2Gβγ machinery activates Ras proteins that regulate four signaling enzymes, PI3K, TORC2, PLA2, and sGC, each of which has been implicated in chemotaxis. Despite much progress, our understanding on the signaling network controlling chemotaxis by GPCRs remains incomplete. It is still unclear which proteins interact with G protein subunits leading to activation of these enzymes, and how these enzymes control the actin cytoskeleton. The Elmo and Dock proteins are evolutionarily conserved in D. discoideum and likely serve as GEFs for Rac proteins controlling actin cytoskeleton in chemotaxis. Indeed, It has been shown that in D. discoideum Dock and Rac proteins regulate the actin cytoskeleton during chemotaxis toward a cAMP source, but how the cAR1/Gα2Gβγ link to downstream components to control the actin-based moving apparatus is not known. Here, we identified ElmoE as an essential component for cAR1-controlled chemotaxis, and importantly, we demonstrated that ElmoE associates with Gβγ subunits and interacts with Dock-like proteins to activate RacB and promote actin polymerization at the leading front of migrating cells. RESULTS ElmoE Plays a Role in cAR1-Mediated Chemotaxis To examine the function of ElmoE, we generated both an elmoE null and an ElmoE-YFP knockin strain, in which the YFP coding sequence was inserted at the 3′ end of the ElmoE gene, through homologous recombination. elmoE − mutants displayed an abnormal developmental phenotype characterized by the relatively low number of fruiting bodies formed when cells are developed on a lawn of Klebsiella aerogenes. In similar experiments, elmoEKI cells did not show the developmental defect, demonstrating that the ElmoE-YFP protein is functional. In addition, ElmoE-YFP protein was hardly detected in vegetative elmoEKI cells but was expressed during the chemotaxis-competent stage, consistent with a role in chemotaxis. Figure 1. ElmoE Is Not Required for cAMP Gradient Sensing but Is Required for Chemotaxis Chemotaxis is the result of three basic cell processes: chemoattractant gradient sensing, actin-dependent cell polarization, and actin-mediated cell motility. To test whether ElmoE plays a role in gradient sensing, we examined chemoattractant-induced polarization of PIP 3 on the plasma membrane in cells exposed to a gradient of chemoattractant. Polarization of PIP 3 is regulated by cAR1/Gα2βγ and requires inputs from Ras, PI3K, and PTEN. Changes in the level of PIP 3 were monitored in vivo by the PIP 3 -binding fluorescent probe PH CRAC -GFP. We found that in both elmoE − and wild-type cells PH CRAC -GFP localized similarly toward a chemoattractant gradient emanating from a point source, indicating that ElmoE is not essential for gradient sensing. However, elmoE − cells showed a clear defect in directional cell migration. We recorded cell movement toward a chemoattractant gradient and determined four chemotactic parameters for wild-type, elmoE −, and elmoEKI cells. Our analyses showed that elmoE − cells exhibited significantly poorer directionality, lower speed, more direction changes, and reduced polarization compared to wild-type or elmoEKI cells. These results indicate that ElmoE plays a role in cAR1/Gα2βγ-mediated chemotaxis, affecting both cell polarization and motility, two processes that require the actin-cytoskeleton. ElmoE Translocates to the Cell Membrane upon Activation of cAR1/Gα2βγ Activation of cAR1 GPCR induces dissociation of heterotrimeric G-proteins into Gα2 and Gβγ subunits, which regulate multiple signal transduction pathways controlling the actin-cytoskeleton that drives cell migration. We first observed the cellular localization of ElmoE-YFP upon a uniform cAMP stimulation. Before the stimulation, ElmoE was enriched at the leading front and was also distributed in cytosol of chemotaxing cells. Stimulation triggered a transient translocation of ElmoE-YFP to the plasma membrane, 2C ), indicating that activation of cAR1/Gα2βγ mediates cellular localization of ElmoE. When cells were treated with Latrunculin B, which destroys the actin cytoskeleton, cAMP-stimulation did not induce a clear membrane translocation of ElmoE-YFP, suggesting that cAMP-induced membrane translocation of ElmoE depends on the actin cytoskeleton. Figure 2. ElmoE-YFP and PH CRAC -GFP Translocation Kinetics It has been shown that cAR1/Gα2βγ activates the small G-proteins RasC and RasG to control TORC2 and PI3K activities respectively, and each of which in turn transduces signals to the actin-cytoskeleton. To understand the role of each pathway in cAR1-mediated ElmoE membrane translocation, we examined ElmoE-YFP cellular distribution in the cells that had been treated with LY, which blocks PI3K, and in pia − cells, in which there is no functional TORC2 complex. Furthermore, we monitored ElmoE-YFP distribution in cells lacking RasC and RasG, rasC − / rasG −, or a functional heterotrimeric G protein complex, g β −. With the exception of g β − cells, we observed a clear cAMP-induced membrane translocation of ElmoE-YFP under all conditions. Furthermore, consistent with our gradient experiments, the cAR1-induced PIP 3 response to cAMP stimulation was normal in elmoE − cells as monitored by the transient translocation of PH CRAC -GFP to the plasma membrane. 2D ). Thus, the plasma membrane translocation of ElmoE is mediated by heterotrimeric G-proteins and requires the actin-cytoskeleton, but does not require RasC, RasG, PI3K, and TORC2. Proteomic Analyses Suggest that ElmoE Associates with Gβγ, RacB, and the Arp2/3 complex To reveal the potential molecular mechanism of ElmoE function, we sought to identify proteins that associate with ElmoE. ElmoE-YFP-TAP expressed in elmoE − cells was partially purified from lysates using anti-GFP antibodies coupled to beads, and eluates were subjected to SDS gel electrophoresis; the YFP-TAP tag expressed in cells was used as a control. Several prominent protein bands, which appeared specifically in the ElmoE-YFP-TAP but not in the control sample, were identified using mass spectrometry. The identified proteins include RacB, ArcB, and ArcC, as well as actin. We then applied a comprehensive proteomic analysis to identify all proteins that immunoprecipitated with ElmoE-YFP-TAP but not the YFP-TAP tag. The analysis confirmed that RacB, ArcB, and ArcC as well as act22 and act16 coimmunoprecipitated with ElmoE-YFP-TAP. We also discovered that the Gβ subunit of the heterotrimeric G protein and other components of the Arp2/3 complex associated with ElmoE-YFP-TAP but not the YFP-TAP. Figure 3. ElmoE Forms Complex with Gβγ, RacB, the Arp2/3 Complex, and Actin To further examine the interaction between Gβγ and ElmoE, we identified proteins that associate with Gβ subunit using a proteomic approach. Cells expressing His-S-HA-Gβ or His-S-HA-CRAC were stimulated with cAMP. HBVS was added to cell lysates to chemically crosslink proteins. The crosslinked lysates were precleared by centrifugation, and the supernatant was then subjected to tandem affinity purification with Ni-NTA agarose and S-protein agarose. The eluted protein complexes were subjected to mass spectrometry. We found that ElmoE, Gγ, Gα4, GbqA, and Gα2 crosslinked to His-S-HA-Gβ but not to the His-S-HA-CRAC control. Identification of Gγ and Gαs, which are known to interact with Gβ to form a heterotrimeric complex, indicated that this approach successfully revealed Gβ associating proteins, including that identified here, ElmoE. Because HBVS crosslinks proteins at distances less than 15 Å, our data suggest that ElmoE interacts with Gβγ. Gβγ Associates with ElmoE The association between Gβ and ElmoE was further confirmed by immunoprecipitation analyses. In pull-downs of lysates from cells expressing ElmoE-YFP using an anti-GFP antibody, we found that native Gβ coimmunoprecipitated with ElmoE-YFP. In reciprocal experiments, lysates from cells coexpressing ElmoE-YFP and His-S-HA-Gβ or ElmoE-YFP and His-S-HA-CRAC or His-S-HA-PH CRAC, as controls, were immunoprecipitated to with anti-HA antibody. ElmoE-YFP coimmunoprecipitated with His-S-HA-Gβ but not His-S-HA-CRAC or His-S-HA-PH CRAC. Figure 4. The Association between Gβγ and ElmoE To understand how Gβ and ElmoE may associate, we performed coimmunoprecipitation analyses on extracts from cells coexpressing ElmoE-YFP and mutant Gβ subunits designated SN. GβSN point mutants were previously isolated as a class of Gβ mutants that specifically fail to activate the adenylyl cyclase but retain the ability to carry out cAMP-induced actin polymerization. We found that ElmoE-YFP coimmunoprecipitated with GST-tagged GβSN1, GβSN2 and GβSN8 but not the GST-tag control, indicating that the residues needed for adenylyl cyclase activation are not required for association with ElmoE. These results are consistent with the notion that association between Gβγ and ElmoE does not involve signaling proteins that function to activate adenylyl cyclase, such as, RasC and G, PI3K, or TORC2. To further understand the ElmoE-Gβ interaction, we generated two ElmoE deletion mutants and assessed their ability to associate with Gβ and translocate to the plasma membrane after a cAMP stimulation. 4E ). N-ElmoE-YFP consists of the first 1044 amino acids of ElmoE, which includes the Elmo domain. C-ElmoE-YFP consists of the second half of ElmoE, which contains a coiled-coil domain. Immunoprecipitation analyses showed that N-ElmoE-YFP associated with Gβ while C-ElmoE-YFP did not. As an additional control, we found that Gβ does not coimmunoprecipitate with ElmoA-GFP, another D. discoideum Elmo family protein. These results indicate that Gβ specifically associates with the N-terminal portion of ElmoE. Interestingly, cAMP stimulation induced a clear membrane translocation of C-ElmoE-YFP but not N-ElmoE-YFP. In addition, the translocation exhibited by the C-ElmoE-YFP did not occur when cells were treated with Latrunculin B, similar to that exhibited by full-length ElmoE-YFP. Taken together, our results suggest that ElmoE receives two kinds of signals from the cAR1/Gα2βγ machinery: one from Gβγ to its N-terminal portion, and the other, a potential feedback signal, to its C-terminal portion from the actin cytoskeleton. ElmoE Associates with Dock-Like Proteins and RacB Eight genes have been found to encode Dock-like proteins in D. discoideum. Among them, DdDockA, B, C, and D belong to the subfamily of Dock180-related proteins, and DdzizA, B, C, and D belong to the subfamily of zizimin-related proteins, which include mammalian Dock9 and 10. To determine which of the Dock family proteins associate with ElmoE, Dock-like proteins were epitope-tagged, expressed in cells with ElmoE-YFP and coimmunoprecipitation analyses were performed. We found that ElmoE-YFP coimmunoprecipitated with GST tagged DdDockC and DdzizA but not any other family member. Figure 5. ElmoE Associates with Dock-like Proteins and RacB The association between ElmoE and RacB was confirmed by immunoprecipitation analyses. 5D ). Lysates of cells coexpressing myc-tagged RacB and ElmoE-YFP or PH CRAC -GFP were immunoprecipitated using anti-GFP antibodies coupled to beads, elutes were subjected immunoblot analysis using anti-myc antibody. We found that myc-RacB coimmunoprecipitated with ElmoE-YFP but not PH CRAC -GFP. In a reciprocal experiment, ElmoE-YFP but not PH CRAC -GFP coimmunoprecipitated with myc-RacB. Our results suggest that ElmoE and DdDockC and DdzizA form the evolutionarily conserved Elmo/Dock complex that likely serves as the GEF for the small G protein RacB. Activation of cAR1 Promotes Association between Gβγ and ElmoE To evaluate how activation of cAR1 affects the association between Gβ and ElmoE, we performed coimmunoprecipitation analyses on the membrane fraction from cells coexpressing His-S-HA-tagged Gβ and ElmoE-YFP, N-ElmoE-YFP, or C-ElmoE-YFP. 6B ). After cells were stimulated with 10 μM cAMP, membrane fractions were isolated at various time points and immunoprecipitated using the HA antibody coupled to beads to pull down His-S-HA-Gβ. To determine the amount of ElmoE-YFP, N-Elmo-YFP, and C-Elmo-YFP that associates with His-S-HA-Gβ upon cAMP stimulation, elutes at various time points were subjected to western blot analysis using the anti-GFP antibody. 6B ). We found that cAMP stimulation induced a clear increase in the level of ElmoE-YFP associating with His-S-HA-Gβ. 6C ). In contrast, N-ElmoE-YFP associated with His-S-HA-Gβ but the level of N-ElmoE-YFP remained unchanged upon a cAMP stimulation, 6C ), while C-ElmoE-YFP that translocates to membrane upon a cAMP stimulation did not associate with Gβ. Figure 6. Activation of cAR1 Promotes the Association between Gβγ and ElmoE and Induces RacB Activation We further examined dynamics of Gβγ/ElmoE association upon uniform cAMP stimulation in single live cells using a sensitized emission FRET imaging method. Cells coexpressing Gβ-CFP/ElmoE-YFP or cAR1-CFP/ElmoE-YFP were imaged in three channels over a time lapse after cAMP stimulation. As predicted, the normalized FRET between cAR1-CFP and ElmoE-YFP remained low and unchanged following cAMP addition. In contrast, a sharp increase in N-FRET between Gβ-CFP and ElmoE-YFP was measured upon cAMP stimulation concurrent with ElmoE-YFP translocation to the plasma membrane. Interestingly, the N-FRET signal remained high even after the bulk of the ElmoE-YFP signal returned to the cytosol, consistent with previous findings that Gβγ remains dissociated from Gα under persistent stimulatory conditions. Taken together, our data indicate that activation of cAR1 promotes the association of Gβγ and ElmoE. N-terminal region of ElmoE interacts with Gβ, while C-terminal region of ElmoE facilitates membrane translocation of ElmoE. Before a cAMP stimulation, there is a basal level of association between Gβγ and ElmoE. Our observation that ElmoE localizes at the leading front of chemotaxing cells before a cAMP stimulation is consistent with the notion that ElmoE associates with Gβγ at the leading front of polarized cells in the absence of cAMP. cAMP stimulation promotes the association between Gβγ and ElmoE by generating more free Gβγ subunits on the membrane and recruiting more ElmoE to the membrane. Gβγ-ElmoE Association and Membrane Translocation of ElmoE Are Required for Proper Chemotaxis To test whether the Gβγ-ElmoE association and/or cAMP-induced membrane translocation are crucial for ElmoE functions, we examined developmental phenotype and chemotaxis of elmoE − cells expressing N-ElmoE-YFP and C-ElmoE-YFP. As shown previously, elmoE − cells displayed a developmental phenotype. Expressing ElmoE-YFP rescued the phenotype. In contrast, expressing either N-ElmoE-YFP or C-ElmoE-YFP in elmoE − cells did not rescue the developmental phenotype. Using a TAXIScan assay, we examined chemotaxic behaviors of wild-type, elmoE −, and elmoE − cells expressing ElmoE-YFP, N-ElmoE-YFP, or C-ElmoE-YFP toward a linear cAMP gradient. The elmoE − cells displayed significant defects in chemotaxis index and speed, while elmoE − cells expressing ElmoE-YFP rescued the chemotaxis defects, consistent with previous results. In contrast, expressing either N-ElmoE-YFP or C-ElmoE-YFP did not rescue the chemotaxis defects. These results suggest that both membrane translocation and the Gβ association of ElmoE are important for normal development and chemotaxis. ElmoE Is Required for cAR1-Triggered RacB Activation Because RacB was found to associate with ElmoE, we next tested whether ElmoE regulates RacB activity. Upon cAMP stimulation, RacB was activated in cells expressing ElmoE but in cells lacking ElmoE or cAR1, the stimulation failed to induce RacB activation. 6I ). There are 18 Rac-related GTPases belonging to the Rho family and 42 proteins with a Rho-GEF domain in D. discoideum. To examine whether ElmoE is a pan regulator of Rac activity, we measured the cAMP-induced activation of two additional Rac proteins RacD and RacI in cells lacking ElmoE. In contrast to RacB, RacD and RacI were clearly activated in elmoE − cells. Although our survey of Rac proteins was limited, these results suggest, in conjunction with our mass spec data, that ElmoE plays a role in cAR1-induced activation of RacB but not activation of all Rac proteins. ElmoE Regulates cAMP-Induced Actin Polymerization To reveal the relationship between ElmoE and the actin cytoskeleton, we first biochemically measured cAMP-induced actin polymerization over a time course. In wild-type cells, cAMP-induced actin polymerization is a Gα2Gβγ-dependent process that has an initial, large rapid increase in F-actin, followed by an elongated and small second peak. When elmoE − cells were stimulated with the same dose of cAMP, a reduced initial peak of F-actin was observed. We then imaged cAMP-induced actin polymerization in live cells using an F-actin-binding probe ΔlimE-RFP by confocal microscopy. When cells were exposed to a uniformly applied cAMP stimulation, ΔlimE-RFP translocated to the cell cortex, indicating an increase of F-actin and then returned to cytosol in both wild-type and elmoE − cells. However, the level of actin polymerization was reduced in elmoE − cells. Interestingly, cells lacking RacB also exhibit a similar reduction in the level of cAMP-induced actin polymerization. Figure 7. ElmoE Plays a Role in Actin Polymerization at the Leading Front of Chemotaxing Cells To better observe the detailed structures of the actin cytoskeleton, we imaged wild-type and elmoE − cells expressing the fluorescent F-actin probe ABD-GFP using total internal reflection-fluorescence microscopy. The TIR-FM imaging plane is spatially limited to ~100 nm from the coverslip and, thus, eliminates interfering, out of focus fluorescence in adherent cells. In both cell lines, the actin network underwent dynamic change even before cAMP stimulation. Upon stimulation, F-actin was transiently enriched at the cell periphery where membrane protrusions are located. The transient decrease in signal at the cell’s contact area with the coverslip was likely due to depletion of free ABD-GFP as it was recruited to sites of rapid actin polymerization. These events were followed by the formation of more actin filaments in the contact region and in newly forming pseudopods. We did not observe obvious defects in the initial organization or reorganization of actin network induced by chemoattractant in elmoE − cells by this methodology. Taken together, our results suggest that ElmoE is necessary for the magnitude of F-actin accumulation during the immediate “cringe” response to receptor stimulation. While the global organization of the actin network appears unaffected by the loss of ElmoE when cells experience a uniform stimulation, maintenance of polarity and directional movement are significantly compromised when cells lacking ElmoE are exposed to a chemoattractant gradient. ElmoE Is Enriched at the Leading Pseudopod of Chemotaxing Cells Next, we examined the cellular distribution of ElmoE, RacB, Arp2/3 complex, and the actin cytoskeleton in live cells. Cells expressing ElmoE-YFP and ΔlimE-RFP were imaged by confocal microscopy under different conditions to study how the dynamics of ElmoE localization correlates with formation of F-actin structures. In vegetative cells, ElmoE and F-actin colo-calized to macropinosomes—highly dynamic F-actin-rich structures that are responsible for nutrient uptake. Upon uniform cAMP stimulation of differentiated cells, both ElmoE and F-actin transiently translocated to the plasma membrane. Using an under agar chemotaxis assay to ensure that cells are uniformly flat, we found that ElmoE accumulated at the base of extending F-actin filaments that drive the extension of the leading pseudopods during directional cell migration. 7E ). We also imaged chemotaxing cells expressing RacB-GFP and Arp2-GFP using the under agar assay. RacB-GFP, which monitors both inactive and active RacB, was uniformly distributed in cytosol of chemotaxing cells, indicating that RacB proteins are accessible for activation throughout the cell. As expected, Arp2-GFP was enriched at the anterior of the cell where it organizes actin assembly in leading pseudopods to drive cell migration. In elmoE − cells, the localizations of RacB and Arp2-GFP appeared normal, 7G ), and actin polymerization took place at the leading front of migrating cells, indicating that signals are still transduced from cAR1/Gα2βγ to the actin cytoskeleton in the absent of ElmoE, which supports the idea that multiple pathways relay signals from the GPCR to the actin cytoskeleton in chemotaxis. However, the distributions of these components are consistent with the notion that ElmoE may play a role in localizing the activation of RacB at the leading front where Arp2/3 complexes are localized to promote the growth of the dendritic actin network driving cell migration. DISCUSSION The evidence presented here reveals a pathway in which an Elmo protein functions to link the heterotrimeric G protein Gβγ to Rac activation, ultimately regulating actin polarization in chemotaxis. From studies in Caenorhabditis elegans and mammalian cells, it was established that cell surface receptors, including GPCRs, regulate Elmo/Dock complexes to activate Rac proteins to mediate pseudopod protrusion during cell migration. However, the signaling component that link receptors to Elmo/Dock complexes remained unclear. Our study shows that GPCRs can regulate Elmo function via an association between Gβγ and an Elmo protein. The results of our pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation experiments indicate that the Gβ subunit associates with ElmoE and that signaling through cAR1/Gα2βγ targets two different regions of ElmoE. Specifically, Gβ associates with the N-terminal portion of ElmoE containing the Elmo domain, and cAMP-induced membrane translocation of ElmoE was shown to be mediated through the C-terminal portion of ElmoE. Membrane translocation of ElmoE or C-terminal ElmoE did not occur in cells that were treated with Latrunculin, suggesting that the actin cytoskeleton is required for signal feedback to enhance the localization of ElmoE. Elmo and Dock180 form a complex that serves as a GEF for Rac proteins in metazoans. There are eight genes that encode Dock-like proteins in D. discoideum. We showed that ElmoE associates with the Dock-related proteins DdDockC and DdzizA but not the other five Dock-like proteins. A previous study showed that ElmoA associates with DdDockD. Thus, it is increasingly clear that Elmo proteins and their Dock-like partners in D. discoideum form evolutionarily conserved complexes as they do in higher eukaryotes. Our results show that ElmoE is required for cAR1-induced activation of RacB and proteomic and functional analyses suggest that ElmoE specifically interacts with RacB but not any other of the 17 Rac-like proteins present in D. discoideum. Together our data suggests that ElmoE and the Dock-related proteins DdDockC and/or DdzizA may form an evolutionarily conserved Elmo/Dock complex to serve as a GEF for the small G protein RacB. Our study has provided evidence to suggest that the ElmoE pathway may spatially direct the growth of the dendritic actin network in pseudopods during chemotaxis. Cells lacking ElmoE displayed defects in chemotaxis similar to what was previously shown in racB − cells. In addition, elmoE − and racB − cells displayed a similar reduced level of cAMP-triggered actin polymerization, consistent with ElmoE and RacB functioning in the same pathway to promote actin polymerization. In chemotaxing cells, ElmoE was enriched at the base of the forward-extending F-actin network in leading pseudopods where the Arp2/3 complex also accumulates. Because we do not yet have a specific fluorescence probe for the active form of RacB, we imaged the distribution of RacB-GFP, which reflects both active and inactive forms of the protein, and found that the RacB-GFP signals were uniformly distributed in cytosol in chemotaxing cells. We postulate that localized ElmoE may spatially control/activate RacB predominantly at the leading pseudopod to promote the forward extension of actin network for cell migration. Interestingly, D. discoideum ElmoA, in contrast to ElmoE, was found to associate with actin/myosinII to prevent excessive F-actin polymerization around the cell periphery and was excluded from leading pseudopods in chemotaxing cells, indicating that Elmo proteins function differentially to control chemotaxis. It has been shown in D. discoideum that RacB activates PAKc. PAK proteins are a highly conserved family of protein kinase regulated by Rac in all eukaryotes. In mammalian cells, it has been suggested that members of the PAK family act on cytoskeletal regulators such as Filamin, LIMK and MLCK to control the reorganization of the actin network independent of the Arp2/3 complex. Also in mammals, Rac proteins can coordinate the formation of new actin filaments in an Arp2/3-dependent manner through the SCAR/WAVE complex. While we do not have direct evidence for RacB regulation of WASP/SCAR activity in D. discoideum, our proteomic analyses indicate that ElmoE associates with RacB and the Arp2/3 complex, suggesting that similar pathways are conserved. The pathway, consisting of a GPCR, Gβγ, an ElmoE, Dock-related proteins, and RacB proteins, functions in concert with other pathways, such as PI3K, PLA2, TORC2, that transduce signals from a GPCR to the actin-network during cell migration in D. discoideum. Future studies will reveal whether the molecular mechanism involving the direct interaction between G protein subunits and Elmo/Dock complexes is also conserved in other eukaryotes, and how this pathway mediates chemokine GPCR-controlled cell migrations of mammalian cells. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Chemotaxis Assays Micropipette Chemotaxis Assay As previously described, wild-type, elmoE −, and elmoEKI cells were developed to the chemotactic stage. Cells were plated in a 1-well chamber and imaged with a Zeiss Laser Scanning Microscope, LSM 510 META, with a 40×, 1.3 NA Plan-Neofluar objective lens. A chemoattractant gradient was generated with a microinjector connected to a micropipette filled with 1 μM cAMP. Cell migration was recorded at 10 s intervals. Computer analysis was performed using DIAS software. The generation and measurement of applied cAMP gradient using Alexa 594 fluorescent dye has been previously described in detail. EZ-TAXIScan Chemotaxis Assay Cell migration was recorded at 15 s intervals at room temperature for 30 min in the EZ-TAXIScan chamber, which was assembled as described by the manufacturer. Coverslips and chips used in the chamber were coated with 1% BSA at room temperature for 1 hr. A stable, broad cAMP gradient was established for the assay. Cell migration analysis was performed with MATLAB software, and has been previously described. ElmoE Membrane Translocation upon cAMP Stimulation Differentiated cells expressing ElmoE-YFP were plated in 4-well chambers in a volume of 400 μl DB buffer and were stimulated at the indicated concentrations of cAMP by applying a 100 μl volume of cAMP into the well. The temporal-spatial intensity changes of ElmoE-YFP in cells were directly imaged using a confocal microscope. FRET The dynamics of Gβ and ElmoE protein interaction upon uniform cAMP stimulation was carried out by using a sensitized emission FRET imaging method on a Zeiss 710 LSM confocal microscope using a EC plan-Neoflur 40× oil lens. Cells expressing Gβ-CFP or ElmoE-YFP alone, Gβ -CFP with ElmoE-YFP, and cAR1-CFP with ElmoE-YFP were differentiated to the chemotactic stage, and stimulated as above. The cells were imaged in three channels: CFP, FRET, and YFP with the following settings: a 449–501 nm band pass was used to collect donor and 524–582 nm band pass was used to collect FRET emissions after excitation with a 440 nm laser. A 524–582 nm band pass was used to collect acceptor emissions after excitation with a 514 nm laser. Identification of Proteins That Interact with ElmoE Cells expressing pDV-ElmoE-YFP-TAP were developed to the chemotactic stage. Cells transformed with an empty pDV-CYFP-CTAP vector served as a control. After development with cAMP pulses, cells were washed, resuspended to 4 × 10 7 cells/ml in DB, and shaken with 2 mM caffeine at 200 rpm for 20 min to inhibit endogenous cAMP signaling to bring intracellular responses to basal levels. Cells were then stimulated with 50 μM cAMP and an aliquot was removed at 5 s. Cells were lysed in precooled lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors. Immunoprecipitation was performed by using the μMACS GFP isolation kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, cleared lysates were obtained by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. For immunoprecipitation of ElmoE-YFP, lysates were incubated with μMACS anti-GFP MicroBeads at 4°C for 30 min. After the labeling incubation, the cell lysate was applied onto a μColumn and washed with wash buffer. Proteins were eluted with Elution Buffer and subjected to SDS-PAGE. Protein bands stained with Coomassie blue were excised for mass spectrometry analysis. Protein identification work was carried out using NanoLC-MS/MS peptide sequencing technology. In brief, each protein band was destained, cleaned, and digested in-gel with sequencing grade modified trypsin. The resulting peptide mixture was analyzed by LC-MS/MS, where a high pressure liquid chromatography instrument with a 75 μm inner diameter reverse phase C18 column was on-line coupled with an ion trap mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometric data acquired were used to search the most recent nonredundant protein database. A specific search was done for the D. discoideum database. Coimmunoprecipitation ElmoE and Gβ Cells expressing ElmoE-YFP were developed to the chemotactic stage, collected by centrifugation and resuspended in ice-cold buffer at 7 × 10 7 cells/ml. After stimulation with 50 μM cAMP an aliquot was removed at 5 s. Cells were lysed by adding an equal volume of cold lysis buffer containing a protease inhibitor cocktail. The lysate was precleared by centrifugation. For coimmunoprecipitations, the precleared lysates were incubated with an anti-GFP polyclonal antibody for 90 min, and the immunocomplex was captured by incubating with Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose for 2 hr. Immunoprecipitates were separated by SDS-PAGE, and western blot analysis was performed with anti-GFP monoclonal antibody or anti-Gβ polyclonal antibody. As a negative control, wild-type cells were used. For the reciprocal experiments, precleared lysates of cells coexpressing ElmoE-YFP and His-S-HA-Gβ were incubated with anti-HA MicroBeads. Immunoprecipitation was performed as described above. The eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, blotted onto a PVDF membrane, and probed with anti-GFP antibody or anti-HA monoclonal antibody. As negative controls, cells expressing ElmoE-YFP and His-S-HA-CRAC, or His-S-HA-PH CRAC were used. ElmoE, N-ElmoE, C-ElmoE, and Gβ Cells expressing ElmoE-YFP, N-ElmoE-YFP, or C-ElmoE-YFP were developed and stimulated as above. Precleared lysates of cells were incubated with anti-GFP MicroBeads. Immunoprecipitation was performed as described above. The eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, and probed with anti-GFP antibody or anti-Gβ polyclonal antibody. ElmoE and GβSNs Cells coexpressing ElmoE-YFP and GST-tagged mutant Gβ were developed and stimulated as above. Precleared lysates of cells were incubated with anti-GST MicroBeads. Immunoprecipitation was performed as described above. The eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, and probed with anti-GFP antibody or anti-GST antibody. ElmoE and RacB Cells coexpressing ElmoE-YFP and myc-RacB were developed and stimulated with or without 10 μM cAMP. Cells coexpressing PH-GFP and myc-RacB were used as a control. Immunoprecipitation was performed by using μMACS GFP isolation kit as described above. Immunoprecipitated proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE and analyzed by western blot with an anti-myc antibody. For the reciprocal experiments, μMACS anti-c- myc MicroBeads was used to pull down myc-RacB. ElmoE-YFP was probed for with an anti-GFP antibody on western blots. ElmoE and Dock-like Proteins Cells coexpressing ElmoE-YFP and GST-tagged or His-S-HA-tagged Dock-like proteins were developed and stimulated as above. Precleared lysates of cells were incubated with anti-GST or anti-HA MicroBeads. Immunoprecipitation was performed as described above. The eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, and probed with anti-GST, anti-HA, and anti-GFP. Immunoprecipitation of Membrane Fraction Cells coexpressing His-S-HA-Gβ and ElmoE-YFP, N-ElmoE-YFP, or C-ElmoE-YFP were developed to the chemotactic stage. After basalation in 2 mM caffeine for 30 min, cells were stimulated with 10 μM cAMP. Aliquots of cells were taken and syringe lysed at indicated time points. The membrane fraction was isolated by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 1 min. The supernatant was removed and the pellet was resuspended in Lysis buffer. Immunoprecipitations were carried out as above with anti-HA MicroBeads. The elution was subjected to SDS-PAGE and western blot analysis with an anti-HA or anti-GFP antibody. Crosslinking Assay Cells expressing His-S-HA-Gβ were developed, stimulated as described above, and lysed by adding an equal volume of cold lysis buffer, 200 mmol HBVS. The crosslinking reaction was incubated at room temperature for 5 min and then stopped by adding a 20-fold molar excess of DTT. The crosslinked lysate was precleared by centrifugation and the supernatant was then subjected to tandem affinity purification. First, Ni-NTA agarose chromatography was used to capture the protein via its His tag. The lysate was incubated with Ni-NTA agarose for 90 min, followed by a series of washes with 20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, containing 20 mM and then 50 mM imidazole. Elution was performed with 20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, and 500 mM imidazole. The eluate was diluted with 20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, to a final concentration of 50 mM imidazole. Next, Triton X-100 was added to 0.01% and the sample was subjected to S-tag purification by binding to S-protein agarose for 3 hr followed by a series of washes with 50 mM Tris,, 0.5 mM EDTA. The elution was performed with 50U AcTEV protease to remove S-protein agarose. Finally, the eluted protein complexes were subjected to mass spectrometry for protein identification. Rac Activation Assay The Rac activation assay was performed by affinity precipitation following the protocol in the Rac1 Activation Assay Biochem Kit with modifications: Active Rac was isolated with GST-Sepharose beads coupled with PAK -PBD. Briefly, cells expressing myc-RacB, GFP-RacD, or GFP-RacI were developed, stimulated as described above, and lysed with lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors. Cleared lysates were obtained by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm, 4°C for 2 min. Lysates were incubated with PAK-PBD beads with rotation at 4°C for 1 hr. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 5,000 × g at 4°C for 3 min, washed with wash buffer, and suspended with Laemmli sample buffer and boiled for 2 min. The samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and western blot analysis with an anti-myc or anti-GFP antibody. The band intensity was quantified with the ImageJ. The levels of Rac-GTP in cells without cAMP stimulation were set at 1.0. In Vivo Actin Polymerization The actin in vivo polymerization was determined as described. Briefly, wild-type and elmoE − cells were developed to chemotactic stage. Cells were harvested, washed with PB and resuspended in 10 mM PM, and 3 mM caffeine. Cells were stimulated with 1 μM cAMP, fixed and stained in buffer containing 3.7% formaldehyde, 0.15% Triton X-100, 250 nM TRITC-phalloidin, 20 mM KCl, 10 mM Pipes, 5 mM EGTA, and 2 mM MgCl2, pH 6.8. F-actin was quantified by measuring TRITC-phalloidin fluorescence with a LS55 Luminescence spectrometer. Supplementary Material 1 Click here to view. 2 Click here to view. 3 Click here to view. 