 The Arp2/3 complex generates branched actin networks that exert pushing forces onto different cellular membranes. WASH complexes activate Arp2/3 complexes at the surface of endosomes and thereby fission transport intermediates containing endocytosed receptors, such as α5β1 integrins. How WASH complexes are assembled in the cell is unknown. Here, we identify the small coiled‐coil protein HSBP 1 as a factor that specifically promotes the assembly of a ternary complex composed of CCDC 53, WASH, and FAM 21 by dissociating the CCDC 53 homotrimeric precursor. HSBP 1 operates at the centrosome, which concentrates the building blocks. HSBP 1 depletion in human cancer cell lines and in Dictyostelium amoebae phenocopies WASH depletion, suggesting a critical role of the ternary WASH complex for WASH functions. HSBP 1 is required for the development of focal adhesions and of cell polarity. These defects impair the migration and invasion of tumor cells. Overexpression of HSBP 1 in breast tumors is associated with increased levels of WASH complexes and with poor prognosis for patients. Keywords: actin cytoskeleton, Arp2/3 complex, cell migration and invasion, centrosome, multiprotein complex assembly Subject Categories: Cell Adhesion, Polarity & Cytoskeleton, Membrane & Intracellular Transport Introduction Cells use branched actin networks to control their shape, to power cell migration, and to drive membrane remodeling in intracellular traffic. The Arp2/3 complex is the stable multiprotein complex that generates branched actin networks. It contains two actin‐related proteins, Arp2 and Arp3, and five other subunits that maintain the two actin‐related proteins associated. When activated by the WCA domain of so‐called nucleation promoting factors, the Arp2/3 complex creates an actin branch : It associates with a pre‐existing actin filament and nucleates a new filament from its two subunits, Arp2 and Arp3, brought into close contact, thus mimicking a filament end. Such a multiprotein complex can be referred to as a molecular machine to highlight the coordinated work it performs. No function has been ascribed to Arp2 or Arp3 in isolation, outside of the Arp2/3 complex. Nucleation promoting factors activates the Arp2/3 complex at different subcellular locations: WAVE at the lamellipodium edge, where the branched actin network provides the force for membrane protrusion, and WASH at the surface of endosomes, where the force generated by the branched actin network contributes to the scission of transport intermediates. These transport intermediates either follow the retrograde route toward the Golgi or recycle internalized receptors to the plasma membrane. The α5β1 integrin is a cargo that takes the two WASH‐dependent routes, since it is recycled to the plasma membrane both from endosomes and after a detour through the trans‐Golgi network. WAVE and WASH are both stably associated with four other proteins, which integrate inputs to control WCA exposure as an output. The endosomal recruitment of the WASH complex depends on the cargo‐recognition complex of the retromer. Formation of branched actin networks thus involves cascades of molecular machines. How cells assemble these molecular machines from neosynthesized subunits is not known in most cases. Indeed, molecular machines are not just simple assemblies driven by the spontaneous association of subunits. The simple stepwise addition of subunits or subcomplexes yields a WAVE complex, where the WCA domain is not properly masked. The reconstitution of a native WAVE complex from recombinant subunits was a tour‐de‐force, which required a decade of work. In fact, in the cell, proteasomes exert a quality control and degrade up to 30% of neosynthesized proteins. When one subunit of WAVE, WASH or Arp2/3 complexes is depleted, remaining subunits of the same molecular machine are usually degraded by proteasomes. Conversely, when an exogenous, usually tagged, subunit is overexpressed, the endogenous subunit is degraded, because its partner subunits have been titrated by the more abundant exogenous protein. These observations suggest that subunits need to assemble with their partner subunits to reach their native state and become stable. In the case of the WAVE complex, one subunit, Brk1, forms a homotrimeric precursor, even though only a single Brk1 subunit is present in the native complex. Brk1 turns over more rapidly than the WAVE complex, suggesting that the two Brk1 molecules that should remain after dissociation of the trimeric precursor are also degraded. Large molecular machines, like proteasomes, require many factors for their assembly. Assembly factors transiently associate with one or several subunits, but eventually dissociate before the machine is completed. If they were to remain associated, they would be subunits. It is not yet established whether assembly factors are systematically required for the formation of smaller molecular machines, like the Arp2/3 or NPF complexes. So far, an assembly factor was only identified in the case of the WAVE complex: The Nudel protein, which transiently interacts with two subcomplexes, is critical to maintain WAVE complex levels and thus to form lamellipodia. Assembly factors offer a means to control the levels of assembled complexes. For example, starvation induces the expression of proteasome assembly factors and hence favors the assembly of new proteasomes to promote the degradation of old proteins, thereby allowing biosynthesis of new proteins in amino acid‐restricted conditions. The Arp2/3 and the WAVE complexes are overexpressed in a variety of cancers. This overexpression is usually associated with a high‐grade, lymph node invasion and poor prognosis for patients. Since most subunits of these molecular machines are only stable within the whole complex, it means that invasive tumor cells managed to assemble more of these machines, but the mechanism involved is not known. The WASH complex, which allows focal delivery of metalloproteases and integrin recycling, is critical for tumor cell invasion, but whether its expression is deregulated in tumors is not known. Here, we identify the first assembly factor of the WASH complex, HSBP1, and characterize how it promotes WASH assembly. We found that HSBP1 is overexpressed in breast cancer and that its overexpression is associated with increased levels of WASH complex and poor survival of patients. Results Identification of HSBP1 as an assembly factor of the WASH complex To look for putative assembly factors of the WASH complex, we derived stable 293 cell lines expressing tagged subunits of the WASH complex. We noticed a small molecular weight protein in the immunoprecipitates of CCDC53, but not of WASH, nor of Strumpellin. We identified this protein as HSBP1 by mass spectrometry. The gene encoding this small protein of 76 amino acids was cloned and transiently co‐expressed with each subunit of the WASH complex in 293T cells. Indeed, out of the five subunits of the WASH complex, CCDC53, WASH, Strumpellin, SWIP, and FAM21, only CCDC53 interacted with HSBP1. HSBP1 is thus a possible assembly factor, because it binds to a single subunit, and not to the whole WASH complex. Figure 1 HSBP 1 is a specific partner of the CCDC 53 subunit of the WASH complex To examine whether HSBP1 directly binds to CCDC53, we produced and purified these two recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli. HSBP1 was previously crystallized, and the HSBP1 core is formed by a trimeric coiled coil. HSBP1 was, however, described as a hexamer, because the asymmetric unit of the crystal contains two trimeric coiled coils associated end‐to‐end. In this structure, the two trimers differ by the conformation of a bulky residue in their coiled coil, phenylalanine 27. The end‐to‐end association of two HSBP1 trimers is a crystal‐induced contact, because we found that HSBP1 in solution behaves as a homotrimer, when its mass is evaluated by size exclusion chromatography coupled to multi‐angle light scattering. The structure of CCDC53 was not previously characterized. We found by SEC‐MALS that free CCDC53 also behaves as a homotrimer. The situation is reminiscent of the distantly related Brk1 subunit of the WAVE complex : Free Brk1 exists as a homotrimer, even though a single subunit of Brk1 is present in the WAVE complex. When CCDC53 and HSBP1 were mixed, we detected a new peak by SEC‐MALS, which surprisingly corresponded to a mixed heterotrimer, containing two HSBP1 for a single CCDC53. So not only HSBP1 directly binds to CCDC53, but also this interaction remodels the quaternary structure of each component. Trimeric HSBP1 displays a distorted coiled coil. This distortion most likely arises from the accommodation of the bulky F27, which creates a steric hindrance. Such a bulky residue at the d position of a coiled‐coil heptad is highly unusual in trimeric coiled coils. However, F27 is strictly conserved in all HSBP1 homologs. To better understand the reaction occurring between HSBP1 and CCDC53, we modeled the structure of free CCDC53 according to the crystal structure of free Brk1. CCDC53, whose name stands for coiled‐coil domain‐containing protein 53, can be modeled as a trimeric coiled‐coil protein, like Brk1. Then, we used the two previous structural models of HSBP1 and CCDC53 to model the mixed HSBP1‐CCDC53 heterotrimer. In heptads 4 and 5 of the mixed heterotrimer, we noticed that the single strand of CCDC53 brings two optimal electrostatic couples with the two strands contributed by HSBP1. These salt bridges formed between residues E‐K/R of heptads were identified as the most stabilizing motifs in experimental studies of model trimeric coiled coils. The residues involved are strongly conserved in the sequence alignments of both HSBP1 and CCDC53. These two stabilizing salt bridges probably contribute to the spontaneous assembly of the mixed HSBP1‐CCDC53 heterotrimer. Figure 2 Structural model of the CCDC 53‐ HSBP 1 heterotrimer To evaluate the potential role of HSBP1 in the assembly of the WASH complex, we isolated MDA‐MB‐231 clones stably depleted of HSBP1 and analyzed their content in WASH complex subunits. Upon HSBP1 knock‐down, steady state levels of CCDC53 and WASH, but not those of FAM21 and Strumpellin, were significantly decreased. The effect of HSBP1 depletion was the same in HeLa cells upon transient transfection of siRNAs. The subunits of stable multiprotein complexes usually depend on each other for their stability. For the WASH complex, the depletion of a “large” subunit, such as Strumpellin, SWIP, or FAM21, induces the degradation of all remaining subunits, whereas the depletion of a “small” subunit, such as WASH or CCDC53, induces the degradation of the other small subunit, leaving intact levels of large subunits. Upon HSBP1 depletion, the co‐dependent CCDC53 and WASH subunits are thus specifically downregulated. Figure 3 HSBP 1 promotes the assembly of a ternary complex containing CCDC 53, WASH, and FAM 21 To characterize WASH subcomplexes, we fractionated cytosolic extracts by ultracentrifugation in sucrose gradients and analyzed the distribution of subunits in each fraction by Western blot. In control MDA‐MB‐231 cells, we detected three distinct pools of WASH complex subunits. The low pool P1 was detected at 3.0 S, an intermediate pool P2 was detected at 8.8 S, and a high pool P3 was detected at 12.5 S, which corresponds to the previously determined sedimentation coefficient of the pentameric WASH complex. The P1 pool corresponds to the complex of CCDC53 with HSBP1, as determined by immunoprecipitation. The P2 pool corresponds to a ternary complex containing CCDC53, WASH, and FAM21. The distribution of FAM21 in P2 is much more extended than the ones of WASH and CCDC53, suggesting that only part of FAM21 is associated with WASH and CCDC53 in the ternary complex. When HSBP1 is depleted, P1 and P2 pools of CCDC53, but surprisingly not the P3 pool, are absent. WASH is also depleted from the P2 ternary complex, but not FAM21, in line with its extended distribution. These distributions suggest that HSBP1 promotes the conversion of the CCDC53‐HSBP1 heterotrimer into the CCDC53‐WASH‐FAM21 ternary complex. To confirm the role of HSBP1 in promoting WASH assembly, we derived a stable MDA‐MB‐231 cell line that overexpresses tagged WASH. The increased WASH levels were associated with increased levels of CCDC53, but not of FAM21 and Strumpellin. When tagged WASH was overexpressed, the endogenous WASH was downregulated, as observed previously, suggesting that the levels of partner subunits control the total amount of WASH. In this experiment, WASH was tagged with both FLAG and HaloTag sequences. The HaloTag covalently reacts with haloalkane reactive ligands. A chemical compound called HaloPROTAC3 induces the specific degradation of HaloTagged proteins through the recruitment of the VHL E3 ubiquitin ligase. When cells expressing HaloTagged WASH were incubated with 1 μM HaloPROTAC3 for 24 h, levels of tagged WASH and CCDC53 significantly decreased, while endogenous WASH reappeared. Figure EV1 HSBP 1 is required for CCDC 53 assembly into the WASH complex To monitor the assembly of the WASH complex, we washed out the HaloPROTAC3 compound to resume expression of HaloTagged WASH and to follow its assembly into WASH complexes by immunoprecipitation. Using this procedure, we were able to detect the buildup of WASH and associated subunits over several hours. Upon HSBP1 depletion, HaloTagged WASH associated with a reduced amount of CCDC53, but with normal amounts of FAM21 and Strumpellin, in line with the disappearance of the ternary complex, but the maintenance of the pentameric complex, seen in sucrose gradients. To conceive better the sequence of events in WASH complex assembly, we then built a structural model of the pentameric WASH complex, based on the crystal structure of the analogous WAVE complex. In this model, WASH, CCDC53, and FAM21 interact through a heterotrimeric coiled coil. It should be stated that the model of the WASH complex is not as robust as the one of CCDC53‐HSBP1 heterotrimer, because apart from a predicted coiled‐coil segment in its N‐terminus, the structure of FAM21 cannot be accurately predicted. This model suggests, however, a molecular scenario where CCDC53 must be dissociated from a precursor homotrimeric form to contribute a single subunit to the ternary complex. HSBP1, which dissociates the free homotrimer of CCDC53, would deliver this single CCDC53 to WASH and FAM21. Phenotype associated with HSBP1 depletion in MDA‐MB‐231 cells Because WASH is involved in recycling α5β1 integrins from intracellular compartments to the plasma membrane, we checked the localization of this particular integrin in the stable MDA‐MB‐231 clones depleted or not of HSBP1. We found that α5β1 focal adhesions from HSBP1‐depleted cells were strongly reduced in numbers and slightly reduced in size. HSBP1‐depleted cells display decreased levels of α5β1 integrins at their surface, as measured by FACS, and decreased total levels of β1, as measured by densitometry of Western blots. As expected, these defects were associated with reduced adhesion to fibronectin, the major ligand of the α5β1 integrin, and to collagen type I. Similar defects were previously documented in WASH‐depleted cells. Figure 4 Integrin‐mediated adhesions are decreased in HSBP 1‐depleted MDA ‐ MB ‐231 cells MDA‐MB‐231 is an invasive mammary carcinoma cell line. A simple and classical assay in cancer research is the migration through pores of “transwell filters”. Coating the transwell filter with a thick layer of extracellular matrix forces cancer cells to invade the gel to reach the other compartment. HSBP1‐depleted cells were drastically impaired in their ability to migrate and invade through transwell filters. We next examined how the HSBP1‐depleted cells migrate on a 2D fibronectin substrate. When trajectories of individual cells were examined, tracks of HSBP1‐depleted cells were much shorter than control ones. The mean square displacement highlights that HSBP1‐depleted cells explore a much smaller surface area over time than controls, a direct consequence of the reduced speed and decreased directional persistence of HSBP1‐depleted cells. In 3D collagen gels supplemented with fibronectin, similar defects of HSBP1‐depleted cells were observed. Figure 5 Impaired migration and invasion in HSBP 1‐depleted MDA ‐ MB ‐231 cells To make sure that these phenotypes could be ascribed to the knock‐down of HSBP1, we derived an HSBP1‐depleted line re‐expressing WT HSBP1. Indeed, the re‐expression of HSBP1 rescued the levels of WASH and CCDC53, as well as the migration phenotype of HSBP1‐depleted cells. We also analyzed HSBP1 mutants for their ability to rescue the phenotype. To prevent the formation of the salt bridges that stabilize the 1 / 2 heterotrimer, we swapped charges in the R44E E49R HSBP1 mutant. To prevent the inherent distortion of the HSBP1 coiled coil, we targeted the conserved F residue in the F27L HSBP1 mutant. Both mutants were not as efficient as WT in rescuing the HSBP1 phenotype, suggesting that these HSBP1 features were important. The HSBP1 phenotype was, however, partially rescued by both mutants, a likely consequence of their overexpression. Figure EV2 HSBP 1 phenotypes are completely rescued by wild‐type HSBP 1, but only partially by HSBP 1 mutants HSBP1‐depleted cells were poorly polarized, as their lamellipodium usually covers their whole periphery. This defect in cell polarization was captured by their circularity index, which remains higher over several hours than one of the control cells. In sharp contrast, control cells break symmetry and elongate perpendicular to the migration direction, resulting in an increased aspect ratio, the ratio of the long over the short axis. From time to time, control cells transiently lose polarity and change migration direction. The associated fluctuation in the aspect ratio is captured by the “volatility” of this parameter, an index borrowed from the stock market analysis. The volatility of the aspect ratio of HSBP1‐depleted cells is much lower than the one of control cells, since the lack of polarity of the latter yields a relatively constant aspect ratio close to 1. These results suggest that defective polarity of HSBP1‐depleted cells or mutants can account for their impaired migration and invasion. Figure 6 Decreased polarity of HSBP 1‐depleted MDA ‐ MB ‐231 cells The role of HSBP1 is conserved in the Dictyostelium discoideum amoeba HSBP1 is a well‐conserved protein. We decided to knock out the orthologous gene in the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, where we had previously studied the role of the WASH complex. To this end, we replaced the whole HSBP1 coding sequence by a selectable marker. Using a specific WASH antibody, we found that WASH is downregulated in HSBP1 KO amoebae. Re‐expression of HSBP1 in the KO background restored WASH levels. We then used mass spectrometry to examine the expression of the other subunits of the WASH complex. We were able to detect and quantify specific peptides encoded by the orthologous WASH, FAM21, Strumpellin, and SWIP genes in complex extracts of amoebae. The smallest subunit, CCDC53, which generates few peptides, was unfortunately not detected. HSBP1 KO induced downregulation of WASH, but not of FAM21, Strumpellin, and SWIP, as in mammalian cells. In the amoeba, WASH recruits the Arp2/3 complex at the surface of vesicles of lysosomal origin. As in WASH KO, HSBP1 KO displayed a pronounced defect in Arp2/3 recruitment at the surface of vesicles. Figure EV3 Isolation HSBP 1 KO amoebae and characterization of HSBP 1 in the amoeba Figure 7 The role of HSBP 1 in assembling functional WASH complexes is conserved in Dictyostelium discoideum In the presence of fluorescent dextran, which is not digestible, HSBP1 KO amoebae become “constipated” and that prevents them from proliferating. In fact, HSBP1 KO amoebae continue to accumulate dextran well after the 2 h required for the WT amoebae to reach a steady state, when exocytosis compensates for endocytosis. When fluorescent dextran was washed out, the exocytosis defect of HSBP1 KO amoebae became obvious. This phenotype of HSBP1 KO amoebae was also rescued by HSBP1 re‐expression. Exocytosis involves post‐lysosomal vesicles in the amoeba and requires WASH‐mediated retrieval of the V‐ATPase from lysosomes. The HSBP1 phenotype is thus the same as the one displayed by WASH KO amoebae. Together, these experiments indicate that the role of HSBP1 in assembling functional WASH complexes is conserved in two distant species, human and Dictyostelium amoeba. HSBP1 operates at the centrosome To examine the localization of HSBP1 in Dictyostelium amoeba, we generated GFP fusion proteins at both HSBP1 ends. In both cases, HSBP1 localizes to central dot‐like structures, which were identified as centrosomes using the γ‐tubulin marker. We then examined HSBP1 localization by immunofluorescence of mammalian cells. In MDA‐MB‐231 cells, HSBP1 antibodies also brightly stained centrosomes. This staining is specific because it was lost upon HSBP1 depletion. HSBP1 staining was clearly associated with γ‐tubulin, a specific marker of the pericentriolar material, but did not completely overlap with it. By staining MDA‐MB‐231 cells expressing HaloTagged CCDC53 or WASH with a fluorescent HaloTag ligand, we indeed detected CCDC53 and WASH colocalized with HSBP1 and γ‐tubulin at the centrosome. Figure 8 HSBP 1 operates at the centrosome Figure EV4 HSBP 1, WASH, and CCDC 53 localize at centrosomes To address whether HSBP1 localization to the centrosome was important for its function in promoting WASH complex assembly, we used centrinone, a Plk4 inhibitor that prevents centrosome duplication during the cell cycle. In centrosome‐negative cells, HSBP1 levels were maintained, but levels of WASH complex subunits were downregulated. WASH and CCDC53 signals were less intense in centrosome‐negative cells, when HSBP1 was diffused, than in control cells where HSBP1 was concentrated in the centrosome. These experiments suggest that HSBP1 concentration at the centrosome is important for its function in assembling WASH complexes. To confirm the centrosomal localization of HSBP1 in tissues, we stained cryosections of normal breast and mammary carcinoma. HSBP1 staining was always partially overlapping with γ‐tubulin, but appeared slightly more elongated in the presence of cilia in normal breast. Centrosomes are at the base of cilia in normal breast, whereas these structures regress during cancer progression. In conclusion, HSBP1 is associated with centrosomes in all case examined, Dictyostelium amoeba, human cells in culture, healthy tissue, or tumors. HSBP1 expression in breast cancer Since the WASH complex is critical for tumor cell invasion, we examined the putative involvement of HSBP1 in the progression of breast cancer. To this end, the levels of HSBP1 mRNA were quantified in the mammary tumors of a large retrospective cohort of 446 patients, whose long‐term outcome was known. HSBP1 mRNA expression significantly increased with the Scarff‐Bloom‐Richardson grade, which is a histological score used to evaluate cancer prognosis. HSBP1 was also more expressed in tumors exhibiting overexpression of ERBB2. Most importantly, patients that carried tumors with a high level of HSBP1 had poor metastasis‐free survival. Figure 9 HSBP 1 overexpression in breast carcinomas is associated with increased levels of WASH complex and poor prognosis In order to check the role of HSBP1 in WASH complex assembly in vivo, we examined the expression of HSBP1 and of WASH complex subunits from paired samples, which correspond to mammary carcinomas and adjacent normal tissue from the same patient. About half of tumors overexpressed HSBP1 at the protein level compared to normal tissue. Most importantly, these tumors also exhibited increased levels of the WASH complex subunits CCDC53, WASH, and Strumpellin, but not of FAM21. We verified by immunofluorescence of formalin‐fixed paraffin‐embedded sections that mammary carcinoma cells, stained by cytokeratin 7, but not stromal cells, overexpress HSBP1 and WASH complex subunits, CCDC53 and WASH. In sharp contrast, the tumors that did not overexpress HSBP1 did not show overexpression of WASH complex subunits. These results obtained in patient samples suggest that HSBP1 overexpression is a means, by which in mammary carcinoma cells overexpress the WASH complex. Figure EV5 Mammary carcinoma cells co‐express HSBP 1, CCDC 53, and WASH Discussion We have identified HSBP1 as a specific partner of CCDC53 using proteomics and showed its involvement in WASH complex assembly. HSBP1 is the first assembly factor identified for WASH complexes. This small protein of 8.5 kDa is a negative regulator of the HSF1 transcription factor. HSBP1 stands for HSF1 binding protein‐1. HSF1 is the major transcription factor that is activated in response to heat shock. HSF1 activation involves its trimerization through a coiled coil. HSBP1 terminates HSF1 transcription in the nucleus by dissociating the active HSF1 trimer. Here, we report a cytosolic function of HSBP1. HSBP1 can dissociate the precursor trimeric form of CCDC53 to favor WASH complex assembly. The two functions of HSBP1 thus involve a similar structural mechanism based on trimeric coiled coils. The phenotypes we report here upon HSBP1 depletion appear unrelated to the termination of the heat‐shock transcriptional response. The phenotypes we obtained here upon HSBP1 inactivation are indicative of defective WASH functions. In Dictyostelium amoeba, WASH knock‐out produced defective Arp2/3 recruitment at the surface of lysosomal vesicles and defective exocytosis of non‐digestible dextran. In human cells, WASH depletion led to reduced surface levels of α5β1 integrins and a decreased number of focal adhesions. WASH depletion also reduced invasive abilities of tumor cells. HSBP1‐depleted cells also displayed a striking defect in polarity establishment that prevented them from migrating, even though they were able to generate membrane protrusions. This last phenotype was not previously reported upon WASH depletion, but it is a logical one, since the recycling of α5β1 integrins has been shown to be critical for migration persistence. The analyses of WASH subcomplexes revealed several surprises. In both Dictyostelium amoeba and human cells, CCDC53 and WASH, but not Strumpellin, SWIP, and FAM21, are destabilized upon HSBP1 depletion. This is reminiscent of the fact that in RNAi‐treated HeLa cells, only CCDC53 is destabilized, when WASH is depleted, and only WASH is destabilized, when CCDC53 is depleted. The WASH knock‐out in MEF cells, however, decreased the levels of all five subunits of the WASH complex, but the remaining FAM21, SWIP, and Strumpellin subunits were still found to be associated. Furthermore, we found that, by overexpressing HaloTagged WASH or by selectively destabilizing it through HaloPROTAC3 treatment, only the CCDC53 subunit mirrors the amount of WASH. Our study thus confirms the particular behavior of the interacting pair of subunits composed of WASH and CCDC53. Surprisingly, however, our sucrose gradient analyses did not reveal a remaining FAM21–SWIP–Strumpellin subcomplex in HSBP1‐depleted cells. Rather, HSBP1 appeared to specifically promote the assembly of a ternary complex of 8.8 S composed of CCDC53, WASH, and FAM21, in addition to the classical pentameric complex. Structurally, this ternary complex makes sense. We modeled that it should be organized around a heterotrimeric coiled coil, where each subunit would contribute one strand. The reason why FAM21 levels were not significantly affected upon HSBP1 depletion is probably because only a small fraction of total FAM21 is present in the ternary complex. Indeed, multiple pools of FAM21 are likely to exist, since FAM21 displays an unusually extended distribution in sucrose gradients. The second surprise is that our subcomplex analysis supports the unexpected idea that the ternary complex, rather than the pentameric complex, carries most WASH functions. Indeed, in HSBP1‐depleted cells, which exhibit a typical WASH phenotype, the pentameric complex is still present. In retrospect, the idea that the ternary complex might be the significant working molecular machine can help interpret another intriguing observation. Recently, Strumpellin knock‐out cells were reported to exhibit WASH and branched actin at the surface of endosomes, like control cells. These data put in question the role of the pentameric WASH complex. The logical assumption that the pentameric complex would derive from the ternary complex by the addition of SWIP and Strumpellin is not even clear, given that the pentameric complex is assembled around HaloTagged WASH with similar kinetics whether or not HSBP1 is present. The localization of HSBP1 at centrosomes and the decreased levels of WASH complex in centrosome‐negative cells suggests that centrosomes are sites of WASH complex assembly. Nudel, the assembly factor identified for the WAVE complex, also accumulates at centrosomes, in line with its regulatory activity toward dynein, the microtubule minus‐end directed motor. It might be advantageous to concentrate the proteins to assemble into complexes at such a central and discrete location. One should note that many structural proteins of the centrosome are structured around large coiled coils. Even though the coiled coils we are studying here are composed of just a few heptad repeats and are of precise specificity, the concentration of coiled coils in the centrosomal area might play a role in the assembly of multiprotein complexes. The centrosome is also a privileged site for proteasomal degradation, which is often associated with multiprotein complex assembly. Indeed, misfolded proteins accumulate at the centrosome through dynein‐dependent transport in a structure called aggresome, when proteasomes are overwhelmed by substrates to degrade. But centrosomes are not only sites where the WASH complex is assembled, but also sites where the WASH complex activates the Arp2/3 complex. The centrosomal branched actin networks are implicated in anchoring centrosomes to the nucleus. HSBP1 is overexpressed in breast tumors, and its overexpression is associated with poor prognosis for patients. We documented HSBP1 overexpression in tumors compared to normal tissue in about half of patients. Fully consistent with the role of HSBP1 in assembling WASH complexes, this overexpression was associated with increased levels of WASH complex subunits. WASH overexpression in cancer was not previously reported, even if its role in tumor cell invasion was established. FAM21 was the only WASH complex subunit, whose levels were not correlated with the ones of HSBP1 and which was not overexpressed. FAM21 appears to have moonlighting functions, since it was found to regulate transcription by NF‐κB in the nucleus independently of the WASH complex. In Dictyostelium amoebae, the FAM21 knock‐out phenotype is also quite different from the one observed in the WASH knock‐out amoeba. In conclusion, our study identified HSBP1 as the first assembly factor of WASH complexes, structurally characterized the step in which it functions, and established that HSBP1‐mediated assembly provides a mechanism for overexpressing WASH complexes in tumors. Materials and Methods Information on patients, biopsies, and qRT–PCR analyses can be found in Appendix Supplementary Methods. Plasmids All the human open reading frames were flanked by FseI and AscI sites for easy shuttling between compatible plasmids. Human HSBP1 was amplified by PCR from cDNA clones IMAGE:3010737. The WASH complex subunits CCDC53, Strumpellin, and SWIP were amplified by PCR using the respective cDNA clone IMAGE:4272385, IMAGE:30532658, and IMAGE:8143997. WASH was previously cloned similarly. HSBP1 mutations F27L and R44E E49R were introduced by gene synthesis. All PCR‐amplified genes and synthesized genes were verified by sequencing. ORFs were subcloned into the following custom‐made plasmids: a modified pET28b for the expression in E. coli. This plasmid tags the proteins with a His tag and a TEV cleavage site ; pcDNAm FRT PC‐GFP Blue and pcDNAm FRT PC‐mCherry Blue for expression of GFP or mCherry tagged proteins at their N‐terminus and the easy isolation of Flp‐In cell lines ; MXS EF1Flag HaloTag Blue SV40pA PGK PuroR bGHpA for the expression of proteins tagged at their N‐terminus with FLAG and HaloTag; MXS EF1Flag Blue SV40pA PGK Blasti bGHpA for the expression of proteins tagged at their N‐terminus with FLAG, used in rescue experiments. The shRNA‐expressing pGIPZ plasmids, non‐targeting control, shHSBP1 #1, shHSBP1 #2 were obtained from Dharmacon. Protein purification and SEC‐MALS His‐tagged CCDC53 and HSBP1 were purified from E. coli BL21 Rosetta pLacI‐Rare, grown in 2× YT containing 25 μg/ml of kanamycin and 34 μg/ml of chloramphenicol. Cultures were induced overnight at 37°C with 1 mM IPTG, and growth was continued for 4 h at 18°C. Tagged CCDC53 and HSBP1 were retained on a Talon affinity resin equilibrated in buffer A, eluted with buffer A containing 125 mM imidazole and further purified by gel filtration on a Superdex 200 column equilibrated in buffer B. Pure fractions were pooled and concentrated to 10 mg/ml. To purify the HSBP1‐CCDC53 complex, an extract from His‐tagged CCDC53‐expressing E. coli cells was mixed with an extract from E. coli expressing untagged HSBP1 and purified as described above, except that the mixed heterotrimer was eluted with only 10 mM imidazole. Superdex 200 increase column coupled to multi‐angle static light scattering. Light scattering and refractive index measurements were performed with a MiniDAWN TREOS device and a RID‐20A, respectively. Molecular mass and hydrodynamic radius calculations were performed with the ASTRA 6.1 software using a dn/dc value of 0.183 ml/g. Antibodies, immunoprecipitations, and Western blots Polyclonal antibodies targeting CCDC53 and FAM21 were obtained by immunizing rabbits with full‐length CCDC53 and the FAM21 fragment and affinity purified on a column coupled to the immunogen. Polyclonal antibodies directed against human and Dictyostelium WASH were previously described. Strumpellin polyclonal antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. HSBP1 pAb, HSBP1 mAb, anti‐FLAG mAb, and anti‐γ‐tubulin mAb antibodies were from Sigma‐Aldrich. Integrin α5 mAb, integrin β1 mAb, p150 Glued were from BD Biosciences. Integrin β1 mAb was from Abcam. Cytokeratin 7 mAb was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Tubulin monoclonal antibody was obtained from Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank. The protein‐C monoclonal antibody recognizing the PC tag was from Roche. Immunoprecipitations were performed using resin directly coupled to HPC4 Protein‐C monoclonal antibody, FLAG M2 beads, or GFP‐trap beads. Beads were incubated in the lysates prepared in RIPA buffer and washed with the same buffer. HSBP1 was identified by nano LC‐MS/MS as previously described. For WB analysis of total β1 integrin levels, cells were lysed with. SDS–PAGE was performed using 4–12% Bis‐Tris Nupage gels, and proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes using liquid transfer with sodium carbonate transfer buffer. To reveal the small protein HSBP1, we optimized the Western blot protocol: It involved 30 min of in gel renaturation in ; after the transfer, proteins were cross‐linked to the membrane using a 30‐min incubation in PBS containing 0.4% paraformaldehyde. Blots were developed with alkaline phosphatase‐coupled antibodies and NBT‐BCIP as substrates or horseradish peroxidase ‐coupled antibodies and SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate. Signals were then quantified by densitometry of product deposition on membranes or by photon counting. Mammalian cells and transfections MDA‐MB‐231 parental cells and MDA‐MB‐231 shRNA clones were grown Leibovitz's L‐15 medium. It was later found that MDA‐MB‐231 cells grew much faster in MEM medium and cells expressing HaloTag tagged CCDC53 or WASH were grown and selected in MEM medium. 293T, HeLa, and Flip‐In 293T cells were grown in DMEM. All media were supplemented with 10% FBS. Media and serum were from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Cells were incubated in 5% CO 2 except cells in cultured in Leibovitz's L‐15 medium, which were grown with no CO 2. All cells and stable clones were regularly tested for mycoplasma infection using a sensitive PCR assay and found to be negative. The vast majority of MDA‐MB‐231 cells were centrosome‐negative after 20 days of centrinone treatment. The medium was changed every 3 days, and DMSO was used as a control. For transient HSBP1 knock‐down, HeLa or MDA‐MB‐231 cells were transfected with non‐targeting siRNA or HSBP1 targeting siRNA using lipofectamine RNAiMax and examined after 2 days. 293T cells were transiently transfected using calcium phosphate precipitation. Stable transfectants of Flip‐In 293T cells were obtained by homologous recombination at the FRT site as previously described. To isolate stable clones depleted of HSBP1 or expressing HaloTagged proteins, MDA‐MB‐231 cells were transfected with appropriate plasmids using Lipofectamine 2000 and selected with 2 μg/ml puromycin. For rescue experiments, MDA clones expressing the shRNA #2, targeting HSBP1 3′UTR, were transfected with plasmids expressing WT or mutant HSBP1 and selected with 2 μg/ml Puromycin and 12 μg/ml Blasticidin. Clones were isolated with cloning rings and expanded. Sucrose gradient The whole procedure is described in detail in Gautreau et al. Briefly, cytosolic extracts were prepared by lysing cells by nitrogen cavitation, followed by low speed centrifugation and ultracentrifugation. Samples were normalized according to protein concentration determined by the BCA assay. 200 μl of extract was loaded on top of the 11 ml 5–20% sucrose gradient and ultracentrifuged for 17 h in the swinging bucket rotor SW41 Ti at 197,000 × g. 0.5 ml fractions were collected and either concentrated by using trichloroacetic acid precipitation with insulin as a carrier for direct WB analysis or pooled for immunoprecipitation with 10 μl of Protein A/G beads and 1 μg of CCDC53 antibody or control IgG. NP‐40 was added to a final concentration of 0.05% to avoid bead sticking. Beads were washed four times with XB buffer supplemented with 0.05% NP‐40 and analyzed by WB. Mammalian cell assays Cell adhesion assays are performed with cells detached with 2 mM EDTA in PBS and plated in 96‐well plates previously coated with 10 μg/ml of collagen‐I, fibronectin, or heat‐denatured BSA as a negative control for background subtraction. Cells were allowed to adhere for 45 min at 37°C, non‐adherent cells were washed using PBS, and adherent cells were estimated using the MTS reagent. Two‐dimensional cell migration was performed on glass‐bottomed μ‐Slide coated with 10 μg/ml fibronectin. In three‐dimensional cell migration, cells were sandwiched between two collagen gels polymerized in glass‐bottomed μ‐Slide at 37°C for 1 h. Transwell assays were performed using Transwell inserts either coated with 10 μg/cm 2 fibronectin or with a collagen gel containing fibronectin as described above. Cells were incubated in serum‐free medium and attracted to the other side of the filters by 10% serum. Cells were stained with calcein AM, and cells were imaged without fixation. Immunofluorescence and FACS Cells were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 0.25% Triton X‐100 for integrin staining. Cells were fixed with cold methanol‐acetone for HSBP1 and γ‐tubulin staining. To label HaloTagged CCDC53 or WASH, cells were incubated for 15 min in growth media containing the TMR ligand. Cells were then rinsed twice with PBS and incubated in fresh media for 30 min to decrease background staining. Cells are then washed with PBS, then fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde, and permeabilized with cold methanol‐acetone. For immunofluorescence on tissue section displayed in Fig EV4, biopsies were frozen in liquid nitrogen and serially sectioned. Sections were fixed with methanol‐acetone. For immunofluorescence on tissue section displayed in Fig EV5, 7‐μm‐thick sections were prepared from FFPE tumor samples, deparaffinized, rehydrated, processed for heat‐induced epitope retrieval in PT Link with EDTA buffer, and blocked with 3% BSA in PBS. For FACS analysis, cells were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde and analyzed on a Guava easyCyte system. Microscopy and image analysis Widefield imaging was performed on an Axio Observer microscope equipped with a Plan‐Apochromat 100×/1.40 or 63×/1.40 oil immersion objective, an EC Plan‐Neofluar 40×/1.30 oil immersion objective and a Plan‐Apochromat 20×/0.80 air objective, a Hamamatsu camera } C10600 Orca‐R 2 and a Pecon Zeiss incubator XL multi S1 RED LS. Live cell analysis was performed as described. Confocal images were acquired on a commercial confocal laser scanning microscope equipped with an inverted frame, a high NA oil immersion objective, and a white light laser. Image analysis was performed with ImageJ and FIJI. Analyses of focal adhesions, cell shape, including volatility of the aspect ratio, and cell trajectories were previously described. Computational modeling Modeling of the CCDC53 homotrimer and of the HSBP1‐CCDC53 heterotrimer was performed using the RosettaCM protocol to build and relax the trimeric structures. The CCDC53 sequence was aligned on the sequence and structure of the homotrimeric Brk1 paralog following the alignment generated by the HHpred profile–profile comparison method. The probability of a correct match between CCDC53 and HSBP1 Hidden Markov Model profiles was 99.9%. In the heterotrimer, the register of the single CCDC53 strand with respect to the two HSBP1 strands was provided by the HMM profile of CCDC53, which matches the one of HSBP1 with a probability of 93%. The WASH complex has been modeled based on the structure of the WAVE complex. Sequence alignments for every subunit were obtained using Hhpred, and structural models, restricted to the reliable parts of the alignments, were generated with RosettaCM. Only for the FAM21 subunit, a significant alignment could not be obtained with any of the WAVE complex subunits. The domain of FAM21 spanning residues 58–128 having the highest probability to fold as a coiled coil was used to model FAM21 as a heterotrimeric coiled coil in the WASH complex context. Dictyostelium discoideum The HSBP1 gene was disrupted in Ax2 strain by homologous recombination. Blasticidin‐resistant colonies were picked and tested to lack the entire HSBP1 coding region by PCR. The HSBP1 coding region was amplified from cDNA by PCR and cloned into Dictyostelium expression vectors to generate pPT606, pPT607, pPT608. Amoebae were incubated in HL5 medium in the presence of 0.5 mg/ml tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate dextran overnight in sterile flasks shaking at 100 rpm. Total fluorescence levels were acquired as previously described. Cells expressing GFP‐ARPC4 were incubated in SIH medium overnight with 2% dextran to enlarge vesicles for ease of imaging in glass bottom dishes. Images were captured on a Zeiss 880 LSM inverted confocal microscope with Airyscan detector, using a 63×/1.4 NA objective and deconvolved using the Zen software. For mass spectrometry measurements of WASH complex subunits, amoebae were boiled in 1% SDS. Lysates were reduced using dithiothreitol and subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide. Trichloroacetic acid precipitated pellets were washed with water, resuspended in 8 M urea buffer, diluted 1–10, and digested with trypsin. Digested peptides solutions were labeled on a Sep‐Pak reverse phase C18 cartridge with light and medium dimethyl. Desalted peptides were then mixed and separated by a 2.1 mm RP‐HPLC column. Fractions were dried down and injected into an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer and acquired for 90 min each. Statistics Statistical analysis and plotting of the results were carried out with GraphPad software. Data are expressed as mean ± s.e.m. with respect to the number of independent experiments unless mentioned otherwise. ANOVA followed by post hoc Dunnett's multiple‐comparison tests is performed to analyze significant differences between more than two groups. To analyze the difference between two groups, a paired Student's t ‐test was performed. Differences were considered significant at confidence levels greater than 95%. Four levels of statistical significance are distinguished: * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001; **** P < 0.0001. Author contributions SPV performed most experiments and drafted the manuscript. AG supervised the work and wrote the manuscript. RG contributed structural models. PAT and RHI contributed experiments with Dictyostelium. SL performed the quantitative mass spectrometry experiment using amoeba extracts. GL performed the initial proteomics experiment that identified HSBP1 as a CCDC53 partner. VH performed DNA cloning, obtained, and purified FAM21 and CCDC53 antibodies. NM and SPV performed the FACS analysis. CL‐S, YM, and ES produced recombinant protein and performed SEC‐MALS analysis. SV and IB contributed qRT–PCR measurements of HSBP1 in the retrospective cohort of breast cancer patients. EVD and NVC provided tumor extracts. LAT performed immunofluorescence on tumor biopsies. MEL and AYA contributed HSBP1 immunofluorescence in normal breast tissue. Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. Supporting information Appendix Click here for additional data file. Expanded View Figures PDF Click here for additional data file. Movie EV1 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV2 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV3 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Expanded View and Appendix Click here for additional data file. Review Process File Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 1 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 3 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 4 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 7 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 8 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 9 Click here for additional data file. Acknowledgements We thank David Cornu from the proteomics platform, Christophe Velours from the protein–protein interaction platform. We thank the imaging facility of Laboratoire d'Optique et Biosciences and Pierre Mahou for his assistance with confocal microscopy. We thank Prof. Craig Crews from Yale University for the kind gift of HaloPROTAC3. We thank Andrew K. Shiau from Ludwig Institute for the kind gift of centrinone. We also thank Emmanuel Derivery and Philippe Chavrier for critical reading of the manuscript. This work was supported in AG's group by grants from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche, from the fondation ARC pour la Recherche sur le Cancer, from Institut National du Cancer. The confocal was partly supported by Agence Nationale de la Recherche. MEL acknowledges the support from RFBR number 16‐34‐01316. Analyses of tumor samples were supported by the Russian Science Foundation Grant 14‐15‐00318 with equipment funded by the Tomsk Regional Common Use Center. EVD was supported by Tomsk State University Competitiveness Improvement Program. SPV was supported by PhD fellowships from Ministère de l'Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche for the first 3 years and from Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer for the 4th year. Notes The EMBO Journal 37 : e97706 Article information EMBO J. 2018 Jul 2; 37: e97706. Published online 2018 May 29. doi: 10.15252/embj.201797706 PMCID: PMC6028030 PMID: 29844016 Sai P Visweshwaran, 1 Peter A Thomason, 2 Raphael Guerois, 3 Sophie Vacher, 4 Evgeny V Denisov, 5, 6 Lubov A Tashireva, 7 Maria E Lomakina, 8 Christine Lazennec‐Schurdevin, 1 Goran Lakisic, 1 Sergio Lilla, 2 Nicolas Molinie, 1 Veronique Henriot, 1 Yves Mechulam, 1 Antonina Y Alexandrova, 8 Nadezhda V Cherdyntseva, 5 Ivan Bièche, 4 Emmanuelle Schmitt, 1 Robert H Insall, 2 and Alexis Gautreau 1, 9 Sai P Visweshwaran 1 Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS UMR7654, Université Paris‐Saclay, Palaiseau, France Find articles by Sai P Visweshwaran Peter A Thomason 2 Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Bearsden, UK Find articles by Peter A Thomason Raphael Guerois 3 Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell, CEA, CNRS, Université Paris‐Saclay, Gif‐sur‐Yvette, France Find articles by Raphael Guerois Sophie Vacher 4 Pharmacogenomics Unit, Department of Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris, France Find articles by Sophie Vacher Evgeny V Denisov 5 Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and Immunology, Cancer Research Institute, Tomsk National Research Medical Center, Tomsk, Russia 6 Laboratory for Translational Cellular and Molecular Biomedicine, Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russia Find articles by Evgeny V Denisov Lubov A Tashireva 7 Department of General and Molecular Pathology, Cancer Research Institute, Tomsk National Research Medical Center, Tomsk, Russia Find articles by Lubov A Tashireva Maria E Lomakina 8 Institute of Carcinogenesis, N.N. Blokhin Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russia Find articles by Maria E Lomakina Christine Lazennec‐Schurdevin 1 Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS UMR7654, Université Paris‐Saclay, Palaiseau, France Find articles by Christine Lazennec‐Schurdevin Goran Lakisic 1 Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS UMR7654, Université Paris‐Saclay, Palaiseau, France Find articles by Goran Lakisic Sergio Lilla 2 Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Bearsden, UK Find articles by Sergio Lilla Nicolas Molinie 1 Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS UMR7654, Université Paris‐Saclay, Palaiseau, France Find articles by Nicolas Molinie Veronique Henriot 1 Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS UMR7654, Université Paris‐Saclay, Palaiseau, France Find articles by Veronique Henriot Yves Mechulam 1 Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS UMR7654, Université Paris‐Saclay, Palaiseau, France Find articles by Yves Mechulam Antonina Y Alexandrova 8 Institute of Carcinogenesis, N.N. Blokhin Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russia Find articles by Antonina Y Alexandrova Nadezhda V Cherdyntseva 5 Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and Immunology, Cancer Research Institute, Tomsk National Research Medical Center, Tomsk, Russia Find articles by Nadezhda V Cherdyntseva Ivan Bièche 4 Pharmacogenomics Unit, Department of Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris, France Find articles by Ivan Bièche Emmanuelle Schmitt 1 Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS UMR7654, Université Paris‐Saclay, Palaiseau, France Find articles by Emmanuelle Schmitt Robert H Insall 2 Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Bearsden, UK Find articles by Robert H Insall Alexis Gautreau 1 Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS UMR7654, Université Paris‐Saclay, Palaiseau, France 9 School of Biological and Medical Physics, Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia Find articles by Alexis Gautreau 1 Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS UMR7654, Université Paris‐Saclay, Palaiseau, France 2 Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Bearsden, UK 3 Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell, CEA, CNRS, Université Paris‐Saclay, Gif‐sur‐Yvette, France 4 Pharmacogenomics Unit, Department of Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris, France 5 Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and Immunology, Cancer Research Institute, Tomsk National Research Medical Center, Tomsk, Russia 6 Laboratory for Translational Cellular and Molecular Biomedicine, Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russia 7 Department of General and Molecular Pathology, Cancer Research Institute, Tomsk National Research Medical Center, Tomsk, Russia 8 Institute of Carcinogenesis, N.N. Blokhin Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russia 9 School of Biological and Medical Physics, Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia Alexis Gautreau, Email: ude.euqinhcetylop@uaertuag.sixela. Corresponding author. * Corresponding author. Tel: +33 169334870; E‐mail: ude.euqinhcetylop@uaertuag.sixela Received 2017 Jun 30; Revised 2018 Apr 23; Accepted 2018 Apr 25. Copyright © 2018 The Authors Articles from The EMBO Journal are provided here courtesy of The European Molecular Biology Organization 