 The endoplasmic reticulum is a membranous network with an intricate dynamic architecture necessary for various essential cellular processes. Nearly one third of the proteins trafficking through the secretory pathway are folded and matured in the ER. Additionally, it acts as calcium storage, and it is a main source for lipid biosynthesis. The ER is highly connected with other organelles through regions of membrane apposition that allow organelle remodeling, as well as lipid and calcium traffic. Cells are under constant changes due to metabolic requirements and environmental conditions that challenge the ER network’s maintenance. The unfolded protein response is a signaling pathway that restores homeostasis of this intracellular compartment upon ER stress conditions by reducing the load of proteins, and by increasing the processes of protein folding and degradation. Significant progress on the study of the mechanisms that restore ER homeostasis was achieved using model organisms such as yeast, Arabidopsis, and mammalian cells. In this review, we address the current knowledge on ER architecture and ER stress response in Dictyostelium discoideum. This social amoeba alternates between unicellular and multicellular phases and is recognized as a valuable biomedical model organism and an alternative to yeast, particularly for the presence of traits conserved in animal cells that were lost in fungi. Keywords: Dictyostelium, endoplasmic reticulum, endoplasmic reticulum stress, unfolded protein response, inositol-requiring enzyme 1 1. Dictyostelium as a Model Organism for Experimental Biology Research Owing to its simplicity and easy genetic manipulability, some microbial organisms prove to be powerful biology-research tools; for instance, Saccharomyces cerevisiae is one of the most widely studied eukaryotic organisms. Much of the current knowledge in biochemistry, and molecular and cellular biology arose from research performed with this yeast. However, since this fungal organism has some specific genetic, cellular, and metabolic traits that are not widely conserved, other eukaryotic microbial organisms emerged to address cellular processes that diverged greatly in yeast cells. One of these organisms is Dictyostelium discoideum, a social soil-dwelling protist, taxonomically classified in the Amoebozoa phylum, the sister group to animals and fungi. Despite its phylogenetic classification, Dictyostelium displays cellular processes that are conserved in animal cells, but that are absent in fungal or plant cells, such as phagocytosis and chemotaxis. Interestingly, it also has traits that are conserved in fungi and plants, but were lost in animal cells, such as phosphorelay signaling systems, and cellulose production. Dictyostelium has a life cycle that alternates between unicellular and multicellular phases, depending on nutrient availability. As unicellular amoebas, they obtain nutrients from phagocytizing yeast or bacteria, and they multiply via fission about every 8 h. Remarkably, under starvation, Dictyostelium cells stop mitotic division, and start an intercellular signaling communication process mediated by the secretion of various molecules. One of them, the cyclic adenosine monophosphate, acts as a chemoattractant that triggers the polarization, migration, and aggregation of groups of about 10 5 cells from the species Dictyostelium discoideum. These aggregates of apparently homogeneous cells enter a developmental program that generates a multicellular organism with distinct cell types. After various developmental stages, including one as a multicellular motile slug, the Dictyostelium differentiation program culminates in the formation of a fruiting body composed of a sorogen filled with spores, which is supported by a cellulose stalk made of dead cells. Figure 1 Diagram of the Dictyostelium life cycle. Individual amoebas feed on yeast and bacteria, and multiply via fission. When nutrients are scarce, cells aggregate and undergo a developmental program, comprised of distinct stages that culminate in the formation... Since its first isolation and description more than 80 years ago, a growing number of studies used Dictyostelium discoideum to unravel diverse biological questions. The genome of this haploid organism is fully sequenced, and many different techniques were developed allowing the study of a wide range of topics including infection and drug testing. In addition, Dictyostelium was used in basic studies of cell and developmental signaling, among them, the pathways involved in endoplasmic reticulum homeostasis, maintenance, and regulation. Conditions that interfere with ER homeostasis contribute to the pathogenesis of human chronic disorders including diabetes and some neurodegenerative syndromes, such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and Huntington’s diseases. Dictyostelium emerged as an advantageous model for the study of signaling pathways involved in neurodegeneration (reviews on this topic were addressed in 