Correction for Edwards et al., Insight from the maximal activation of the signal transduction excitable network in Dictyostelium discoideum You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Correction for Edwards et al., Insight from the maximal activation of the signal transduction excitable network in Dictyostelium discoideum Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Jul 10; 115: E6671. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A v.115; 2018 Jul 10 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay This corrects the article " Insight from the maximal activation of the signal transduction excitable network in Dictyostelium discoideum " in volume 115 on page E3722. Correction for Edwards et al., Insight from the maximal activation of the signal transduction excitable network in Dictyostelium discoideum Additional article information CELL BIOLOGY Correction for “Insight from the maximal activation of the signal transduction excitable network in Dictyostelium discoideum,” by Marc Edwards, Huaqing Cai, Bedri Abubaker-Sharif, Yu Long, Thomas J. Lampert, and Peter N. Devreotes, which was first published March 30, 2018; 10.1073/pnas.1710480115. The authors note that the following statement should be added as a new 