 Phagocytes are cells that pursue, engulf and kill bacteria. They include macrophages and neutrophils of the mammalian immune system, as well as free-living amoebae that hunt and engulf bacteria for food. Phagocytosis can result in diverse outcomes, ranging from sustenance to infection and colonization by either pathogens or beneficial symbionts—and thus, discrimination may be necessary to seek out good bacteria while avoiding bad ones. Here we tested whether the soil amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum can discriminate among different types of bacteria using behavioural assays where amoebae were presented with paired choices of different bacteria. We observed variation in the extent to which the amoebae pursued different types of bacteria, as well as preferential migration towards Gram-negative compared with Gram-positive bacteria. Response profiles were similar for amoebae that originated from different geographical locations, suggesting that chase preference is conserved across much of the species range. While prior work has demonstrated that bacteria use chemotaxis to seek out amoebae they colonize, our work suggests that the opposite also occurs—amoebae can preferentially direct themselves to particular bacteria in the environment. Preferential sensing and response may help to explain why some amoeba–bacteria associations are more common in nature than others. Keywords: phagocytes, chemotaxis, bacterial discrimination, bacterial detection, host–microbe associations 1. Introduction Phagocytes are motile cells of the mammalian immune system, such as neutrophils or macrophages, that locate and engulf bacterial invaders, as well as amoebae that hunt and engulf bacteria for food. To find bacteria, phagocytes engage in chemotactic or ‘chase’ behaviours, demonstrating that they can detect and respond to bacteria at a distance. However, it remains unclear whether phagocytes can discriminate among different types of bacteria, allowing them to selectively pursue particular bacteria, despite the importance of discrimination for outcomes such as clearance, infection or colonization. The amoeba Dicytostelium discoideum is a model system for phagocytosis, chemotaxis and host–pathogen interactions. These cells phagocytose bacteria for food, but they are also infected and killed by some bacteria and colonized by others. Early work showed that dictyostelids are limited in the soil by bacterial availability, and they show intra- and interspecific variation for growth on co-occurring bacteria. Other work identified distinct sets of genes that regulate growth on Gram-negative versus Gram-positive bacteria, as well as physiological changes that take place upon phagocytosis of these two types of bacteria. We sought to determine whether D. discoideum could discriminate among bacteria at a distance using a paired choice assay, where amoebae were deposited equidistant between different species of bacteria and their degree of preference was quantified. We tested three different D. discoideum genotypes from distinct geographical regions that cover a large portion of the species' natural range. We also hypothesized that, if they can discriminate among bacteria, then they might show greater sensitivity to, or even preference for, bacterial species that frequently colonize them, such as Burkholderia spp. or Pseudomonas fluorescens. Finally, cyclic adenosine monophosphate is used by D. discoideum for chemotaxis and aggregation during its transition to a multicellular stage of its life cycle. However, it was recently reported that cAMP is also used by D. discoideum to locate bacteria. In follow-up experiments, we tested whether bacterially secreted cAMP influences D. discoideum migration, comparing the amoeba response to Escherichia coli mutants that vary in their production of cAMP. Taken together, these experiments address an overarching question: can phagocytes discriminate among bacteria in the environment, seeking out beneficial bacteria while avoiding deleterious ones? The ability to discriminate can impact encounter rates with bacteria in nature and may be important in promoting the repeated interactions that drive host–microbe adaptation and coevolution. 2. Material and methods Methods used are described more fully in the electronic supplementary material. Briefly, three D. discoideum strains QS32, QS39 and QS40 were inoculated into HL5 medium with 10% fetal bovine serum and 2% PSV and maintained as bacteria-free adherent cultures for approximately one week. Four Gram-negative and four Gram-positive bacteria were grown overnight in lysogeny broth and concentrated to an OD 600 of 5. Twenty thousand D. discoideum cells were deposited in spots onto a Nunc Omni tray containing 10 ml of KK2 buffer with 2% Noble agar. After drying, 2 µl spots of bacteria were placed between each D. discoideum spot, at a distance of approximately 0.65 cm. The number of D. discoideum cells that moved towards each bacterial species was quantified in ImageJ using images taken 4 h after the start of the experiment. Experiments were replicated in three temporally independent assays. See the electronic supplementary material for details of the cAMP assay. Figure 1. Amoebae of each of three D. discoideum genotypes were deposited between pairs of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. The left and right edge of each amoeba spot was imaged after 4 h. Each paired bar shows a choice assay... 3. Results In 21 of 24 pairwise choices between a Gram-positive and a Gram-negative bacterium, D. discoideum preferentially migrated towards the Gram-negative bacterial species. There were three exceptions to this pattern: QS39 showed a weak preference for Gram-positive B. subtilis over Gram-negative K. pneumonaie and E. coli, and QS40 weakly favoured B. subtilis in a pairwise contest against K. pneumonaie. We modelled the number of cells migrating towards a bacterial spot as a function of the focal bacterium, the alternative choice of bacterium, the Gram status and the D. discoideum genotype. All three interaction terms were highly non-significant and dropped from the model. The identity of the alternative bacterium in each pairwise choice was also highly non-significant and likewise dropped from the model, indicating that the identity of the alternative choice bacterium does not influence how much the cells migrate towards a focal bacterium. Overall, there was significant variation in response to different bacteria. The strongest response was to P. fluorescens, a bacterial species that has been repeatedly isolated from D. discoideum fruiting bodies. The weakest responses were all to Gram-positive bacteria: M. luteus, S. aureus and E. facaelis. Consistent with the pairwise results indicating Gram-negative preference, the model showed a significant effect of Gram status on chemotaxis. The overall response profile was strikingly similar across the geographically widespread D. discoideum strains, captured by the non-significant effect of D. discoideum genotype on chemotaxis. Finally, we compared the migration of amoebae towards a wild-type E. coli strain with that of two mutants, one of which has a deletion of the sole adenylate cyclase gene cyaA and the other of which overexpresses the same gene. Indeed, chemotaxis was strongest to cyaA OE and weakest to Δ cyaA, and the pattern was consistent across all three D. discoideum genotypes, suggesting that cAMP detection might play a role in the discrimination behaviour of this amoeba. Figure 2. Migration towards E. coli strains that vary in cAMP production. Amoeba response to wild-type E. coli and two E. coli mutants Δ cyaA and cyaA OE, where the adenylate cyclase gene necessary for cAMP production is deleted or overexpressed, respectively.... Table 1. Results of mixed model analysis of variance for effects of random factors. Each random factor was tested by taking the difference between the −2 residual log likelihoods of nested models with and without the factors of interest,... 4. Discussion The ability to find bacteria at a distance is crucial for amoebae that seek bacteria for food or symbiosis, as well as for phagocytic immune cells that must navigate to a site of infection. Recent work has demonstrated that bacterial symbionts use chemotaxis to locate Dictyostelium hosts, but does the reverse also occur, and can Dictyostelium discriminate among different types of bacteria at a distance? We hypothesized that, because chemotaxis towards bacteria is likely an adaptive response by amoebae to locate potential food sources or beneficial symbionts, we might observe different chemotactic profiles for D. discoideum from different geographical locations. Overall, however, we found no variation in preference among D. discoideum genotypes, suggesting that discrimination has not evolved divergently across environments. However, additional strains or sites might clarify this pattern further. We also found that chemotaxis was enhanced in response to an E. coli strain that overexpresses cyaA and reduced in response to a strain that does not produce cAMP. In Gram-negative bacteria, cAMP mediates catabolite repression, leading to its excretion in large quantities in growth medium lacking glucose, but there are few reports of cAMP production by Gram-positive bacteria, except under limited conditions, and no established signalling roles for cyclic mononucleotides in Gram-positive bacteria. These findings suggest that D. discoideum 's discrimination is mediated, at least in part, by sensing of cAMP, and lack of cAMP in Gram-positive bacteria might help to explain its muted response to them. However, we did observe stronger migration towards the Δ cyaA strain than a control lacking any bacteria, indicating that cAMP is not the sole molecule that induces chemotaxis towards E. coli. Thus, the cells are likely responding to other known chemoattractants, such as folate. Pseudomonas fluorescens elicited the strongest overall response and has been repeatedly isolated from the fruiting bodies of D. discoideum and shown to provide some benefit to the amoeba, either as food or through the production of antifungal compounds. Two other bacteria that also elicited strong responses were E. coli and K. pneumoniae, which are good prey sources for this organism, meaning that they rapidly devour them, reach high cell densities and develop. Previous work showed that Burkholderia, Enterobacter sakazakii and P. fluorescens are the most commonly isolated bacteria from D. discoideum fruiting bodies. Thus, these findings suggest that D. discoideum might be most capable of detecting the bacteria with which it associates or encounters frequently in nature. However, the directionality of this finding is not obvious. In other words, does D. discoideum preferentially associate with certain bacteria because it most readily detects and finds them in nature? Alternatively, has its detection method been fine-tuned by selection to respond preferentially to those bacteria with which it best associates? We cannot decisively answer this question, but the lack of any geographical pattern whatsoever in response to different bacterial species, as well as the potential role of cAMP as the molecule that leads to discriminatory behaviour, lends greater credence to the first hypothesis—that D. discoideum is biased towards finding and associating with certain bacteria because of a conserved mechanism by which it senses them. More generally, our results suggest that long-term colonization, particularly of professional phagocytes, might be mediated, in part, by the mechanisms by which they detect and respond to bacteria in their environment. This suggests the possibility that hosts might actively pursue and determine colonization outcomes. Supplementary Material Supplemental Tables and Figures: Click here to view. Acknowledgements Early experiments were performed by E.A.O. in Adam Kuspa's laboratory at Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. Data accessibility Raw data and code are deposited in Dryad:. Authors' contributions G.R. carried out experiments and analysed data. E.A.O. carried out experiments, performed statistical analyses and wrote the paper. Both authors contributed to writing and editing, approved the final version and agree to be accountable for its content. Competing interests We declare we have no competing interests. Funding G.R. received a research scholarship for this work from the University of Houston Stutzenberg Undergraduate Research Endowment. E.A.O. was funded by the National Science Foundation. Article information Biol Lett. 2019 Jan; 15: 20180607. Published online 2019 Jan 9. doi: 10.1098/rsbl.2018.0607 PMCID: PMC6371911 PMID: 30958215 Ghazal Rashidi 1 and Elizabeth A. Ostrowski 1, 2 Ghazal Rashidi 1 Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA Find articles by Ghazal Rashidi Elizabeth A. Ostrowski 1 Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA 2 Institute of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Massey University, Auckland, New Zealand Find articles by Elizabeth A. Ostrowski 1 Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA 2 Institute of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Massey University, Auckland, New Zealand e-mail: zn.ca.yessam@ikswortso.e Electronic supplementary material is available online at. Received 2018 Sep 4; Accepted 2018 Nov 27. Copyright © 2019 The Author Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved. Articles from Biology Letters are provided here courtesy of The Royal Society 