 Tarantula’s leg muscle thick filament is the ideal model for the study of the structure and function of skeletal muscle thick filaments. Its analysis has given rise to a series of structural and functional studies, leading, among other things, to the discovery of the myosin interacting-heads motif. Further electron microscopy studies have shown the presence of IHM in frozen-hydrated and negatively stained thick filaments of striated, cardiac, and smooth muscle of bilaterians, most showing the IHM parallel to the filament axis. EM studies on negatively stained heavy meromyosin of different species have shown the presence of IHM on sponges, animals that lack muscle, extending the presence of IHM to metazoans. The IHM evolved about 800 MY ago in the ancestor of Metazoa, and independently with functional differences in the lineage leading to the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. This motif conveys important functional advantages, such as Ca 2+ regulation and ATP energy-saving mechanisms. Recent interest has focused on human IHM structure in order to understand the structural basis underlying various conditions and situations of scientific and medical interest: the hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathies, overfeeding control, aging and hormone deprival muscle weakness, drug design for schistosomiasis control, and conditioning exercise physiology for the training of power athletes. Keywords: Myosin interacting-heads motif, Muscle disease, Myosin filaments, Muscle evolution, Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, Tarantula Introduction Muscle acquisition was a fundamental step during animal evolution. Muscle is a specialized contractile tissue made up of two major proteins, actin and myosin II. According to the sliding-filament model of muscle contraction, the interaction of these two proteins within each sarcomere causes the sarcomere to shorten, generating force and movement. The myosin II molecule, one of the several members of the myosin superfamily, is composed of two heavy chains, two essential light chains, and two regulatory light chains. The two MHCIIs assemble on a long tail and two globular heads, each head with a ELC and RLC bound. The analysis of tarantula’s leg muscle thick filaments has made them the ideal organism for the study of the structure and function of skeletal muscle thick filaments, leading to the myosin interacting-heads motif discovery. Cryo-electron microscopy allowed the visualization of the two heads of the myosin heavy meromyosin in 2D crystals from chicken smooth muscle, which were found to form an asymmetric arrangement, suggesting how the relaxed state was achieved. Cryo-EM allowed the visualization of both heads together with its sub-fragment 2 —missing in the 2D crystals—in native thick filament of relaxed striated muscle of tarantula Aphonopelma sp., suggesting that this “interacting-head” structure underlies the relaxed state of thick filaments in both smooth and myosin-regulated striated muscles over a wide range of species. This single molecular entity was called the myosin IHM, whose structure and function is reviewed in Alamo et al.. This structural motif plays a key role in tarantula myosin filament’s cooperative phosphorylation activation mechanism, potentiation, and post-tetanic potentiation. Here, we review the studies revealing the presence of the IHM in thick filaments of many species in different muscle types and conservation of the IHM intramolecular interactions. We also analyze the evolutionary relationship among the taxa possessing the IHM and propose a time-frame for its evolution. Finally, we present some recent findings on the consequences of the IHM structure and function in human physiology and pathologies. Lesson I: the IHM is present in all muscle types and many species in both thick filaments and HMM The striking similarity between the arrangement of the two heads of a myosin molecule in the thick filament of vertebrate smooth muscle as compared with the one of an invertebrate striated muscle lead to the suggestion that the IHM structure may underlie the relaxed state of thick filaments, in both smooth and myosin-regulated striated muscles, over a wide range of species, and with important functional differences in regards to the types of myosin-linked regulation, such as RLC phosphorylation and direct ELC Ca 2+ binding. The IHM is present in thick filaments across bilaterian taxa and muscle types The finding of the IHM in frozen-hydrated tarantula striated muscle thick filaments promoted electron microscopy studies to search for its presence on thick filaments of other muscle types and bilaterian taxa. 1 ). Further cryo-EM studies confirmed its presence in striated muscle thick filaments from the horseshoe crab Limulus polyphemus and Placopecten magellanicus. 1 ). It has been confirmed to be present in negatively stained striated muscle thick filaments from scorpion Tityus discrepans and the scallop P. magellanicus, in cardiac muscle from zebrafish Danio rerio, mouse Mus musculus, rabbit Oryctolagus cuniculus, and human Homo sapiens, and smooth muscle from the blood-fluke Schistosoma mansoni. 1 ). These additional studies confirmed that, depending on the lineage, the IHMs are organized in three, four, or seven coaxial helices: three helices for skeletal and cardiac muscle in Vertebrata, four helices for striated muscle in Arthropoda and smooth muscle in Platyhelminthes, and seven helices for striated muscle in Mollusca. 1 ). In these thick filaments, the IHMs are located approximately parallel to the filament axis, standing over from the thick filament backbone surface. They establish interconnecting intermolecular interactions along these helices and between adjacent crowns, either between all IHMs, only between some crowns, or within each crown. By using a 3D reconstruction of frozen-hydrated Lethocerus indicus, the indirect flight muscle thick filament 1 ) has been recently reported with a global resolution of 0.62 nm and with varying resolutions on the thick filament region between ~1.2 and 2.1 nm in the myosin heads region, 0.55 nm for the region where the myosin tails are packed, and 1.0 nm for the filament central paramyosin core. The heads region densities show an IHM structure perpendicularly oriented to the filament axis, in contrast to all the other muscle types studied so far, where they are parallel to the filament axis. 1 ). Therefore, the angle of the IHMs above the thick filament backbone seem to be variable, either approximately perpendicular or parallel. In addition, the Lethocerus IFM IHM appears to be freestanding with no intermolecular interactions between neighboring IHMs along the helices or within each crown 1 ) and without interactions with its myosin subfragment 2. It has been recently reported that a lack of negative charge in S2 may explain why Lethocerus thick filaments display an IHM perpendicular to the filament axis, rather than a parallel one as seen in tarantula. Further studies are required to clarify whether this particular perpendicular angle is specific to species with S2 lacking negative charges as in Lethocerus or if it is a general characteristic only of insect IFM. Fig. 1 3D reconstructions from electron micrographs of negatively stained or frozen-hydrated thick filaments for smooth, skeletal, and cardiac muscles of different invertebrate and vertebrate animals. According to the presence of interacting-heads motif... The IHM is present in isolated HMM of metazoans The EM studies on thick filaments 1 ) triggered immediately the interest on understanding the evolutionary origin of the IHM, mainly through the search for the presence of the IHM in taxa lacking muscle and thick filaments, either by EM or small-angle X-ray scattering. However, detecting the presence of IHM by 3D reconstructions of frozen-hydrated or even negatively stained isolated thick filaments is very time consuming, so an alternative approach such as the direct detection of IHM in negatively stained isolated HMM molecules was found to be more practical in that regard. 2 ). The IHM, which is basically an HMM with a longer S2, can be established in isolated myosin molecules or in thick filament﻿s. In contrast, the IHM in thick filaments can establish anchoring intermolecular interactions with myosin tails in the backbone and through interconnecting intermolecular interactions between neighboring IHMs, constituting helices of IHM on the surface of the backbone. Fig. 2 Averaged images of heavy meromyosins from different species. The IHM is present in the studied metazoans irrespective of the muscle type, nonmuscle cells, or its absence, as in sponges. The IHM presence was... Negatively stained EM studies of HMM Using this more practical approach, the IHM was found in the smooth muscle of turkey Meleagris gallopavo and in the scallop Pecten maximus. 2 ). The IHM was also detected in the HMM from mammals’ skeletal, cardiac, and nonmuscle cells, as well as in tarantula, horseshoe crab, and scallops, 2 ), suggesting that myosin head-head and head–S2 interactions are a general mechanism for switching off myosin II activity in cells and showing that the IHM can be established without additional intermolecular interactions with neighbor myosin tails. Further studies showed that the IHM is present in the sea anemone Condylactis gigantea smooth muscle HMM 2 ) extending the IHM presence to the non-bilaterian eumetazoans. More recently, the IHM was found in the HMM of animals lacking muscle, such as the sponge Cinachyra alloclada, 2 ), extending the IHM presence to the ensemble of metazoans. In contrast, the IHM is absent in the yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe and the amoebozoan Acanthamoeba castellanii, while a completely different myosin tail folding and a variation of the IHM structure was detected in the amoebozoan slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. In summary, as shown in Figs. ​ Figs.1 1 and ​ and3, 3, the presence of the IHM in thick filaments has been confirmed in vertebrates, i.e., bony fishes, mammals, and birds; arthropods, i.e., insects, spiders, scorpions, and horseshoe crab; other invertebrates, i.e., blood-flukes and molluscs; and, as shown in Fig. ​ Fig.2, 2, in the HMM of the sea anemone C. gigantea and the sponge C. alloclada. 3 ). The IHM has not been studied in Ctenophora, Placozoa, and some bilaterian phyla, all of which representing groups that deserve to be studied by EM or SAXS. 3 ). However, given the phylogenetic distribution of lineages with IHM among the Metazoa, it is hypothesized here that these groups would eventually be shown to exhibit the IHM. The ensemble of the available evidence suggests that the IHM appeared with the evolution of the Metazoa, with and without muscle. The specific evidence that Porifera have the IHM suggests that either the IHM structure evolved once at the origin of Metazoa, or twice—independently—in Porifera and in Eumetazoa. 3 ). Further EM or SAXS studies on Ctenophora and Placozoa should help clarify this point. Additional evidence in support of the idea of the emergence of the IHM concomitantly with the evolution of metazoans comes from the fact that the IHM seems to be absent in other Unikonta, such as the fungus S. pombe and the amoebozoan A. castellanii. 3 ). However, analyses of the IHM presence and structure in some of Metazoa’s closest relatives, most particularly in Choanoflagellata, Filasterea, and Mesomycetozoea, will be necessary to confirm the relation between IHM and Metazoa. Fig. 3 Consensus phylogenetic relationships of Unikonta, i.e., Metazoa, Fungi, Amoebozoa, and some related unicellular eukaryotes, for which the IHM structure has been studied directly via electron microscopy and small-angle X-ray scattering or >500 MY. However, according to the phylogenetic tree shown in Fig. ​ Fig.3, 3, the IHM evolved about 800 MY ago in the ancestor of Metazoa. The evolution of this particular IHM quaternary conformation seems, therefore, to be related somehow to the emergence of coordinated movement in these multicellular organisms, and the presence of its more complex form is related with the apparition of muscle in Eumetazoa and particularly in Bilateria, which required synchronized Ca 2+ regulation as provided by the related emergence of MLCK and MLCP enzymes, as well as the Ca 2+ binding troponin complex. It should be noted that cnidarians and ctenophores have striated muscle with considerable structural similarity to the one found in bilaterians, but lacking titin and the troponin complex, crucial components of bilaterian striated muscles. This has been suggested as evidence for an independent and convergent evolution of striated muscle in these lineages and in bilaterians. According to this view, the evolution of striated muscles in Cnidaria/Ctenophora and Bilateria would have occurred through the addition of different sets of proteins to a common contractile apparatus present in the ancestor of metazoans. The existence of a fully functional IHM structure in animals without true muscle, such as sponges, provides indirect evidence in support for this idea. As indicated above, analyses of Metazoa’s closest relatives, Choanoflagellata, Filasterea, and Mesomycetozoea, will, however, be necessary to confirm this and to set a precise time-frame for the evolution of the IHM. Finally, the dissimilar myosin tail folding observed in D. discoideum, implying an IHM with different tail–IHM interactions and particularly the lack of the IHM structure in other amoebozoans such as A. castellanii, strongly suggest that it represents an older and independent evolution of the IHM structure exhibiting functional differences as compared with the IHM that evolved later in Metazoa. Supporting this proposal, Fig. ​ Fig.2 2 shows that D. discoideum, in which MLCK and MLCP have been reported to be present, exhibits a completely different myosin tail folding and a variation of the IHM structure. Further investigations on the presence and structure of IHM and the presence of MLCK and MLCP in Mycetozoa and other slime molds are very important to clarify this point, as well as achieving a quasi-atomic model of the D. discoideum IHM. Lesson II: the evolution of myosin IHM: implications of its intramolecular interactions and evolutionary advantages In this section, we review the evidences of the IHM presence shown in Figs. ​ Figs.1 1 and ​ and2, 2, aiming to understand its evolutionary advantages, the emerging of the components needed for its assembling, and the conservation of its intramolecular interactions. Paired myosin heads constituting an IHM provides evolutionary advantages over unpaired heads The myosin II molecule is the only myosin molecule capable of generating filaments. Besides myosin II, the main components of these myosin thick filaments are paramyosin, myosin binding protein C, filagenins, titin, etc., depending on the species. Therefore, the study of the sequences of the myosin II molecule components, MHCII, ELC, and RLC, is very important to understand the relationship between the conservation of certain myosin sequences and the IHM functioning, as well as the association between mutations on these sequences and certain muscle malfuctioning and pathologies. Each head of the myosin II molecule carries out three basic functions: binding to actin, hyd﻿rolyzing ATP, and producing force when attached to actin. The myosin II is, therefore, essential for force production and movement. On the other hand, the arrangement of these two heads into an IHM asymmetric structure produces important additional properties that are not observed in single myosin heads, such as: ATPase self-inhibition on both heads, free head swaying, blocked head force potentiation, and post-tetanic potentiation. These four additional functions endorse the organisms that can establish functional IHM molecules, i.e., which possess MHCII, ELC, and RLC with key additional evolutionary advantages, such as the helical organization of the IHMs in thick filaments, allowing the movement of actin filaments towards the center of the myosin thick filament, with the resulting generation of force and force potentiation. This configuration is, therefore, related to muscle evolution as proposed below. Besides, this configuration appears to form transient filaments in different locations needed for the functioning of simpler interdigitating arrays of actin and myosin with a more irregular organization, such as in vertebrate smooth muscle or nonmuscle cells. Furthermore, mutations in the myosin II gene could produce slightly altered MHCIIs with different intramolecular interactions, which, in turn, could be responsible for IHM structural variations, such as striated-like, smooth-like, and nonmuscle-like MHCII sequences, or IHM structure variations like in D. discoideum. In addition, mutations in the ELC and RLC genes could be responsible for the structural modifications endorsing the IHM with direct ELC–Ca 2+ binding or RLC phosphorylation regulation. It has been suggested that the IHM may have emerged as a small, self-inhibiting unit before the evolution of thick filaments. The emergence of the IHM self-relaxation mechanism should have endorsed evolutionary advantages to the myosin molecule by itself, like in nonmuscle cells, allowing simple force production and movement. Later, when assemblies of myosin molecules became organized as thick filaments and sarcomeres, further evolutionary advantages were achieved, including cooperativity between the different myosin heads. An additional advantage of the emergence of IHM, based on the conservation of IHM intramolecular interactions across metazoans and the presence of IHM in bilaterians, would be the saving of ATP in skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscle achieved through the super-relaxed state, reviewed in. Intramolecular interactions and assembling of the IHM The assemblage of an IHM requires a certain number of intramolecular interactions. Specifically, five of such intramolecular interactions, the priming/forming “f” and “g”, and the stabilizing “a”, “d”, and “e”, must be fully established for the IHM to be formed. In thick filaments, the IHM also establishes intermolecular interactions with neighbor myosin heads and tails, which are important for the generation of the IHM helices on thick filament backbone surface. However, the IHM can be established in the HMM without these additional intermolecular interactions with neighbor myosin heads and tails. 2 ). According to the comparison of MHCII sequence alignments between selected lineages within Unikonta and the tarantula Aphonopelma sp., Alamo et al. have suggested that the required amino acid sequences at the stabilizing and priming forming IHM intramolecular interactions are present in metazoans but not in fungi or amoebozoans. Indeed, using this approach, Alamo et al. predicted that the IHM should be present across metazoans such as D. melanogaster, the sea anemone C. gigantea, and the sponge Amphimedon sp., but not in the yeast S. pombe or the amoebozoans D. discoideum and A. castellanii. In addition, the conservation of intramolecular interactions across animal species and the presence of IHM in bilaterians suggested that an SRX state should be maintained playing a role in saving ATP in muscle. In agreement with these predictions, the IHM has been detected in isolated embryonic and adult HMM molecules of D. melanogaster IFM, the sea anemone C. gigantea, and the sponge C. alloclada. 2 ). Furthermore, as predicted by Alamo et al., the IHM is absent in the amoebozoan A. castellanii and the yeast S. pombe, 2 ), confirming that these lineages lack the proper charged amino acids in the sequences involved in the intramolecular interactions necessary for the IHM quaternary conformation assemblage. However, a different myosin tail folding and a variation of the IHM structure were detected in the amoebozoan slime mold D. discoideum. 2 ). As shown in Fig. ​ Fig.2, 2, the myosin tail folding in this species is very different to the simple myosin tail folding observed in metazoans, possibly exhibiting different intramolecular interactions and additional tail–IHM interactions not considered in the analysis done by Alamo et al.. The presence of the IHM in metazoans and its absence in the yeast S. pombe and the amoebozoan A. castellanii, all containing the IHM protein core set, support the proposal that the actual assembly of the quaternary IHM structure requires the establishment of five appropriate intramolecular interactions, which appears to be absent in D. discoideum as a consequence of additional tail–IHM interactions and very different intramolecular interactions. An assembled IHM requires ELC and RLC to incorporate Ca 2+ regulation in a functional IHM In addition to the intramolecular interactions mentioned above, the assembling of a functional IHM requires the presence of MHCII, RLC, and ELC proteins. Endorsing an assembled IHM with regulation by Ca 2+ requires either an ELC capable of binding Ca 2+, as in the anterior byssus retractor muscle of some Mollusca or the presence of MLCK and calmodulin to allow the myosin RLC phosphorylation, and the presence of MLCP to allow its dephosphorylation, so the assembled IHM can interact with actin to produce force and regulate it. Therefore, for assembling and making a Ca 2+ regulated IHM, the IHM protein core set should include actin and MHCII with the required appropriate IHM intramolecular interactions, and, depending on the Ca 2+ regulation type, either an ELC capable of Ca 2+ binding or a phosphorylatable RLC, calmodulin, MLCK, and MLCP. However, it seems that these necessary genes did not appear at the same time but progressively: actin and calmodulin were present in the ancestor of Bikonta and Unikonta, while MHCII, RLC, and ELC appeared only in the stem Unikonta, but whether this represents a deeper ancestry or a case of horizontal gene transfer remains to be evaluated). MLCP myosin binding subunit gene appeared in the common ancestor of Choanoflagellata and Metazoa, MLCP protein phosphatase 2 gene in Unikonta and Bikonta and the MLCK gene in Metazoa. Therefore, based only on the temporal emergence of the IHM protein core set genes, we conclude that, in spite that MHCII, RLC, ELC, actin, and calmodulin are present in the ensemble of Unikonta, only metazoans are capable of building an IHM with Ca 2+ regulation via RLC phosphorylation. 3 ). Supporting this conclusion, the results in Fig. ​ Fig.2 2 show that the IHM is present in metazoans but absent in the yeast S. pombe and the amoebozoan A. castellanii, which lack the MLCP mypt and MLCK genes. The MHCII sequence appears to convey the assembly and type of myosin/thick filament The three types of MHCII sequences, striated-like, smooth-like, and nonmuscle-like, 2 ), have been discussed in relation to the presence of the IHM and thick filament type. The nonmuscle type seems to be present in all Unikonta, while the smooth-like and striated-like types seem to be associated with the emergence of muscle. The nonmuscle-like MHCII assembles as minifilaments in the amoebozoans D. discoideum and A. castellanii, but not in the sponge C. alloclada. The striated-like MHCII make bipolar thick filaments in striated and smooth muscle thick filaments but not in the sponge or vertebrate smooth muscle that make specialized side-polar thick filaments. Therefore, the type of MHCII does not only convey the specific amino acid sequences required for establishing the IHM intramolecular interactions, but also appears to convey the tail packing associated with the filament presence and filament type. Lesson III: IHM implications in human diseases Recently, an increasing interest has emerged on the human IHM structure and its associated SRX energetics consequences for understanding the structural basis of human muscle diseases, like some cardiomyopathies and muscle loss associated with aging and hormone deprival, muscle force conditioning enhancement by exercise training, the design of drugs targeting the IHM and SRX to alleviate obesity and type 2 diabetes, and parasitic diseases control. Human cardiomyopathies Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and dilated cardiomyopathies are diseases of the human myocardium caused by variants in genes encoding sarcomere proteins. Three of these human genes encode respectively the three human cardiac IHM components, β-MHCII, ELC, and RLC. The proposition that HCM is linked to variants that would have an effect on the formation of IHM has been proposed in several studies that have mapped HCM variants on the IHM structure. Using a model built with the human S2 crystal model PDB 2FXM and the chicken smooth muscle myosin PDB 1I84 model fitted to the tarantula thick filament 3D map, it was firstly pointed out the involvement of HCM charge-inverting variants E924K, E927K, E930K, and E935K were located in the negatively charged Ring 1 of S2. Using the tarantula IHM PDB 3DTP quasi-atomic model, the charge-changing HCM variants were found to be involved in the intermolecular interaction “a” between the free head and S2, suggesting that HCM charge-changing variants could be involved specifically in altering IHM intramolecular interactions. It has been proposed that this interaction is likely to be important in maintaining the relaxed conformation of myosin in the thick filament, and variants in the S2 negatively charged Ring 1 may lead to more disordered heads, and perhaps some dysregulation of contraction. As the negatively charged Ring 2 is likely to be a site of interaction for MyBP-C, it has been proposed that variants on it could potentially affect the interaction of MyBP-C with S2, modulating contraction by MyBP-C. Ten HCM and 27 DCM variants were mapped to the tarantula IHM PDB 3DTP, suggesting a random variants distribution rather than a disease-specific clustering. The 3DTP model was fitted against the mouse cardiac muscle thick filament 3D map EMD-1465, showing that the R403Q variant phenotype could result from altered head–head interactions, suggesting that potential effects of the variants on relaxed head–head and head–tail interactions are probably important for understanding the mutant phenotype. In consequence, Moore et al. suggested that: HCM variants map to regions that could alter the IHM, variant-induced disruption of thick filament regulation could alter heart energy consumption, and variants could induce a disruption of the distribution of heads between DRX and SRX states, potentially leading to hypertrophy via an altered energetic state of the heart. Direct evidences for these earlier suggestions have been provided recently by the homologous human β-cardiac IHM structure, based on the tarantula PDB 3JBH IHM model, which has allowed mapping the variants from 6112 HCM and 1315 DCM patients and 33,370 controls. The mapping showed that these variants cluster on the IHM intramolecular interactions: HCM variants disproportionately altered IHM interaction residues. The location of the HCM variants 4 a) predict impaired IHM formation and stability and attenuation of the SRX state, accounting for altered contractility, reduced diastolic relaxation, and increased energy consumption, which fully characterize HCM pathogenesis. 4 c). This study demonstrated that HCM and DCM variants differentially impact myosin motor domain functions and specific IHM interactions, suggesting the structural mechanisms for failed contractile power in DCM and the markedly compromised relaxation and energetics in HCM 4 c). These conclusions suggested that the identification of IHM residues in PDB 5TBY involved in relaxation could provide new opportunities to target the IHM with small molecules like MYK-461 to improve HCM pathophysiology and other heart diseases with diastolic dysfunction and by extending these analyses to skeletal myopathies so that further insights into critical roles of the highly conserved IHM in the relaxation of striated muscles could be expected. With that in mind, two very important advances in the future would be the solving the human β-cardiac HMM atomic structure by X-ray crystallography and achieving the human β-cardiac HMM and IHM near-atomic structure by cryo-EM. Fig. 4 Assessment of the effects of hypertrophic and dilated variants according to their localization on the same positions on the blocked and free heads but exposed to different environments. Mapping of pathogenic and likely pathogenic... Recently, Nag et al. built a homology model for a human β-cardiac myosin IHM using the earlier tarantula PDB 3DTP and the human β-cardiac motor domain crystal structure PDB 4P7H, as well as a human cardiac MyBP-C homology model based on the known structures of some of its domains. It was found that four myosin HCM-causing mutations—but not two other mutations—weakened the IHM S1–S2 interaction. It was proposed that clinical hypercontractility caused by HCM and cMyBP-C mutations is due to an increase in the number of myosin heads that are accessible for force production. This hypothesis was based on: the demonstration of myosin tail -dependent functional regulation of actin-activated human β-cardiac myosin ATPase, that both S2 and MyBP-C bind to S1 and that phosphorylation of either S1 or MyBP-C weakens these interactions. In addition, it was proposed a model involving multiple interactions, including those with myosin’s own S2 and MyBP-C, that hold myosin in a sequestered state. Muscle loss associated with aging and hormone deprival Sarcopenia, the loss of skeletal muscle mass and function with advancing age, is a significant cause of disability and loss of independence in the elderly and, thus, represents a formidable challenge for the aging population. The molecular mechanism of sarcopenia-associated muscle dysfunction remains poorly understood, but previous studies have shown that sarcopenia-associated muscle dysfunction is associated with decreased force production, maximal shortening velocity, and Ca 2+ sensitivity of force. As previously mentioned, all these processes are strongly associated to the myosin activation mechanism, orchestrated by the RLC phosphorylation and the underlying IHM structure. Particularly, the loss of strength on female skeletal muscle as a consequence of aging and loss of ovarian hormone production and the disruption of the myosin SRX by estradiol deficiency has led to the suggestion that SRX could be targetable for strategies to offset weakness and metabolic changes that occur with age in human female muscle. Conditioning exercise training of power athletes Understanding the conditions in which a single maximal isometric contraction affects the contractile performance of the human plantar flexor muscle is important for the training of power athletes. Post-activation potentiation, an acute enhancement of muscle contractile properties and performance subsequent to a maximal conditioning contraction, is linked to RLC phosphorylation. As these authors reported, PAP observed after a conditioning task coexists with fatigue and depends on strength level, muscle fiber type, and age. The training conditioning should be performed in a position such that full activation should be easy to achieve and tailored to mach an athlete or group of athlete’s current status and characteristics, maximizing performance in a specific sporting event. The IHM CPA mechanism should help yield a better understanding of the human PAP and its use on conditioning exercise training of Olympic power athletes. Obesity and type 2 diabetes An important consequence of the IHM asymmetric structure is that the ATPases activities of its two heads are switched off producing the myosin SRX state, reviewed in Alamo et al., and detected with a very slow release of ATP in tarantula muscle. The transition from low ATPase activity in the SRX state to the higher ATPase activity in the DRX state increases the skeletal muscle metabolic rate, with implications for the treatment of some diseases, as described by Cooke on the role of the IHM OFF state in whole body metabolism, and IHM as a therapeutic target for obesity. A key factor for achieving the SRX state is that the RLCs of the blocked and free heads should bind together, forming the RLC–RLC interface. The tarantula IHM 3DTP and 3JBH structures have been used for searching small molecules that could destabilize this interface, aiming to develop drugs to alleviate some human diseases. Spectroscopic studies of the rabbit skeletal muscle SRX state support the presence of this RLC–RLC putative interface, showing that the divalent cation bound to the RLC and the RLC NTE are involved in the SRX state stability. These authors found a probe that allows measuring the SRX state population, enabling high-throughput screens for finding potential pharmaceuticals targeting this interface. Their results using this probe suggest that other small molecules bound to this interface could also destabilize the SRX state and provide a screening method for searching small molecules that destabilize this interface. As the SRX to DRX transition increases the muscle metabolic rate, finding small molecules that destabilize the RLC–RLC interface could lead to potentially effective treatments for obesity and type 2 diabetes, as the SRX state destabilization produced by these small molecules should increase the metabolic rate of resting skeletal muscle, increasing the calories consumption. Using this screening method, these authors identified that piperine destabilizes the SRX state. Piperine, a black pepper alkaloid, can mitigate obesity and type 2 diabetes in rodent models. In consequence, these authors concluded that up-regulation of resting muscle metabolism could treat obesity and type 2 diabetes and that piperine would provide a useful lead compound for the development of these therapies. Parasitic diseases control Schistosomes like S. mansoni and the Chinese liver fluke Clonorchis sinensis are human parasites. Schistosomiasis is the third most devastating tropical disease globally, infecting 240 million humans. C. sinensis is endemic to Japan, China, Taiwan, and Southeast Asia, causing clonorchiasis, infecting more than 15 million humans. Currently, a small molecule, praziquantel, is the unique drug in use against schistosomiasis and clonorchiasis. PZQ produces a spam of the S. mansoni smooth muscle, that, together with host immune response, induces its death and has been reported to bind the S. mansoni myosin RLC. In view of the emerging resistance of schistosomes to PZQ, it should be important to disclose the molecular basis of the PZQ action on the schistosome RLC, aiming to further improve the PZQ molecule, modifying it to increase its pharmacological potency, or new anti-schistosomal drug discovery. The structure of the thick filaments of the smooth muscle of S. mansoni and the striated muscle of tarantula are very similar, exhibiting the presence of the IHM 1 ). Additionally, the S. mansoni RLC exhibits a long NTE with MLCK and PKC consensus sequences, similarly to in tarantula, exhibiting a 100% sequence conservation between them. These similarities suggest the possible presence of myosin-linked RLC phosphorylation regulation in S. mansoni. Consequently, further structural research on their IHM should elucidate whether PZQ is involved in the stability of the RLC–RLC interface. Apart from tarantula, S. mansoni, and C. sinensis, there are only seven more species reported to exhibit long RLC NTEs, as all the remaining species exhibit short NTEs. Interestingly, the other species with long RLC NTEs include three transmitting-disease mosquitoes of the genus Aedes, Culex, and Anopheles, apart from three insects and the giant tube worm Riftia pachyptila not involved in human disease. The RLC similarity between these long RLC NTEs species suggests that the IHM and its RLC–RLC interface of these mosquitoes should be further studied in this context. Conclusions and perspectives The myosin interacting-heads motif appears to be oriented parallel to the filament axis in the thick filaments of most species. The IHM evolved about 800 MY ago in the ancestor of Metazoa and independently and most probably with functional differences in the lineage leading to the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. Future studies will allow assessing the IHM presence by electron microscopy and small-angle X-ray scattering in Apusozoa, Choanoflagellata, Filasterea, and Mesomycetozoea. Hopefully, IHM studies will aid in the amelioration of some human diseases like hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathies, muscle loss associated with aging and hormone deprival, the design of drugs targeting the IHM and super-relaxed state to alleviate obesity and type 2 diabetes, and parasitic diseases control. Acknowledgements We thank Dr. Gustavo Márquez for help with the manuscript. Molecular graphics images were produced using the UCSF Chimera package from the Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization, and Informatics at the University of California, San Francisco. This work was supported in part by Centro de Biología Estructural del Mercosur and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. We dedicate this review to the memory of Dr. Hugh E. Huxley. Notes Conflict of interest Lorenzo Alamo declares that he has no conflicts of interest. Antonio Pinto declares that he has no conflicts of interest. Guidenn Sulbarán declares that he has no conflicts of interest. Jesús Mavárez declares that he has no conflicts of interest. Raúl Padrón declares that he has no conflicts of interest. Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors. Footnotes This article is part of a Special Issue on ‘Latin America’ edited by Pietro Ciancaglini and Rosangela Itri. Article information Biophys Rev. 2018 Oct; 10: 1465–1477. Published online 2017 Sep 4. doi: 10.1007/s12551-017-0292-4 PMCID: PMC6233336 PMID: 28871552 Lorenzo Alamo, 1 Antonio Pinto, 1 Guidenn Sulbarán, 1, 2 Jesús Mavárez, 3 and Raúl Padrón 1 Lorenzo Alamo 1 Centro de Biología Estructural “Humberto Fernández-Morán”, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Apdo. 20632, Caracas, 1020A Venezuela Find articles by Lorenzo Alamo Antonio Pinto 1 Centro de Biología Estructural “Humberto Fernández-Morán”, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Apdo. 20632, Caracas, 1020A Venezuela Find articles by Antonio Pinto Guidenn Sulbarán 1 Centro de Biología Estructural “Humberto Fernández-Morán”, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Apdo. 20632, Caracas, 1020A Venezuela 2 Present Address: Institut de Biologie Structurale, CEA-CNRS Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France Find articles by Guidenn Sulbarán Jesús Mavárez 3 Laboratoire d’Ecologie Alpine, UMR 5553 CNRS-Université Grenoble Alpes, 2233 Rue de la Piscine, 38041 Grenoble, France Find articles by Jesús Mavárez Raúl Padrón 1 Centro de Biología Estructural “Humberto Fernández-Morán”, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Apdo. 20632, Caracas, 1020A Venezuela Find articles by Raúl Padrón 1 Centro de Biología Estructural “Humberto Fernández-Morán”, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Apdo. 20632, Caracas, 1020A Venezuela 2 Present Address: Institut de Biologie Structurale, CEA-CNRS Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France 3 Laboratoire d’Ecologie Alpine, UMR 5553 CNRS-Université Grenoble Alpes, 2233 Rue de la Piscine, 38041 Grenoble, France Raúl Padrón, Phone: +58 212 504 1098, Email: moc.liamg@nordap.luar. Corresponding author. Received 2017 May 17; Accepted 2017 Jul 27. Copyright © International Union for Pure and Applied Biophysics and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany 2017 Articles from Biophysical Reviews are provided here courtesy of Springer 