 Cell-derived extracellular vesicles are newly uncovered messengers for intercellular communication. They are released by almost all cell types in the three kingdoms, Archeabacteria, Bacteria and Eukaryotes. They are known to mediate important biological functions and to be increasingly involved in cell physiology and in many human diseases, especially in oncology. The aim of this review is to recapitulate the current knowledge about EVs and to summarize our pioneering work about Dictyostelium discoideum EVs. However, many challenges remain unsolved in the EV research field, before any EV application for theranostics of human cancers, can be efficiently implemented in the clinics. Dictyostelium might be an outstanding eukaryotic cell model for deciphering the utmost challenging problem of EV heterogeneity, and for unraveling the still mostly unknown mechanisms of their specific functions as mediators of intercellular communication. Keywords: extracellular vesicles, microvesicles, exosomes, oncosomes, apoptotic bodies, intercellular communication, human disease, cancer, Dictyostelium discoideum 1. Introduction After a brief presentation of the extracellular vesicles and of the eukaryotic microorganism Dictyostelium, an overview will be given about the properties of EVs and their involvement in human health and disease. Then, our pionnering work about Dictyostelium EVs will be presented in addition to the assets of Dictyostelium, as a model for studying the mammalian EVs will be discussed. 1.1. Presentation of the Extracellular Vesicles Cell theory was officially formulated in 1838–1839, stating that the cell is the basic component of living organisms. So the cell emerged slowly to birth, as the ultimate unit of life from the seventienth to the ninetienth century. During this time, the cell was perceived as a more complex factory, regulating its multiple biological functions by means of its many macromolecular components. As a consequence, the DNA was attributed to the major director role, orchestrating all the other components in a different set of pathways. Until recently, each cell was delimited by a membrane aimed to protect its precious content from any harmful external invasion and the extracellular medium was mostly devoted to a garbage disposal; even if a few cell-derived proteins, such as proteases or hormones already had specific intercellular functions. One important «earthquake» in cell biology arrived insidiously, initiated by the observation that plasma contains a subcellular factor that promotes the clotting of blood ; two decades later, Wolf showed that this subcellular factor consists of vesicles of platelet origin, named “platelet dust”. Thus, the platelet plasma membrane was no longer an impermeable border, and the cell extended its field outside the cell factory. In 1981, Trams et al. reported the exfoliation of membrane ecto-enzymes in the form of microvesicles. Beside these pionneer observations, two Canadian teams worked on the maturation of sheep reticulocytes into erythrocytes over a number of years, and showed that the obsolete protein transferrin was transported outside the cells by a means of extracellular vesicles, called “exosomes”. This was also observed for the maturation of human reticulocytes, and the exosome-mediated release of obsolete cellular proteins was suggested as a general mechanism. In 1999, Heijnen et al. observed that activated platelets release two types of membrane vesicles: microvesicles by surface shedding and exosomes derived from exocytosis of multivesicular bodies and alpha-granules. After the first 2005 Exosome Meeting in Canada, C. Théry and G. Raposo organised the second International Exosome Workshop. Founding of an International Society, ISEV, was decided and devoted to the study of all the Extracellular Vesicles—not limited to Exosomes—with a dedicated Journal of Extracellular Vesicles, JEV, and a yearly International Congress. This was achieved during the first 2012 ISEV Meeting with about 400 participants, whereas, the 2018 ISEV meeting gathered about 1100 participants. Before ISEV, another International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis, ISTH, was founded in 1969, more centered on Microvesicles in Health and Disease, but now with many aims in common. Both Societies joined for the first time at the Educational Day before the 2016 ISEV Meeting. 1.2. Presentation of Dictyostelium Dictyostelium discoideum was discovered in 1935 by Raper in a North Carolina forest, and has been widely studied ever since. For simplification, Dictyostelium is further used for Dictyostelium discoideum in this review. Dictyostelium is a eukaryotic amoeba at the border of the vegetal and animal kingdoms, which appeared in evolution about one billion years ago, long before mankind. In the wild, it grows on bacteria and cell divides by mitosis, but in the lab it can also grow in an axenic medium without any calf serum, or even in a completely defined medium and cell divide also by mitosis. The individual growing cells are analogous to human leukocytes, with regard to their size and motility, and to macrophages with regard to their capacity for phagocytosis. In conditions of complete starvation, these Dictyostelium, “animal-like” cells, first experience a primitive multicellular aggregation, followed by a simple differentiation into two main “vegetal-like” cells, stalk cells, and spores. Aggregation tests in tissue culture Petri dishes with 2 × 10 6 adhering cells in 1 mL KK 2 buffer depict cAMP-driven chemotaxis, with cell elongation within about 6 h of starvation, and further formation of nice aggregation figures, either in stars or in spirals. When being at an air-interface in differentiation tests, each complete aggregate gives rise in about 24 h from initation of starvation, to a visible so-called fruiting body, inholding stalk cells, programmed to death and organised into a stalk, bearing a small balloon, including the spores, programmed to further life by germination into new amoebae, when recovering normal nutrition conditions. Thus, for this primitive eukaryotic species, growth and differenciation are well separated biological processes, and complete starvation induces the transformation of individual cells into a visible fruiting body. A. Einstein, watching J. T. Bonner’s 1940 video about this slime mold development, in Princeton, was impressed by this amazing microorganism. Besides its quite noticeable lifestyle, Dictyostelium possess many other assets. Its small genomic DNA has been completely sequenced, and covers six chromosomes, with a 90% efficient transcription into about 12,500 genes. By comparison, the human genomic DNA is 10% transcribed, with only about twice as many genes as Dictyostelium, which is devoted with some genes analogous to some important human genes. Dictyostelium cells also harbor mitochondria with a fully sequenced genome, and plasmids. More details about Dictyostelium can be found in the well documented website, as a new non-mammalian model organism for biomedical research. In 2011, R. Escalante gathered the works from many labs to present Dictyostelium as a model for human disease. As stated by S. Bozzaro : “This model organism has been particularly useful for the study of cell motility, chemotaxis, phagocytosis, endocytic vesicle traffic, cell adhesion, pattern formation, caspase-independent cell death, and, more recently, autophagy and social evolution. It has proven to be a powerful genetic and cellular model for investigating host–pathogen interactions and microbial infections, for mitochondrial diseases, and for pharmacogenetic studies. The D. discoideum genome harbors several homologs of human genes responsible for a variety of diseases, including Chediak-Higashi syndrome, lissencephaly, mucolipidosis, Huntington disease, IBMPFD—that can affect the muscles, bones, and brain—and Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. The study of some of these genes has provided new insights on the mechanism of action of the encoded proteins and, in some cases, on the defect underlying the disease”. 2. Overview of the Extracellular Vesicles Here are recapitulated the main EVs characteristics and reported biological functions, with no details about the few already elucidated mechanisms, which have to be searched in more specialized reviews. 2.1. Definition and Characteristics of the Extracellular Vesicles These days, the EV field is extraordinarily complex, due to the huge diversity of their observations. After the pioneering work of Wolf on platelets, Apoptotic bodies, with a size up to 5 µm, released by cells dying by apoptosis were the first EVs to be observed. Microvesicles or Ectosomes, previously named Microparticles, originated mainly from human body fluids, such as blood, plasma and urine, and were generally observed in a clinical environment. With a size between 100 nm and 1 µm, they were rather easy to prepare by low differential centrifugation, and to be characterised by their membrane antigens, mostly by using specific antibodies and normal fluorescence flow cytometers, at least above their 300 nm resolution threshold. These two EV classes shared a phosphatidylserine transfer from the inner to the outer lipidic bilayer, and a common biogenesis, corresponding to the shedding of pieces of the cell plasma membrane, and embedding different macromolecular cargoes. Exosomes, and Exosome-like EVs, such as Prostasomes, were smaller, with a size between 40 and 150 nm, and were first mostly prepared by differential centrifugation, ending with two final steps of ultracentrifugation at 100,000g ; they were mostly characterised by western blots and proteomics in a biological environment. Their biogenesis were linked to endocytic processes through the cells until their accumulation into multivesicular bodies, partly fusionning with the PM for the release of their inner vesicles outside the cells as EVs. More recently, the EV family increased with the appearance of Oncosomes, shed from the PM of some—not only tumor—cells, with a size up to 10 µm, therefore the EV family is always increasing. All EV main classes differ first by their size, 40–150 nm for the exosomes, 100 nm–1 µm for the microvesicles, up to 5 µm for the apoptotic bodies and up to 10 µm for the oncosomes. However, these different EVs cannot be confidently discriminated by size, due to their partial overlapping. EVs differ also by their biogenesis: microvesicles and oncosomes originate from the shedding of pieces of plasma membrane; apoptotic bodies originate from a lesser known ultimate cell reconditioning, whereas exosomes experience an intracellular traffic through the well-known endocytic pathways. Besides differences in size and biogenesis, the most important characteristics of the different EVs are their respective cargoes, with defined contents of molecular components, giving them different densities. The known EV macromolecular compounds have been classified in three databases. However, EVs can neither be discriminated by their quite different cargoes, due to the absence of some true class-specific biomarkers. Almost all cells, whatever their kingdom, Archeabacteria, Bacteria or Eukaryotes, are physiologically releasing EVs, suggesting that this might also be the case for the Last Universal Common Ancestor, which is the most recent organism from which all modern cells derive, and that EV release might indeed be of the utmost importance for cell biology. This is also the case for the different cells of the human body and the various body fluids, although with varying amounts. Therefore, the EV landscape seems to be a “continuum” of different EVs, more or less well classified into four main EV populations, as were the spectral lines of the H atom before Niels Bohr’s atomic theory. Many reviews have been devoted to the classification of EVs. In the absence of a general consensus about EV nomenclature, the International Society ISEV advocates the general use of EVs, whatever the EV class used in the current scientific papers. On the other hand, EVs are endowed with important biological functions, which will be summarized below. Moreover, EV concentrations are generally increasing in many diseases with specific changes of their cargoes, especially in human cancers. Therefore, tumor cell-derived EVs might be promising as biomarkers and even as therapeutic agents for drug delivery. These points of interest will also be detailed below. After a rather slow and messy emergence until 2012, the EV field is now experiencing a tremendous increase of interest in both biology and medicine, as shown by the fast growing EV publication rate. 2.2. Extracellular Vesicles and Intercellular Communication Besides their characterization by size, biogenesis and cargo contents, the EV biological properties, although still mostly unknown, have been progressively discovered. One of the earliest observations was the externalisation of the transferrin receptor from sheep reticulocytes in vitro. It was later suggested as a general exsosomal process for shedding membrane proteins. Already in 1996, it was mentioned that B-lymphocytes secrete antigen-presenting vesicles. The roles of membrane vesicles and exosomes in immune responses were further elucidated. Microvesicles also participate in important biological processes, such as the surface–membrane traffic and the horizontal transfer of proteins and RNAs among neighbouring cells. In 2006, whereas the horizontal transfer of DNA by the uptake of apoptotic bodies was already a known process, J. Ratajczak et al. stressed that membrane-derived vesicles were important mediators of cell-to-cell communication, and they brought evidence for the horizontal transfer of mRNA and protein delivery by embryonic stem cell-derived microvesicles. Valadi et al. reported a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells, mediated by the exosome transfer of mRNA and miRNA. Among other beneficial influences of exosomes, one can mention their communication of protective messages during oxidative stress. Nowadays, the EV active participation in intercellular communication is convincingly claimed. As stated by Camussi et al. “even though the exact physiological role of EVs remains to be elucidated, it is becoming clear that they may transfer proteins, receptors, bioactive lipids, messenger ribonucleic acid, and micro-RNA from the cell of origin to the recipient cell, which may modify their phenotype and functions”. The physiological roles of exosomes is probably important for monitoring body homeostasis during health, but is less well-studied than their pathological roles in many human diseases. The exosome-like vesicles prostasomes, originating from the prostate, represent an exception, as their influence in normal human reproduction was one of the earliest works of interest about EVs. During normal pregnancy, placental vesicles have been shown to have a wide range of functional activities, transferring a variety of bioactive molecules into the maternal circulation. Recently, EVs have also been implied in senescence and aging. However, the EV-mediated intercellular communication is a “double-edge sword”, as cells can release prions in association with exosomes, and exosomes can also mediate the functional delivery of viral miRNA, whereas microvesicles too can contribute to viral infection. 2.3. Extracellular Vesicles and Human Diseases Figure 1 shows the complexity of the cell-derived EVs. This tissue-specific EV classification points out their interest in the medical field. As stressed more recently, only large oncosomes are released by some tumor cells, whereas oncosomes might also be releasd by non-tumor cells. The possibility of using EVs as biomarkers and even therapeutics in many human diseases has sustained the increasing interest for EV research. This approach was first experimented with the microvesicles, as detailed in. Shedding vesicles play a role in inflammation and thrombosis, in vascular diseases and in pre-eclampsia versus normal pregnancy. Pregnancy affords a unique opportunity for a comparative EV study in normal physiology and disease. In addition, microvesicles have important physiological roles in coagulation in vivo, by mediating the coordinate contribution of platelets, macrophages, and neutrophils. Endothelial-derived microparticles are said to be biological conveyors at the crossroad of inflammation, thrombosis, and angiogenesis. EVs have deleterious effects, as well as beneficial effects, in cardiovascular pathologies, depending on the molecules they carry,. Epigenetic changes induced by EVs have been particularly studied in the context of immunology, cancer and stem cell biology. Figure 1 Complexity of eukaryotic EVs. Following their respective biogenesis, three main classes of cell-derived EVs are now recognized: exosomes, microvesicles/microparticles and apoptotic bodies. A tissue-specific EV classification is also shown to point out... Table 1 shows the suggested topics for abstract classifications of ISEV 2018, stressing the current huge human medical involvement of EVs. Presently, EVs are involved in the immune system, in cardiovascular diseases and vascular disorders, in reproduction and pregnancy, and in the nervous system. They are also involved in tissue injury, repair and remodeling; in viral, bacterial, fungal, and parasitic infections; in acute and chronic inflammatory disorders; in stem cells and in cancer, especially in tumor immunology, angiogenesis, and metastasis; as well as in neurodegenerative diseases. Table 1 Topics for 