 Open in a separate window Highlights • Multiple chemoattractants trigger phosphorylation of a core set of proteins • Most core proteins are phosphorylated by ErkB at a pPR motif • ErkB targets are almost all signaling proteins, not cytoskeletal effectors • ErkB substrates identify regulators of chemotaxis and motility Signaling via chemoattractant receptors activates the cytoskeleton to drive chemotaxis. Nichols, Paschke et al. show that in Dictyostelium cells, the atypical MAP kinase ErkB mediates the response to multiple chemoattractants by directly phosphorylating a core set of signaling proteins. Mutants in ErkB and its substrates impair chemotaxis and motility. Introduction Migration and chemotaxis are essential functions in normal development and physiology for many cell types, and their corruption underlies devastating human diseases. Crawling cells move by projecting pseudopods or blebs at their front while gaining traction from the environment to propel their body forward. In chemotaxing cells, this basic motility is steered by gradients of environmental signals. These signals are detected through surface receptors, which signal to the actin cytoskeleton, biasing projections toward the gradient. Chemotactic signaling in Dictyostelium has been studied extensively and informs our understanding of chemotaxis in neutrophils and other cell types. Key regulators of Dictyostelium chemotactic signaling have been grouped into multiple pathways, of which Ras-PI3K-PKB, Ras-TORC2-PKB, and cGMP-myosinII have attracted the most attention. Yet with the exception of the cascade from Gβ, via RacB, to Arp2/3, the path from upstream signaling events to effectors of motility remains unclear. The small GTPases Ras, Rap, and Rac are crucial, but control of their activity in time and space by large families of guanine nucleotide exchange factors and GTPase activating proteins is barely understood. As we do not know how much of the regulatory network has been identified, it is difficult to understand the global organization and flow of information from chemoattractant to motile behavior. For example, is the regulation distributed throughout the network, or focused through a limited number of nodes? To what extent are different chemotactic stimuli differentially processed by the cell? What types of signals are used at different levels of hierarchy in the network? These questions suggest that a global approach could yield important insights into chemotactic signaling. To decipher organizational principles and dynamics of the signaling networks driving directed migration, we have used quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify proteins that become rapidly phosphorylated or dephosphorylated in response to different chemoattractants in Dictyostelium. Our results demonstrate that a core set of regulatory proteins is shared among chemoattractants. Remarkably, more than half are phosphorylated at a consensus PR motif by a single protein kinase, ErkB. Null mutants have defects in both speed of movement and gradient sensing, across a broad spectrum of concentrations and shapes of chemoattractant gradients. ErkB targets found in our data identify a diverse set of regulators of chemotaxis and motility. The extent of the target set implies that the chemotactic network has previously been substantially undersampled. Overall, this study reveals a central role for ErkB and its substrates in directing chemotaxis. Results Identification of a Core Set of Chemotaxis Phosphoproteins We used SILAC labeling and mass spectrometry to identify proteins whose phosphorylation changes in response to cAMP, the best-studied chemoattractant in Dictyostelium. Cells were grown for 5 generations with or without heavy isotopes and developed to aggregation competence, where they are responsive to cAMP. Heavy cells were uniformly stimulated with a saturating dose of cAMP for 10, 45, and 360 s at 15°C to sample across the timescale of acute responses, stopped with TCA, and mixed with similarly treated unstimulated light cells. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analysis of extracted phosphopeptides identified 18,756 individual phosphorylation sites. Figure 1 Phosphorylation Changes Following Chemoattractant Treatment Only phosphorylation sites of high technical quality were analyzed further. Of these 3,591 sites, we selected those with at least a 2-fold change in phosphorylation, giving 651 with increased and 464 with decreased phosphorylation. Including multiple events on the same protein, this gave 689 proteins whose phosphorylation changed in response to cAMP. Gene ontology terms related to signal transduction, cytoskeleton, chemotaxis, and cAMP relay were enriched in the stimulated set. This set contained proteins known to be involved in cAMP signal transduction, including the TORC2 component RipA, the PI3-kinases PikA and PikB, and the protein kinase Tsunami, with previously known phosphorylations also confirmed on the cAMP receptor, cAR1, the PIP5K PikI, and the Ras scaffold Sca1. In contrast, there was little GO enrichment among proteins with decreased phosphorylation, implying that phosphorylation but not dephosphorylation is the primary functional response to cAMP. These dephosphorylated proteins were not studied further. To examine responses to a second chemoattractant, undifferentiated cells were stimulated with a saturating dose of folate for either 45 or 360 s at 15°C, and 2,188 phosphorylation sites were identified. Phosphorylation increased more than 2-fold at 132 of these sites, decreased more than 2-fold at 250, and around half were common to both time points. GO analysis showed enrichment of cellular locomotion and signal transduction functions among proteins with increased phosphorylation. To identify core components in chemotactic signaling, we intersected the cAMP and folate protein sets, finding 1,968 common phosphorylation sites, of which 86 showed a 2-fold or greater increase in phosphorylation. This set accounted for more than half of the sites upregulated by folate, but only 15% of those upregulated by cAMP, consistent with the additional roles of cAMP in development and cAMP relay, and potentially reflecting additional mechanisms for amplification of cAMP gradient sensing. Accounting for multiple phosphorylations on the same protein gave a core set of 78 proteins whose phosphorylation was stimulated at least 2-fold by both chemoattractants. This number is likely to be an underestimate due to intrinsic limitations of the technique, such as the formation of unsuitable peptides by tryptic digestion and the stringent quality criteria. Table 1 Phosphoproteins in the Core Phosphoproteome This set of proteins was strongly enriched for GO terms associated with signal transduction and chemotaxis and includes 9 protein kinases, 9 GEFs, 10 GAPs, and 5 proteins of phosphoinositide metabolism, but only 2 cytoskeletal proteins—a myosin-I and a formin. Mutants have been described in 30 of the 78 core genes, of which 18 have a described movement or chemotaxis defect and another 6 have a phenotype suggestive of such a defect although chemotaxis was not assayed directly. This represents significant enrichment of movement and chemotaxis phenotypes among mutants of the core phosphoproteome compared to all the phosphoproteins we identified. Despite this enrichment, 48 of the core proteins have no described mutant phenotype to date, implying that the signaling space of chemotaxis has previously been greatly undersampled. Phosphorylation of the Core Phosphoproteome at a Single Consensus We searched for motifs in sequences flanking phosphorylation sites of the core proteins, comparing them to all other sites in our data. We found strong overrepresentation of arginine at the +2 position associated with proline at +1, giving a pPR motif. This motif accounted for 54 of the 86 core phosphoproteome sites. The combination of proline at +1 and arginine at +2 is not a well-characterized kinase substrate motif, suggesting a limited range of proline-directed kinases might be responsible for phosphorylating most of the core phosphoproteome. Figure 2 Identification of Chemoattractant-Responsive Phosphorylation Motifs Analysis for over-representation of known kinase motifs in the core phosphoproteome showed that PKB, PKA, and a broad CAMK consensus are over-represented among cAMP stimulated sites. However, only pPR showed significant phosphorylation with both chemoattractants. We found enrichment of CK2 motifs among dephosphorylated sites, suggesting that activity of this kinase is also modulated by chemoattractants. pPR sites were phosphorylated with a characteristic delay after stimulating cells with cAMP, with little increase before 10 s but sustained phosphorylation at 360 s, which was also apparent after folate stimulation. This sets it apart from for instance PKB sites, where phosphorylation is increased within 10 s but not sustained at 360 s. Phosphorylation of pPR Sites Is Mediated by the MAP Kinase ErkB Having identified pPR as the major phospho-motif in the chemotactic proteome, we sought to identify the kinase responsible for its phosphorylation. We took a genetic approach to test candidate kinases and delineate control of phosphorylation at this site. We identified an antibody against pTxR, which recognized proteins whose phosphorylation is stimulated by cAMP and folate with similar delayed kinetics to the PR sites assayed by mass spectrometry, and of molecular weights and temporal profiles distinct from substrates of the kinases PKB and PKBR1. Figure 3 Phosphorylation of PR Sites in Response to cAMP and Folate Depends on ErkB and Has Unusually Prolonged Kinetics Using this antibody, we screened mutants in chemotactic signal transduction for defects in phosphorylation response to folate. The response was lost in mutants of the heterotrimeric G-protein subunit Gα4, which is specific to folate and Gβ, showing that it is mediated through a GPCR and its coupled heterotrimeric subunit. Resting levels of phosphorylation were higher in these mutants, suggesting that heterotrimeric G-proteins may mediate both activation and inhibition of phosphorylation in parallel. To identify additional upstream regulators, we screened a panel of signaling, chemotaxis, and cytoskeleton mutants for aberrant phosphorylation dynamics at PR. There was no clear effect on phosphorylation in PKB − /PKBR1 − double, PI3K1-5 − quintuple or Rictor − knockout mutants, suggesting signaling through these proteins is not required for pTxR phosphorylation. The phosphorylation response was also intact in knockouts of RasC − /G −, the PI4P5-kinase PikI, GcA − /SgaA −, IplA, the catalytic subunit of PKA, the phospholipase PLA 2, and SCAR/WAVE. In short, deletion of components of the pathways most commonly considered to control chemotaxis did not affect phosphorylation of the pTxR sites. An antibody against the phosphorylated activation loop of MAPK detected a band with kinetics strongly resembling pTxR phosphorylations and of the same molecular weight as the Dictyostelium MAPK, ErkB,. Following folate stimulation, pTxR phosphorylation lagged behind ErkB phosphorylation but appeared simultaneously with it following cAMP stimulation. ErkB is an atypical MAPK related to mammalian ERK7 and ERK8. To test whether ErkB is responsible for pTxR phosphorylations, we created null mutants in ErkB, the classical MAP kinase ErkA, and double null mutants of both ErkA and ErkB. In ErkA knockout mutants, phosphorylation was induced normally by either folate or cAMP, showing ErkA is not responsible for pTxR phosphorylations. We then tested the phosphorylation response of ErkB null mutants to chemotactic stimulation. After 7 hr of development induced by pulses of cAMP, erkB − cells did not express the developmental marker contact sites A, indicating they did not develop to a cAMP-sensitive, aggregation competent state, thus confounding experiments with cAMP. We therefore stimulated undeveloped cells with folate. The results are clear: basal pTxR phosphorylation was almost eliminated in ErkB null mutants and folate no longer stimulated phosphorylation at this site. In contrast, phosphorylation of the HM motifs of PKB and PKBR1, as well as PKB/PKBR1 substrates, were at wild-type levels. This shows that phosphorylation of the pTxR motif depends on ErkB, while other folate-stimulated phosphorylation responses do not. Phosphorylations mediated by ErkB were long-lived compared to known signaling, cytoskeletal, and cell-level responses, most of which adapt within seconds to minutes of stimulation. To better define the timescale of this extended activity, we used conditions to maintain prolonged stimulation of cells, either with high folate or non-hydrolyzable cAMP. An adenylyl-cyclase mutant was used to avoid complications from endogenous cAMP signaling. Strikingly, with both folate and Sp-cAMPS stimulation, many ErkB target proteins remained persistently phosphorylated for the full 30 min of the time course. In contrast, phosphorylation of PKB/PKBR1 substrates rapidly adapted over a much shorter timescale. For both folate and Sp-cAMPS, the activating phosphorylation of ErkB was shorter lived than phosphorylation of many of its targets, with little signal remaining 10 min after stimulation. After this time, phosphorylation of some targets also decayed, while others remained stable. To investigate dephosphorylation kinetics after stimulus withdrawal, a dilution protocol was used: cells were stimulated with 200 nM folate and diluted 50-fold after 1 min. ErkB target phosphorylations then disappeared at characteristic rates over the next 10 min at half-lives from 30 s to several minutes, with the most stable bands corresponding to those persisting under continuous stimulation. Control cells diluted into 200 nM folate behaved similarly to undiluted cells. These results show that ErkB activity adapts much more slowly than many other responses to chemoattractant and that some ErkB targets remain phosphorylated for prolonged periods provided chemoattractant is present. Differential phosphatase activity presumably accounts for the different rates of target dephosphorylation, providing an additional level of regulation. To definitively test that PR phosphorylations depend on ErkB, we employed SILAC. After stimulating erkB − cells with folate for 45 s, 2,179 phosphorylation sites were identified. With only one exception, phosphorylation of the pPR sites was not stimulated by folate in erkB − mutants: either the phosphopeptide was not detected at all, or if it was, phosphorylation was not stimulated by folate. The exception, T627 of GefL, is presumably phosphorylated by a different kinase. We confirmed through the presence of other peptides that many of the ErkB target proteins are still expressed in erkB − cells, showing loss of pPR phosphorylation is not due to loss of the target protein. The overall stimulation for non PR sites in wild-type and mutant experiments was similar. For example, PKB substrates show little difference between wild-type and mutants. Only pPR sites showed a decreased response in erkB − mutants. Figure 4 Phosphoproteomic Characterization of erkB − Cells Confirms Link to pPR Sites The pPR Motif Is the Preferred Substrate for Direct Phosphorylation by ErkB Phosphorylation of the pPR motif clearly depends on ErkB, but it remained possible that phosphorylation is mediated by an intermediary kinase. To examine this possibility, we asked whether ErkB could directly phosphorylate such sites. ErkB was purified as a 6xHis-tagged fusion from Escherichia coli, giving a protein of the expected molecular weight but already phosphorylated, as indicated by an anti-phospho MAPK antibody and treatment with λ-phosphatase. Purified ErkB was active in kinase assays against the myelin basic protein, a known MAPK substrate, as previously reported but not against a GST control. Figure 5 ErkB Directly and Specifically Phosphorylates pPR To what extent is ErkB kinase activity specific to the PR motif? We examined ErkB specificity using a library of peptides based on a 17-amino acid peptide flanking S325 of EppA, a pPR site identified previously and in our SILAC experiments. ErkB efficiently phosphorylated the wild-type peptide sequence and a peptide with the phospho-acceptor serine substituted to threonine. Substitution of P+1 or R+2 with alanine effectively abolished phosphorylation, as did double replacement of P+1 and R+2 with alanine. A PKC-ɛ substrate peptide with arginine in the +2 position gave a trace of activity. Strikingly, two sequence variants matching the classical MAPK substrate consensus PXpSP were not phosphorylated by ErkB. To test ErkB activity on an intact protein, we determined the sites phosphorylated on MBP in our kinase assays, using mass spectrometry. MBP has 25 S and T residues available for phosphorylation, and the input protein was essentially un-phosphorylated. We observed strong phosphorylation at T94, which lies within a pPR motif in MBP. The S38 residue, in a different region of the protein, outside an identifiable consensus, was also phosphorylated, as was T97, which is within a classical MAPK motif and adjacent to T94. The T97 residue was only used when T94 was also phosphorylated. We noticed that the ErkA activation loop is not phosphorylated in erkB - mutants and that ErkA has an SPR motif close to its N terminus, thus raising the possibility of cross-phosphorylation of ErkA by ErkB. The phosphorylated site was not detected in vivo by mass spectrometry—there is not sufficient lysine or arginine density to yield a suitable tryptic peptide. However, testing this idea in vitro, we found that His-tagged ErkA is clearly phosphorylated at this site by ErkB in kinase assays and not at the activation loop itself. This experiment confirms, with a second protein, that the PR motif is a preferred substrate for ErkB. ErkB Activity Depends on Activation Loop Residues, which Are Targets for Autophosphorylation Since ErkB expressed in E. coli is phosphorylated and active in kinase assays, it is possible that ErkB can autophosphorylate, as described for the mammalian atypical MAPK ERK8. To test this directly, we dephosphorylated purified ErkB and incubated it with ATP to allow self-modification. As controls, we used GST and non-phosphorylated ErkA. ErkA is a classical Erk1/2 type MAPK and requires activation by the MAPKK MekA, not present in the assay. Only ErkB could autophosphorylate. No phosphorylation of GST or ErkA was detected. To explore the mechanism of ErkB autophosphorylation, we mutated the activation loop residues to alanine singly and in combination. Immunoblotting confirmed loss of pMAPK signal for all versions. In kinase assays with MBP substrate, phosphorylation by single mutants of ErkB was reduced to 5%–7% of that by wild-type. This residual activity was lost in the double phospho-null. Mass spectrometry showed that phosphorylation of MBP at T94 and T97 was at least 500-fold decreased in the double phospho-null mutant. When tested against peptides, phosphorylation by single mutants was 1%–3% and by the double phospho-null mutant was 0.1%–0.5% of wild-type. These results show that ErkB kinase activity depends on phosphorylation of the activation loop, with phosphorylation of both T176 and Y178 required for full activity. Is autophosphorylation of T176 and Y178 sequential or independent? Mass spectrometry showed both T176 and Y178 were phosphorylated on ErkB expressed in bacteria. Similarly, both sites were phosphorylated on ErkB after dephosphorylation followed by auto-rephosphorylation. When we tested purified T176A and Y178A phospho-null mutants in the same analysis, we found the remaining phosphorylatable residue was phosphorylated to a similar extent as the wild-type protein, suggesting phosphorylation of the activation loop residues is independent. ErkB Is Essential for Chemotaxis and Efficient Movement The large-scale modification of proteins by ErkB in response to chemoattractant implies it has an important role in chemotaxis. Chemotaxis to cAMP could not be tested because erkB − cells do not develop to the cAMP-responsive stage. We therefore examined chemotaxis to folate by undifferentiated cells. Wild-type cells chemotax well to a needle releasing folate. In contrast, ErkB null cells are strongly defective, moving much more slowly, with a chemotactic index close to zero. For a more quantitative long-term analysis of chemotaxis in the ErkB mutant, we used an under-agarose chemotaxis assay using cells grown in liquid media. Amoebae under a layer of agarose containing a uniform concentration of folate locally degrade the folate to create a gradient of chemoattractant. This self-generated gradient moves with the wave of chemotaxing cells as they traverse long distances. erkB − cells had strong defects in cell speed, directness, and chemotactic index, as well as a minor defect in persistence. While these chemotaxis defects were not observed in erkA − mutants, erkA − /erkB − double mutants were even slower with reduced directness. erkB − mutants were strongly defective over a broad dynamic range of chemoattractant concentration. Mixing fluorescently labeled wild-type and erkB − cells in the same assay showed that chemotaxis defects of erkB − cells remained when in the presence of a folate gradient generated by wild-type cells, so they cannot be attributed to an inability of erkB − cells to degrade folate and establish a gradient. Figure 6 erkB − Mutant Cells Have Severe Defects in Motility and Chemotaxis Chemotaxis defects are often inferred when cells are merely slow. To test whether slow movement was the root cause of the erkB − chemotaxis defects, we used erkB hypomorph strains where residual pErkB could be detected, though at a much lower level than wild-type. Hypomorph cells moved with nearly double the speed of erkB − cells but had directness, persistence, chemotaxis index, and developmental defects similar to those of the knockout mutant. Taken together, these data indicate that ErkB regulates both cell motility and chemotaxis over a large dynamic range of chemoattractant concentrations. Do the defects in chemotaxis in the erkB − mutants reflect a specific chemotaxis defect, or a general inability of sick cells to perform complex functions? To evaluate this, we examined other cellular phenotypes. Both erkB − and erkA − /erkB − cells grew robustly in liquid media with no defects in particle or fluid uptake. Liquid-grown erkB − cells were of normal size, although double mutants were smaller. Under agar chemotaxis experiments used cells grown in liquid culture, indicating a general cell welfare issue could not explain the strong chemotaxis defects of the erkB − mutants. Further supporting this conclusion, although erkB − cells form very small plaques on bacterial lawns, they do not have a generalized problem with actin-based protrusions, as they phagocytosed a range of different types and sizes of particles at wild-type rates, despite reduced cell size. What cellular aspects of the response to chemoattractant are perturbed in ErkB nulls? Confocal imaging showed erkB − cells expressing an F-actin reporter make dynamic F-actin projections, but these are generally ineffective at moving the cell: cells formed local projections, but the rear remained anchored. ErkB − cells were also characterized by an abundance of transient F-actin accumulations on their basal surface. These are rare in wild-type cells. Video S1. F-Actin Structures in Wild-Type and erkB − Cells, Related to Figure 6: Video of F-actin structures in Ax2 wild-type and erkB − undifferentiated amoebae during random motility. Maximum intensity projection of a confocal z-stack. Scale bar, 10 μm. Cells were imaged at 2 frames per min for 15 min. Movie frame rate 15 fps. Click here to view. Polymerization assays showed actin is significantly over-assembled in ErkB null cells as measured by the proportion of F-actin to total actin. Dynamic actin polymerization in response to chemotactic stimulation occurred with similar kinetics to wild-type, although the relative magnitude of the response is reduced in erkB − cells, reflecting higher resting levels of F-actin. Candidate Regulators in the Core Chemotaxis Phosphoproteome Have Roles in Chemotaxis and Cell Motility Our phosphoproteomics screen reveals many potential regulators of chemotaxis. We evaluated three of these: the RhoGAPs GacG and GacH and the histidine kinase DhkI. GacG − cells formed expanded colony-feeding fronts on bacterial lawns, usually indicative of aberrant motility. In folate chemotaxis assays, these cells moved much faster than wild-type, though with wild-type persistence and chemotactic index. Undifferentiated gac G − cells were more polarized than wild-type and accumulated F-actin at the leading edge. Developed gacH − and dhkI − cells had defects in persistence in a 1 μM cAMP gradient. CsaA expression indicated wild-type developmental timing of gacH − and dhkI − cells showing that the chemotaxis defects observed are not the result of delayed development. As might be expected for cells with defective cAMP chemotaxis, formation of multicellular aggregates was delayed in gacH − and dhkI − cells. Thus, all tested candidates have a role in chemotaxis or cell movement. Discussion We have identified a core set of 78 proteins that are rapidly phosphorylated in response to two different chemoattractants. Strikingly, the majority are phosphorylated at an PR site by a single kinase, the MAP kinase, ErkB. This is shown both by the loss of these phosphorylations when ErkB is ablated and the specificity of ErkB in kinase assays. This places ErkB as the dominant protein kinase regulating the core chemotactic phosphoproteome, phosphorylating 52 of the 78 proteins, with the much-studied kinases PKB and PKBR1 accounting for only six. This core phosphoproteome is highly enriched in proteins already implicated in cell movement and chemotaxis but contains a greater number of candidates whose role is not yet explored. All candidates evaluated showed significant roles in chemotaxis or motility, so we expect the remainder of the cohort will yield many more. The core set is enriched in signaling proteins including GEFs and GAPs for small G-proteins, protein kinases, and phosphatases. Surprisingly, there were only two clear cytoskeletal proteins, implying ErkB is a regulator of regulators in the signaling network, rather than a direct regulator of effectors. This ErkB target specificity potentially suggests that chemoattractants regulate the cytoskeleton by routes other than protein phosphorylation, perhaps through small G-proteins, whose regulators are recruited to the cytoskeleton by chemotactic stimulation. ErkB is a member of the conserved yet relatively unstudied MAPK15 clade of MAP kinases, along with mammalian ERK7 and ERK8. Neither the substrate specificity nor regulation of this clade is well understood. Our results, both in vivo and in vitro, show that ErkB strongly phosphorylates substrates at a PR motif. This preference has not been described before for any kinase to our knowledge, but it is notable that ERK8 also phosphorylates a TPR site in MBP, suggesting a PR substrate is a conserved feature of this group of MAP kinases. However, with over 1,000 PR sequences in the Dictyostelium proteome, other interactions may also contribute to ErkB specificity. Full activation of ErkB requires dual phosphorylation of the TXY motif in the activation loop. This phosphorylation is stimulated by signaling through the GPCRs for folate or cAMP. We have demonstrated that stimulation depends on both Gα and Gβ subunits of heterotrimeric G-proteins. We found ErkB strongly activates itself by autophosphorylation. Human ERK8 is proposed to self-activate by autophosphorylation without an upstream kinase, and we suggest a similar scenario for ErkB. If so, there may be no need for upstream activating kinases, with pathway regulation achieved by autophosphorylation and phosphatase activity. ErkB may control its own activity through feedback, as targets include the putative MAPK phosphatases MkpA and Mpl1, which are phosphorylated in response to cAMP and folate, respectively. There may also be cross-talk between ErkA and ErkB, since phosphorylation of the activation loop of ErkA in cells depends on ErkB, and ErkB phosphorylates ErkA at a remote PR site in vitro. The consequences and functions of this phosphorylation remain to be explored. ErkB null cells are defective in both speed of movement and chemotactic orientation in a variety of folate gradients, presumably reflecting cumulative effects of mis-regulation of target proteins. Null mutants in these targets present diverse movement phenotypes. Mutants of the RhoGAP, GacG, described here, chemotax nearly twice as fast as wild-type to folate but are almost incapable of fluid uptake by macropinocytosis. GacG is phosphorylated by PKB as well as ErkB and could therefore integrate signaling via both pathways. The RhoGAP, GacH, and histidine kinase, DhkI, have subtle defects in cAMP chemotaxis, with DhkI possibly regulating intracellular cAMP levels through a phospho-relay to the cAMP phosphodiesterase, RegA. The common feature of regulation by ErkB is that phosphorylation of its target proteins is delayed after chemotactic stimulation, but prolonged in continuously stimulated cells, up to 30 min. This sets ErkB phosphorylations apart from other well-described signaling events, such as PIP3 or cGMP production, or activation of PKB and PKBR1 protein kinases, which are more rapid and adapt in the continued presence of ligand, returning to basal levels within minutes. This difference suggests that ErkB plays a distinct role in chemotaxis. We speculate ErkB may be required for slow adaptive responses to ambient levels of chemoattractant and for cellular memory of past levels. Adaptation extends the dynamic range of chemotaxis and is proposed to act at multiple points in chemoattractant signaling. Memory allows aggregating cells, which experience waves of chemoattractant, to move in the front of the wave, but not reverse in the back. Both require cells to stably modify signaling components when signal is present and for this modification to decay once signal is withdrawn, as is observed for ErkB phosphorylations. In conclusion, this work changes our perception of chemotactic signal transduction in Dictyostelium, placing ErkB as a dominant protein kinase, which acts on a core set of chemoattractant-stimulated targets. ErkB is regulated by heterotrimeric G-proteins and autophosphorylation and triggers persistent, non-adapting phosphorylations. ErkB is crucial for cell motility and chemotaxis, and its targets include regulators of chemotaxis and motility. Globally, our analysis implies the complexity of the chemotactic signaling network was greatly undersampled by traditional methods. We propose ErkB regulates multiple activities relating to the physical response of the cell, not by direct action on the cytoskeleton, but by coordinating a large panel of regulators of cytoskeletal dynamics. STAR★Methods Key Resources Table Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, John Nichols. Experimental Model and Subject Details Growth of Dictyostelium Discoideum Wild-type and mutant D. discoideum amoebae were grown at 22°C, either on a surface or in shaken suspension in HL5 with 100 μg/ml dihydrostreptomycin, or in association with Klebsiella aerogenes on SM agar. For chemoattractant-stimulation immunoblot experiments cells were grown either in shaken suspension with HL5, or on clearing plates with K. aerogenes on SM agar. For needle chemotaxis assays, F-actin polymerization assays and immunoblot assays of resting F-actin, cells were grown on clearing plates with K. aerogenes on SM agar. Under agar chemotaxis experiments were performed with cells grown on petri dishes supplemented with HL5. For confocal imaging experiments, cells were grown in SorMC buffer with K. aerogenes at OD 600 = 2, supplemented with Geneticin. SILAC Labeling of Dictyostelium Discoideum Wild-type or erkB - amoebae were SILAC-labelled by shaken suspension growth for 5-6 generations in either defined liquid medium, or in heat-killed SILAC-labelled E. coli in KK 2 -MC supplemented with 60 mM proline, 100 μg/ml dihydrostreptomycin, 100μg/ml ampicillin. For unlabelled amoebae, cells were grown for the same period by the same methods, with heavy isotope arginine and lysine substituted with standard L-arginine and L-lysine at the same concentrations. SILAC Labeling of E. coli E. coli strain AT713, λ -, cysJ43, argA21, lysA22, rpsL104, malT1, xyl-7, mtlA2, thiE1 ), an arginine and lysine auxotroph used previously for SILAC labelling, was used as a food source to SILAC label Dictyostelium amoebae. For SILAC-labelling of E.coli, an M9 medium base was supplemented with glucose and amino acids. Cultures of both unlabelled and labelled cells were prepared. An LB starter culture of AT713 was washed in M9 minimal salts, before being used to inoculate a 5 ml SILAC starter culture. Parallel cultures lacking either arginine, lysine or both were used to check auxotrophic requirement of the strain. After overnight growth, the starter cultures were used 1 in 1000 to inoculate larger SILAC growth cultures which were grown to OD 1.8 before harvesting by centrifugation and four washes with KK 2. Aliquots of cell pellets were frozen on dry ice and stored at -20°C until use. Method Details Stimulation of SILAC Labeled D. Discoideum For cAMP stimulation, labelled and unlabelled cells were washed in KK 2 -MC and resuspended at 2x10 7 cells/ml. Cells were starved in shaken suspension for 1 hour then pulsed with 90 nM cAMP every 6 minutes for 5 hours. Cells were then washed 3x in KK 2 -MC and resuspended in KK 2 + 5 mM caffeine for 30 minutes to basalate cAMP responses in shaken suspension. Cells were washed twice in KK 2 -MC at 4°C before being resuspended in 15°C KK 2 -MC at 1.5x10 7 cells/ml. At 15°C, cells were added to 1/40 th volume of either concentrated cAMP in KK 2 -MC or KK 2 -MC alone. Final concentration of cAMP for 10 s and 45 s stimulation was 1 μM, for 360 s stimulation 200 μM. Following the desired stimulation time, an equal volume of TCA buffer was added to lyse cells and denature protein. Protein was pelleted by centrifugation at 4°C and washed twice in ice-cold acetone before being resuspended in urea buffer. Resuspended pellets from labelled and unlabelled samples were combined. For folate stimulation, labelled cells and unlabelled cells were washed in KK 2 -MC, before being resuspended at 2x10 7 cells/ml in KK 2 -MC in shaken suspension for 20 minutes before being washed twice in KK 2 -MC and resuspended at 1.5x10 7 cells/ml in 15°C KK 2 -MC. At 15°C cells were then added to 1/40 th volume of either concentrated folate in KK 2 -MC or KK 2 -MC alone. Final concentration of folate was 50 μM for 45 s stimulation, 200 μM for 360 s stimulation. Following desired stimulation time, an equal volume of TCA buffer was added and samples handled as for cAMP treatments. Sample Digest and Phosphopeptide Enrichment Protein samples were digested with trypsin as described previously with some modifications. Briefly, protein samples in urea buffer were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Then, the samples were digested with 400:1ratio of Lys-C for 4hr at 25°C. Next, the samples were diluted from 8M to 2 M urea with 20 mM Hepes and were digested with 100:1 ratio of trypsin at 25°C for 17 hr. Digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Any precipitates were removed by centrifugation at 4200 rpm for 20 min. The supernatants were desalted using Sep-Pak Plus Short tC18 cartridges. Bound peptides were eluted with 60% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid and lyophilized. Strong cation exchange chromatography was performed using an Ultimate 3000 Nano/Capillary LC System. Dried peptides were dissolved in 200 μL of solvent A and loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL A column, 4.6 mm x 204 mm. The peptides were separated using a 45 min linear gradient of 0-23% solvent B at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Fifteen fractions, in 3 min intervals, were collected and lyophilized. Each fraction was resuspended in 0.1% TFA and desalted using home-made Poros R3 reversed phase column. The eluted peptides were lyophilized prior to TiO2 enrichment. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO 2 titansphere-chromatography. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in a solution which contained 2, 4-dihydroxybenzoic acid in 80% MeCN, 2% TFA and incubated for 15 min with TiO 2 beads that were prewashed in the same solution. Beads were packed on top of a C8 stage tip and washed sequentially with loading buffer and 80 % MeCN, 2%TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 40ul ammonia solution, pH 10.5, followed by 20 μl 50% MeCN, 0.05% TFA, and partially dried down using a SpeedVac. Samples were then acidified by addition of 4% formic acid and desalted with a C18 Stage tip that contained 1.5 μl of Poros R3 resin. Bound peptides were eluted with 30% MeCN, 4% FA and 80% MeCN, 4% FA. This solution was then partially dried down with SpeedVac and ready for mass spectrometry analysis. In parallel, phosphopeptides were enriched using Phos-Select IMAC resin. Desalted peptides were resuspended in 30% MeCN, 0.25 M acetic acid and 15-30 μl of IMAC beads, previously equilibrated with the loading solution was added. After 45 min incubation at room temperature, beads were transferred to C8 stage tip and washed 3 times with loading solution. Phosphopeptides were eluted sequentially with 40 μl of 0.4 M NH 3 and 20 μl of 50% MeCN, 4% FA. Phosphopeptides solution was acidified, partially dried, and desalted with a C18 Stage tip that contained 1.5 μl of Poros R3 resin. This solution was then partially dried and ready for mass spectrometry analysis. Sample Digest for MS with Non-SILAC Samples Protein samples, 5 μg in 20 mM HEPES, were reduced and alkylated as above. They were then digested with either trypsin, Lys-C or elastase. A small aliquot of each desalted sample was used for LC MS MS protein identification and the rest of the samples were used for IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment, as detailed above. Mass Spectrometry Data Acquisition Liquid chromatography was performed on a fully automated Ultimate U3000 Nano LC System fitted with a 100 μm x 2 cm PepMap100 C 18 nano trap column and a 75 μm×25 cm reverse phase PepMap100 C 18 nano column. Samples were separated using a binary gradient consisting of buffer A and buffer B. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 3 to 30% buffer B with a flow rate 250 nl/min. The outlet of the nano column was directly interfaced via a nanospray ion source to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos or a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometers were operated in standard data dependent mode, performed survey full-scan in the Orbitrap analyzer, with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z =400 for Velos, followed by MS2 acquisitions of the 20 most intense ions in the LTQ ion trap. FTMS target values of 1e6 and ion trap MSn target values of 1e4 were used. Maximum FTMS scan accumulation times were set at 250 ms and maximum ion trap MSn scan accumulation times were set at 200 ms. The Orbitrap measurements were internally calibrated using the lock mass of polydimethylcyclosiloxane at m/z 445.120025. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, exclusion list of 500 and exclusion duration of 30 s. Mass Spectrometry Data Processing Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.0.13.13 with Mascot as search engine. For all data sets, the default parameters in MaxQuant were used, except MS/MS tolerance at 0.6 Da and SILAC ratios calculations were performed on razor and unique peptides with a ratio count of one. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, N-terminal protein acetylation, N-pyroglutamate and phosphorylation of STY as variable modifications. MaxQuant processed data was searched against the Dictyostelium discoideum proteome FASTA database ; downloaded from dictyBase April 2013). For ErkA in vitro phosphorylation MS experiment, data was analysed in Scaffold. Classification of Phosphoproteomic Data Phosphorylation sites were classified by data quality and replication. Class I phosphorylation sites have a localisation probability ≥0.75 in at least one biological replicate and a H/L count of ≥2 in ≥2 biological replicates. Class II sites have a localisation probability ≥0.75 in at least one biological replicate and a H/L count ≥2 in only one biological replicate. Class III sites have a localisation probability of ≥0.75 in at least one biological replicate and H/L counts all <2. Class IV sites have a localisation probability of ≥ 0.75 in at least one biological replicate but were not assigned any H/L ratio. Class V sites have localisation probability of <0.75 and cannot confidently be assigned to a single amino acid. Only Class I sites were used for downstream analysis. The H/L ratio reported for individual biological replicates is the median value of all H/L ratios measured. The mean value of this reported H/L ratio for all biological replicates was used in further analyses. Biological replicate n for SILAC experiments: 10s cAMP n=3, 45 s cAMP n=3, 360 s cAMP n=2, 45 s folate n=3, 360 s folate n=2, erkB - 45 s folate n=2. Testing Heavy Isotope Incorporation To determine the incorporation efficiency of heavy amino acids in SILAC-labelled E. coli and D. discoideum, lysates from heavy labelled cells were separated on 1D-SDS PAGE gel, digested with trypsin and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Raw files were processed using MaxQuant with the re-quantify function not selected. The output peptides.txt files were used to calculate the rate of K and R incorporations. The incorporation efficiency for both lysine and arginine was >95%. Chemoattractant Treatment for Immunoblotting Cells were grown either in axenic shaken suspension in HL5 with 100 μg/ml dihydrostreptomycin, or as clearing plates with Klebsiella aerogenes on SM agar. Cells were harvested and washed in KK 2 -MC. For cAMP and Sp-cAMPS stimulations, cells were prepared as for cAMP stimulation in SILAC experiments, with cAMP pulsing for 4 hours duration. In Sp-cAMPS stimulations, acaA - cells were used to avoid the effects of endogenous cAMP release. For folate stimulations, cells were prepared as for folate stimulation in SILAC experiments. Cells were resuspended at 2x10 7 cells/ml with aliquots added to 1/40 th volume of concentrated chemoattractant in KK 2 -MC or, for T 0 and buffer control samples, KK 2 -MC. After desired stimulation time, cells were lysed by addition of ½ volume of 3x LDS sample buffer supplemented with 2-mercaptoethanol, protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors and vortexing. For long-term chemoattractant stimulations, cells at 2x10 7 cells/ml were shaken during stimulation with chemoattractant, with aliquots taken for lysis at different time points. For chemoattractant dilution experiments, shaken cells were stimulated with chemoattractant, with aliquots taken at different time-points pre-- and post-dilution with either KK 2 -MC or KK 2 -MC containing the original concentration of chemoattractant. Samples of equal cell number were lysed by addition of equal volume 20% TCA and precipitated protein collected by centrifugation before resuspension in 1x LDS sample buffer with 2-mercaptoethanol, protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors. For CsaA expression experiments, cells were prepared and pulsed with cAMP as for cAMP SILAC experiments, with samples taken at hourly intervals over a total of 4 or 7 hours pulsing. For assaying regulation of pTxR phosphorylation and ErkB phosphorylation following folate stimulation; erkB -, erkA -, erkAB -, piaA -, gpbA - and pikA - /pikB - /pikC - /pikF - /pikG - cells were compared with the parental strain Ax2. pkbA - /pkgB - cells were compared with the parental strain Ax3. gpaD - cells were compared with JH10 wild-type cells. Stimulation of ErkB phosphorylation in the erkB - REMI mutant strain AK240 was compared with Ax3 wild-type cells. Immunoblot Assays of Protein Phosphorylation Cell lysate samples were boiled and separated by SDS-PAGE on 4-12% Bis-Tris gels before blotting onto PVDF membrane. Immunoblotting was carried out by standard procedures: membranes were blocked with 5% BSA in TBS-T Tween-20) for 1 hour at room temperature, antibodies were diluted in TBS-T + 5% BSA, wash steps were conducted with TBS-T. Primary antibodies were incubated overnight at 4°C Secondary antibodies were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Chemiluminescent detection was conducted using ECL. Quantification of western blots was conducted using LI-COR Image Studio Lite v5.2.5. Band intensity for individual phosphoproteins was normalised to zero in t = 0 sample and 100 in sample with maximum band intensity. To detect a subset of pPR motif phosphorylations, an anti-pTxR primary antibody was used. Activation loop phosphorylation of ErkB was detected with anti phospho p44/42 MAPK. Phospho-substrates of PKB and PKBR1 were detected using anti-phospho- Akt substrates. HM motif phosphorylation of PKB and PKBR1 was detected using anti phospho p70 S6 kinase Thr389. Anti alpha tubulin was used to detect tubulin as a loading control. To test the developmental marker protein CsA, anti-CsA primary antibody was used. Expression of 6xHis Tagged Erk Proteins For bacterial overexpression the coding sequences of ErkA and ErkB were amplified from cDNA using the primer pairs oPI390/oPI391 and oPI341/oPI343. For the cloning of the resulting PCR products into the pRSET-6xHis expression, plasmid DNA was cut with Fse I and Acs I respectively. Point mutagenesis for ErkB was performed using the primer pairs oPI377/oPI378, oPI373/oPI374 and oPI367/oPI368 using pPI486 as template. See Table S6 for details of oligonucleotide sequences. E. coli cells -RIL) were transformed with the desired bacterial expression plasmid: pPI486, pPI528, pPI544, pPI560 or pPI580. For overexpression cells were grown to an optical density of 0.6 at 37°C and chilled down to 16°C before expression was induced with 0.5 mM IPTG. Cells were grown over night at 16°C for protein overexpression. Cultures were harvested at 5000 x g. The collected cells pellets were frozen down in liquid N 2 in presence of 4 mg chicken egg lysozyme and stored at -20°C overnight. Cell pellets were resuspended in IMAC buffer containing phosphatase inhibitors and protease inhibitors. The final cell lysis was done by sonication. The resulting cell lysate was spun down at 22 000 x g for 30 min and 4°C. The collected supernatant was bound to a NiNTA column. The column was washed three times with IMAC buffer with increasing concentration of imidazole supplemented with 5 mM ATP and 5 mM MgCl 2. For protein elution IMAC buffer with 150 mM imidazole was used. The collected elutions were dialysed overnight in a 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10% glycerol containing buffer. The purified protein was concentrated using Vivaspin 20 columns, aliquoted and stored at -80°C. In Vitro Kinase Assay Phosphorylation of substrate proteins or peptides was performed for 30 min at 30°C in kinase buffer using 100 ng purified 6xHis-ErkB and 10 μg protein or peptide substrate in a 30 μl reaction volume. Protease and phosphatase inhibitors were added before starting the reaction. For the auto-phosphorylation assay 10 μg of kinase was used. 20 μl samples were spotted on P81-Whatman-paper squares and washed three times with 1% phosphoric acid for 10 min, followed by a final 5 min wash in acetone. The papers were dried and transferred into scintillation vials containing 20 ml LSC cocktail and 33 P incorporation was measured in a scintillation analyser. Where substrate proteins were analysed, the remaining 10 μl of each reaction was mixed with 4x SDS-sample buffer and separated on a gel. The dried gel was exposed to an imaging plate and developed using a phospho-imager. For mass spectrometry analysis 10 μg 6xHis-ErkB was used and the kinase buffer used was as above, but without TritonX and 0.002 μCi/ml 33 P-γATP. Generation of Dictyostelium Knockout Mutants Knockout mutants of ErkA, ErkB and DhkI were made in the Ax2 wild-type background by homologous recombination. Regions flanking ErkB were amplified by PCR using primer pairs SK420/SK421 and SK416/SK417. Regions flanking ErkA were amplified using primer pairs SK410/SK411 and SK412/SK413, while regions flanking DhkI were amplified using the primer pairs SK328/SK329 and SK330/331. These fragments were recombined into the plasmid pKOSG-IBA-Dicty1 using the Stargate cloning system and the resulting plasmids cloned into E. coli and validated by Sanger sequencing. Plasmid DNA was digested with Eco RI or PstI and transformed into Ax2 amoebae by electroporation. Briefly: amoebae were harvested then washed and resuspended in cold H50 buffer. 4x10 6 cells in a volume of 100μl were mixed with 15μg digested plasmid DNA in a 1mm gap cuvette, electroporated, and recovered into HL5. Ax2 transformants were selected by growth in HL5 containing 10 μg/ml Blasticidin in 24-well plates. Resistant cells were screened for by PCR using primers flanking the homologous recombination site. Wells yielding PCR products indicating knockout cells were harvested and plated with K. aerogenes on SM agar to isolate clonal populations of cells that were subsequently re-screened by PCR to confirm gene disruption. For the ErkA/ErkB double knockout a second construct for the disruption of ErkB was generated using a hygromycin resistance cassette. The flanking regions were amplified using the primer pairs oPI172/oPI173 and oPI174/oPI175. The first fragment was cloned via its Ngo MIV sites into pDM1081. The second fragment was integrated into the vectors Bgl II/ Spe I sites. The fidelity of the recombination arms was confirmed with Sanger sequencing. The plasmid was linearised with Spe I/ Fse I and transformed into erkA - cells. 60 μg/ml Hygromycin in HL5 was used for used for selection of clones. Resistant cells were screened using the primer pairs SK426/SK429 and oPI196/oPI265. See Table S6 for details of oligonucleotide sequences. Growth on Bacterial Lawn Dictyostelium cells grown on bacterial plates or in axenic shaking suspension were washed once and resuspended in 1 ml KK 2 buffer. Cell concentration was determined and serial dilutions performed to bring cells to a final concentration of 20 cells/ml in a stationary K. aerogenes suspension. To guarantee single colony growth 1 ml of this suspension was spread on three SM-agar plates. Colony diameters were measured after 4,5 and 6 days. Uptake Assays Macropinocytosis and bead uptake assays were performed using flow cytometry. To ensure the use of healthy cells for the uptake assays and to avoid any influence on uptake caused by the bacterial growth defect of erkB - mutant cells, only cells grown in plates supplemented with HL5 were used. The day before the assay cells were seeded at a density of 2x10 5 cells/ml in 96-well plates, using a total volume of 50 μl. Uptake was measured the next day after 60 min of feeding. For macropinocytosis assay cells were fed with HL5 medium supplemented with TRITC-dextran at final concentration of 0.5 mg/ml. Bead uptake was performed with 1.5 μm YG beads used at a final concentration of 10 8 beads/ml. Following incubation cells were washed twice in KK 2 and resuspended in 100 μl KK 2 containing 5 mM sodium azide to detach cells and prevent exocytosis, Cells were analysed with a flow cytometer using the high-throughput sampling attachment. Data analysis was performed with FlowJo software. For the yeast uptake assay, cells were fed for 60 min with TRITC-labelled yeast particles. After quenching with trypan blue, yeast particle uptake was quantified by counting particles internalized by 100 amoebae using a fluorescence microscope equipped with a 20x air objective. Cell Size The size of cells was determined using an Eclipse flow cytometer. Cells were taken from bacterial suspension or plates supplemented with HL5 medium and washed 2x before being resuspended in KK 2 -MC. For measurement, samples were passed through a 20 μm filter unit to remove cell aggregates. Low-density samples of a concentration of about 1x10 5 cells/ml were measured to avoid the quantification of doublets. Developmental Time Course All developmental time courses were performed on gridded filters. Cells were taken from clearing plates, harvested and washed 5x times in KK 2 -MC buffer to remove bacteria and induce starvation. Cells were resuspended to a final concentration of 2.5x10 7 cells/ml. Filters were soaked in KK 2 -MC and placed on equally wet Whatman paper to ensure sufficient humidity. Cells were pipetted on the filters and allowed to settle for 15 min before residual buffer was removed. Images were taken at 4 h intervals using a low magnification microscope equipped with a camera. Micropipette Chemotaxis Assay Undifferentiated Ax2 and erkB - amoebae were harvested from K. aerogenes clearing plates and washed six times in KK 2 -MC to remove bacteria. Cells were resuspended at 2x10 7 cells/ml and shaken in suspension for 30 minutes before being washed again then diluted in KK 2 -MC and placed in a modified 2-well chambered coverglass with cut-down sides. Cells were left to settle for 30 minutes before filming using a Zeiss Axiovert S100 inverted microscope with 20x phase contrast objective. A micropipette filled with 100 μM folate was placed in the centre of the field of view just above the plane of the coverglass using a micromanipulator. Cell movement was imaged at 2 frames per minute for a 40 minutes period. Cells were tracked using the manual tracking plugin of FIJI ImageJ and chemotaxis parameters extracted using the Ibidi chemotaxis tool software. Under Agarose Folate Chemotaxis Assay With the exception of gacG - cells, all cells used for the under agarose chemotaxis assay were grown in HL5. gacG - cells were taken from K. aerogenes clearing plates and compared to Ax2 cells grown under the same conditions. Cells were washed 5 times and resuspended to a final concentration of 2x10 6 cells/ml in LoFlo medium. In parallel, 0.5% low melting point agarose dissolved in LoFlo medium containing 10 μM was pipetted into 50 mm glass bottom dishes. A well was cut into the agarose layer and 2x10 5 cells were transferred into it. Cells were allowed to crawl under the agarose before starting imaging. Microscopy was performed on a Zeiss 710 confocal microscope equipped with a 10x air objective. Cells were filmed for 90-120 min with a frame rate of 2 frames per minute. For data analysis cells that could be filmed for at least 60 min were selected. Chemotaxis parameters were calculated as described for the micropipette assay. Insall Chamber Chemotaxis Assay Cells used for cAMP chemotaxis assays were grown on K. aerogenes clearing plates. To remove remaining bacteria, cells were washed 5x times with KK 2 -MC. Cells were prepared as described for the cAMP stimulation in SILAC experiments, with cAMP pulsing for 4 hours duration. Cells were washed once in KK 2 -MC to remove extracellular cAMP, resuspended in KK 2 -MC and diluted down to a final concentration of 4x10 5 cells/ml. 4x10 4 cells were transferred into an Insall chamber with the concentration of the cAMP source at 1 μM. Microscopy was performed on a Zeiss 710 confocal microscope equipped with a 10x air objective. Cells were filmed for 1 h using a 20 sec frame rate. Data recording was started directly after assembling the chemotaxis chamber. Randomly selected cells that were tracked for at least 45 frames were used for data analysis. Chemotaxis parameters were calculated as described for the micropipette assay. F-Actin Polymerization Assays Cells were prepared for folate stimulation as described for immunoblot assays. F-actin content was determined after folate stimulation by extracting triton-insoluble cytoskeletons and staining by incubation with TRITC-labeled phalloidin. Briefly; cells were fixed and stained in 5 volumes of Fix/Stain buffer formaldehyde, 0.24% Triton X-100, 0.6 μM TRITC-phalloidin) for 10 minutes with end-over-end mixing. Triton-insoluble cytoskeletons were pelleted by centrifugation for 2 minutes at 13000 x g, and washed in 1.5 ml of Wash buffer for 30 minutes with end-over-end mixing. After pelleting by centrifugation again, incorporated TRITC-phalloidin was extracted in 1 ml of methanol. Fluorescence was measured using a Perkin Elmer LS50B fluorimeter. F-actin/total actin measurements were made using undifferentiated amoebae harvested from clearing plates and washed five times in KK 2 -MC. Cells were resuspended at 2x10 7 cells/ml in KK 2 -MC and shaken for 20 minutes, before being collected by centrifugation and resuspended at 1x10 8 cells/ml. Cell samples were lysed by addition of an equal volume of 2x cytoskeleton buffer and incubation on ice for 10 minutes, followed by rotation at room temperature for 10 minutes. Cell cytoskeleton fractions were collected by centrifugation at 8000 x g for 4 minutes, washed in 1x cytoskeleton buffer, and centrifuged again at 8000 x g for 4 minutes before being resuspended in 1x LDS sample buffer with 2-mercaptoethanol, protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors. In parallel, whole cell extracts were prepared by direct lysis of cell samples in 3x LDS sample buffer with 2-mercaptoethanol, protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors. Dilutions of cytoskeleton and whole-cell samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted using anti-actin primary antibody, Band intensity of diluted whole cell extracts were used to plot a reference curve of total actin against which F-actin content of cytoskeleton samples was assessed. Measurements of actin immunoblot band intensity were made using FIJI ImageJ. Live-Cell Imaging of Actin Cytoskeleton Actin structures were visualised by expressing a LifeAct:mCherry fusion in wild-type and erkB - mutant amoebae. To do this, cells were transformed with a dual expression plasmid containing LifeAct fused to mCherry and the PH domain of PkgE fused to GFP, both under the control of Dictyostelium act15 promoters; as well as Geneticin resistance under the control of the coaA promoter. To construct pPI304, the PH-PkgE:GFP from pDM1398 was subcloned into the expression backbone plasmid pDM1209 to create pPI291. LifeAct:mCherry was cloned into the shuttle vector pDM344, before being transferred into pPI291 to create pPI304. pDM1398 and pDM1209 were a kind gift from Dr. Douwe Veltman. Ax2 and erkB − amoebae for transformation were harvested from K. aerogenes clearing plates, washed and resuspended at 4x10 7 cells/ml in cold H40 buffer. 100 μl of cells were mixed with 1 μg of pPI304 plasmid and transferred to a pre-chilled 2mm gap electroporation cuvette. Electroporation was conducted at 350V, with two pulses of 8ms applied at a 1s interval. Cells were transferred to a petri dish containing SorMC buffer with K. aerogenes. After 5 hours, selection was added. After 2 days selection, cells were harvested and washed free from bacteria then allowed to settle on a chambered coverglass for 30 minutes. Lifeact:mCherry was imaged using a Zeiss 780 confocal microscope. Dynamic F-actin structures were imaged over a 15-minute period at 2 frames per minute with confocal slices taken at 370nm intervals. Localization of F-actin puncta was imaged with confocal slices taken at 250nm intervals. Maximum intensity projections were generated using FIJI ImageJ. Imaging of F-actin in gacG − cells was performed as above. Phylogenetic Analysis of MAPK Sequences Sequences were downloaded from Kinbase and dictyBase. Sequences were aligned using MUSCLE. Ambiguous regions were removed using Gblocks, resulting in an alignment focused on the kinase domain of the proteins. Tree construction used the maximum likelihood method in PhyML and was rendered using TreeDyn. The analysis was performed on the Phylogeny.fr platform. Quantification and Statistical Analysis Gene Ontology Enrichment Analysis Gene ontology enrichment analysis was conducted using the Orange Data Mining Toolbox. Foreground sets of chemoattractant-regulated phosphorylation sites were compared against a background of all phosphorylation sites identified in experiments with the same chemoattractant. Only terms with 3 or more input genes assigned to them were tested. Significance of enrichment was tested with the binomial significance test setting. Mutant Phenotype In Silico Analysis Mutant phenotype information was downloaded from DictyBase and cross-referenced against our phosphoproteome data. Over-representation of chemotaxis phenotypes was tested for using Fisher’s exact test. Motif Discovery and Enrichment Analysis De novo motif discovery used pLogo. Chemoattractant responsive sites in the cAMP/folate intersection were used as the foreground set. All phosphorylation sites detected in cAMP and folate experiments were used as the background set. N for foreground and background sets are shown in Figure 2. Known kinase substrate consensus motifs taken from the literature were used in custom Perl script to extract matching phosphorylation sites using the MaxQuant sequence window. Where more complex motif sequences exist entirely as a subset of more simple motifs, sites matching the complex motif were removed from the set of sites matching the simple motif. In practice, this resulted in PKA, PKB and Pak sites being subtracted from the CAMK motif set; and pPR, MAPK and CDK sites being subtracted from the proline-directed motif set. Statistical enrichment was conducted using the Fisher.test function in the R programming language with the alternative parameter set to ‘greater’. P values were adjusted for multiple-testing by the Benjamini-Hochberg method. N values of sites matching different motifs are shown in Figure 2. Chemotaxis Assays Details for analysing chemotaxis data: In the micropipette assay, chemotactic index was defined as the cosine of the angle between the cell’s vector of movement between frame 10 and frame 30 and a line between the cell’s position in frame 10 and the micropipette. In under agarose and Insall chamber assays, chemotactic index was defined as the cosine of the angle between the cell’s vector of movement over the duration of tracking and the direction of the chemoattractant gradient. Persistence was defined as Euclidean distance divided by accumulated distance. Speed defined as accumulated distance divided by time. In the micropipette assay, parameters for individual cells were averaged for each day’s experiment, with n = 4 day’s experiments used for statistical test of difference between wild-type and mutant grand means. Statistical testing of chemotaxis parameters in the micropipette assay was conducted using unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test, which assumes samples are drawn from a Gaussian distribution with both wild-type and mutant populations having equal standard deviations. Statistical testing was performed using Graphpad Prism. Under agarose and cAMP chemotaxis assays were analyzed in the same way, with statistical testing of chemotaxis parameters using Welch’s t test. Details of graphical presentation and results of statistical testing for chemotaxis experiments are shown in Figures 6, S5, and S7, and their respective figure legends F-Actin Polymerization Quantification For time-course assay; n = 3 independent experiments conducted on different days. Mean values are plotted with error bars showing standard deviation. For quantification of resting F-actin; n = 3 independent experiments conducted on different days. Values are plotted with horizontal bar showing mean and error bars showing standard deviation. Statistical testing of difference between wild-type and mutant mean value was conducted by unpaired Student’s t test, which assumes samples are drawn from a Gaussian distribution and that wild-type and mutant populations have equal standard deviation. P = 0.0015. Statistical testing was performed using Graphpad Prism. Data and Software Availability Phosphorylation site data including SILAC ratios is included as Tables S3 and S5. Complete intersection of cAMP and folate phosphorylation data is included in Table S4. Full results of Gene Ontology enrichment analysis are provided in Table S4. 