 Valproic acid provides a common treatment for both epilepsy and bipolar disorder; however, common cellular mechanisms relating to both disorders have yet to be proposed. Here, we explore the possibility of a diacylglycerol kinase playing a role in regulating the effect of VPA relating to the treatment of both disorders, using the biomedical model Dictyostelium discoideum. DGK enzymes provide the first step in the phosphoinositide recycling pathway, implicated in seizure activity. They also regulate levels of diacylglycerol, thereby regulating the protein kinase C activity that is linked to bipolar disorder-related signalling. Here, we show that ablation of the single Dictyostelium dgkA gene results in reduced sensitivity to the acute effects of VPA on cell behaviour. Loss of dgkA also provides reduced sensitivity to VPA in extended exposure during development. To differentiate a potential role for this DGKA-dependent mechanism in epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatment, we further show that the dgkA null mutant is resistant to the developmental effects of a range of structurally distinct branched medium-chain fatty acids with seizure control activity and to the bipolar disorder treatment lithium. Finally, we show that VPA, lithium and novel epilepsy treatments function through DAG regulation, and the presence of DGKA is necessary for compound-specific increases in DAG levels following treatment. Thus, these experiments suggest that, in Dictyostelium, loss of DGKA attenuates a common cellular effect of VPA relating to both epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatments, and that a range of new compounds with this effect should be investigated as alternative therapeutic agents. This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper. KEY WORDS: Diacyclglycerol, Diacylglycerol kinase, Dictyostelium discoideum, Epilepsy, Lithium, Valproic acid Editor's choice: Here, using a tractable model system, Dictyostelium discoideum, we show that diacylglycerol kinase activity might contribute to the cellular mechanism of action of the epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatment, valproic acid. INTRODUCTION Diacylglycerol kinases provide the first step in the phosphoinositide salvage pathway, functioning in the phosphorylation of diacylglycerol to produce phosphatidic acid. Through this activity, cells regulate levels of lipid and glucose metabolism, cell growth and cell signalling. In addition, DGKs regulate both inositol phosphate and phosphatidylinositol signalling through the recycling of DAG, and activation of protein kinase C enzymes, which require DAG binding. Owing to the numerous roles of DAG, and the ten DGK isoforms in humans, few studies have considered a role for DGK-dependent signalling in disease states. The exceptions to this are several knockout studies that have linked various DGK isoforms with epilepsy and bipolar disorder. In bipolar disorder, PKC levels are also elevated during manic episodes, and lithium, a common bipolar disorder treatment, is known to increase DAG levels. Surprisingly, no studies, to our knowledge, have investigated DGK-dependent signalling as an overlapping process relating to both epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatment. One widely used treatment for both epilepsy and bipolar disorder is the eight-carbon, branched-chain fatty acid, valproic acid. It was discovered accidentally in 1963 as a treatment for epilepsy, and is also used in the treatment of migraine, with potential for the treatment of cancer and HIV. In a clinical context, it is used at a plasma concentration of 0.3-0.6 mM, but it is teratogenic, leading to enhanced likelihood of birth defects if taken during pregnancy, thus limiting its clinical use. To develop novel compounds lacking the side effects of VPA, but with a common therapeutic mechanism, many studies have sought to identify its cellular effects and potential targets. This research has been complicated by a broad range of effects caused by VPA, linked to varying therapeutic mechanisms. One approach to simplify this research is to use a tractable model system, such as the simple biomedical model Dictyostelium discoideum. Dictyostelium has been used to investigate complex cellular mechanisms of both bioactive natural products and drugs, including VPA. This pharmacogenetics research has employed Dictyostelium, because its haploid genome enables the rapid identification and ablation of genes encoding proteins that control sensitivity to a drug in growth or acute cell behaviour responses, thus implicating either the identified protein or the pathway that it regulates in the action of a drug. In such an approach, the mutant cell line might also show reduced sensitivity to the effects of the compound on multicellular development, thus conferring resistance to the drug-dependent block in fruiting body formation. Dictyostelium provides an excellent system to investigate the developmental effects of VPA, because its well-defined process of cell migration, coalescence and differentiation to form multicellular fruiting bodies is sensitive to VPA. It is important to note that Dictyostelium provides the ability to assess these behaviours as mutually exclusive cell functions, controlled by groups of both independent and common proteins, yielding a considerable advantage over other model systems. Dictyostelium was the first model to show VPA-dependent effects on phospholipid signalling relating to seizure control, and on inositol phosphate signalling relating to bipolar disorder treatment. These studies have shown that VPA reduces phosphoinositide levels in a time- and dose-dependent manner, independent of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase activity, inositol recycling and de novo inositol biosynthesis. In Dictyostelium, VPA has also been found to increase the levels of phospholipids, phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine, implicating the phosphoinositide salvage pathway as a target pathway of the drug. In both epilepsy and bipolar disorder, Dictyostelium has been used to identify mechanisms underlying the therapeutic role of VPA and also novel compounds for seizure control that have been validated by confirmatory experiments in both in vitro and in vivo mammalian models. These various studies suggest that Dictyostelium could provide valuable insights into the mechanism of VPA in therapeutic function, relating to both epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatment. Here, we investigate a role for DGKA in attenuating the effect of VPA in Dictyostelium. The use of Dictyostelium as a model provides the opportunity to ablate the single dgkA gene, creating a stable isogenic cell line lacking all DGK activity, and enabling the subsequent quantification of acute effects of VPA and congeners on cell behaviour and development in the absence of this enzyme. Previous studies show that ablation of the dgkA gene gives rise to altered development, where cells were able to form small, but relatively normal, fruiting bodies, but this study was complicated by the proposal that the enzyme functioned as a myosin II kinase, whereas it was later shown to provide DGK activity. We show that loss of DGKA, a proposed DGKθ orthologue, results in a significant decrease in the potency of VPA in triggering acute cell behaviour responses and in development. We further show that loss of DGKA reduces sensitivity to the inhibitory effects of a range of other potential epilepsy treatments and a structurally dissimilar bipolar disorder treatment, lithium. These results suggest that DGKA might regulate the cellular effects of VPA, relating to treatments for both epilepsy and bipolar disorder, and newly identified alternatives to VPA could function through the same molecular mechanism. RESULTS Dictyostelium DGKA represents the origins of the family of mammalian DGK enzymes Because DGKs catalyse the first step in the DAG salvage pathway, we initially investigated homology between the single Dictyostelium DGKA protein and the ten members of the mammalian DGK family of enzymes. The Dictyostelium DGKA protein shows a conserved domain structure generally found in the ten human isoforms, with three putative N-terminal phorbol-ester/DAG-type 1 zinc finger domains and a DAG-kinase catalytic domain. The catalytic site is highly conserved between the human and Dictyostelium proteins and broadly conserved throughout other kingdoms. In addition, the Dictyostelium enzyme retains a conserved glycine that, when mutated, abolishes enzymatic activity in COS-7 cells without effect on translocation to membrane and two prolines necessary for full enzymatic activity. The Dictyostelium protein also contains three cysteine residues necessary for membrane association of the mammalian protein. Although the Dictyostelium protein shows slightly stronger homology to the human DGKθ, the enzyme is likely to function as a single, generic DGK owing to high sequence conservation between Dictyostelium DGKA and all ten human isoforms. The cladistics tree supports evolutionary conservation of the DGKs with tight clusters of DGK types 1-5 in organisms with multiple isoforms. Fig. 1. Diacylglycerol kinase, within the phosphoinositide salvage pathway, is highly conserved across kingdoms and ablated in Dictyostelium. Schematic of the phosphoinositide salvage pathway, showing the recycling of diacylglycerol to phosphatidic... To analyse the role of the Dictyostelium DGKA enzyme, we ablated the enzyme in an isogenic cell line. The dgkA − mutant was produced by homologous recombination with a knockout cassette, leading to the loss of 1072 bp from the central region of the encoding gene including the catalytic site. Loss of dgkA gene expression was confirmed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The dgkA − mutant was then used to investigate sensitivity or resistance to VPA exposure in both acute cell behaviour assays and in development. Investigating a role for DGKA in regulating the acute effect of VPA on Dictyostelium cell behaviour Because we have previously shown that VPA acutely blocks Dictyostelium cell behaviour, we then assessed whether this effect was attenuated following ablation of DGKA. This was carried out by monitoring cell behaviour in wild-type and dgkA − cells prior to treatment, to identify potential behavioural differences owing to loss of DGKA, and following exposure to VPA, to identify altered sensitivity to the behavioural changes caused by VPA. The logic to this approach is that loss of VPA sensitivity in the mutant would implicate a role for DGKA-related signalling or protein function in the effect of VPA on acute cell behaviour in this model. In these experiments, cells were treated with pulsatile cyclic adenosine monophosphate to mimic the natural signalling pathways Dictyostelium uses to initiate the process of changing from a unicellular lifestyle to a multicellular phase, beginning with aggregation. These cells, in early development with rapid cell movement, were then exposed to VPA for 10 min to monitor changes in cell behaviour. As an initial approach, we treated cells with VPA at 0.5 mM to show that wild-type cells had halted in movement and formed a circular shape, whereas dgkA − cells continued to move and remained amoeboid in shape, after VPA treatment. We continued this analysis by employing a recently developed assay for monitoring acute changes in cell behaviour following drug or compound exposure, enabling quantification of cell responses. Here, cell behaviour was recorded using time-lapse microscopy prior to and following the addition of VPA, and computer-generated cell outlines were analysed to describe changes in cell shape, membrane protrusion and motility. In the absence of VPA treatment, wild-type and dgkA – cells showed similar circularity, protrusions and motility. This was also seen when comparing the average protrusion number in the absence and presence of VPA, with wild-type cells showing a 5.6-fold reduction, and dgkA − cells showing a 1.5-fold reduction, following treatment. These results suggest that, following the deletion of dgkA, the effect of VPA on acute cell behaviour is reduced, implicating either a role for DGKA-dependent signalling or the DGKA protein in regulating the action of VPA in this model. Fig. 2. Loss of DGKA confers reduced sensitivity to the acute effects of VPA. Schematic of the acute cell behaviour experimental procedure. Cells were induced to early development by pulsatile cAMP before being visualised under a microscope, and cell movement... Rescuing the DGKA-dependent VPA sensitivity in acute cell behaviour We next investigated whether the reduced VPA sensitivity in acute cell behaviour shown for dgkA − cells was through loss of DGKA, by expression of a tagged DGKA-GFP in dgkA − cells. In these experiments, the expressed DGKA-GFP protein was of the expected size, and was localised within the cytosol, consistent with the localisation of the mammalian protein. Acute cell behaviour analysis of the resulting dgkA −/+ cells showed reinstated VPA sensitivity in relation to circularity, protrusion formation and motility. These results further support a role for DGKA-dependent signalling or the DGKA protein in regulating the sensitivity of cells to the effects of VPA. Fig. 3. VPA sensitivity is restored by expression of GFP-DGKA in the dgkA null mutant. Western blot showing GFP-DGKA expression with loading control for WT, dgkA − and dgkA −/+ cell lines. Fluorescence image of GFP-DGKA localisation... Investigating a role for DGKA in regulating the effect of VPA on Dictyostelium development In Dictyostelium, VPA has been shown to block development, where starving cells aggregate to form a mound and then develop into a mature fruiting body over a 24 h period. Because the development of dgkA − cells produces morphologically normal fruiting bodies, with distinct stalk and spore heads, albeit of reduced size, we can therefore analyse the sensitivity of this mutant to the VPA-dependent block in fruiting body formation. Loss of VPA sensitivity in the mutant would suggest that VPA functions to block development in Dictyostelium through a mechanism dependent upon DGKA-related signalling or protein function. We therefore compared fruiting body morphology, in wild-type, dgkA − and dgkA −/+ cells, starved on nitrocellulose filters, in the absence and presence of a range of VPA concentrations. The therapeutic concentrations of VPA in patients is ∼0.4 mM. In the absence of VPA, wild-type, dgkA − and dgkA −/+ cells formed mature fruiting bodies, containing a stalk and a spore head, although the overall size of the dgkA − fruiting body was reduced compared with that of wild-type cells, consistent with previous reports. Fruiting body size was restored in the dgkA −/+ rescue cell line compared with that of wild-type cells, consistent with complementing the loss of dgkA. In the presence of VPA at 0.3 mM and 0.5 mM, wild-type fruiting body morphology was severely affected, reducing the aggregate size and stopping development at the mound stage at 1 mM, consistent with earlier studies. In contrast, dgkA − cells were able to develop into mature fruiting bodies at 0.3 mM and 0.5 mM that were indistinguishable from those formed in the absence of VPA, although development was also arrested at the mound stage in the presence of 1 mM VPA. VPA sensitivity was restored in the dgkA −/+ cell line; fruiting body development was halted with a similar effect to that shown for wild-type cells. These results suggest that the developmental effect of VPA on Dictyostelium is at least partially dependent upon the presence of the DGKA protein. Fig. 4. Loss of DGKA confers reduced sensitivity to the chronic effects of VPA on development. Schematic of the development assay experimental procedure. Cells were shaken and placed on a nitrocellulose filter in the presence and absence of VPA for 24 h... Investigating a role for DGKA in regulating the effect of other epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatments on Dictyostelium development Research into the molecular mechanisms of VPA has yet to identify a common mechanism for both epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatments. We therefore investigated the role of the Dictyostelium DGKA protein in regulating the effect of VPA relating to the treatment of both epilepsy and bipolar disorders, using a range of epilepsy treatments shown to be active in Dictyostelium and in mammalian epilepsy models and the commonly used bipolar disorder treatment, lithium. The logic to this approach was that if these compounds modulate the same signalling pathway or have the same protein target, cells in which this pathway is blocked or has a missing target will show reduced responsiveness to each compound. This analysis was limited to assessing the developmental effects of these compounds, because lithium does not show acute effects on cell behaviour in Dictyostelium. In these experiments, cells were again starved on nitrocellulose filter for 24 h to initiate development, in the presence of a range of compounds at concentrations that inhibited development and fruiting body formation in wild-type cells, and the effects were compared between wild-type and dgkA − cells. We first investigated decanoic acid, a compound that attenuated phosphoinositide signalling in Dictyostelium and provides a key component of medium-chain ketogenic diet for the treatment of drug-resistant epilepsy, with efficacy against seizure activity in an ex vivo hippocampal slice model. This compound arrested wild-type Dictyostelium development at the mound stage, whereas dgkA − cells were resistant to the compounds and developed into mature fruiting bodies. In a similar manner, the branched chain fatty acid 4-ethyloctanoic acid shows activity in both Dictyostelium phosphoinositide inhibition, in ex vivo hippocampal seizure models and in neuroprotection. This compound also blocked Dictyostelium development at the mound stage in wild-type cells, but did not block the development of dgkA − cells. As a related control, a chemical with similar structure to these medium-chain fatty acids, 2-methylhexanoic acid, that showed no effect on Dictyostelium phosphoinositide regulation, and no effect in seizure control, was used. For this compound, both wild-type and dgkA − cells showed similar sensitivity during development, with both cell types showing development arrest at the mound stage. These results suggest that a range of compounds, identified in Dictyostelium through the inhibition of phosphoinositide regulation and providing strong seizure control in mammalian models, have reduced potency in dgkA − cells, suggesting that the effect of these compounds is dependent upon the presence of DGKA. Fig. 5. Loss of DGKA confers reduced sensitivity to the chronic developmental effects of a range of novel antiepileptic treatments and the bipolar disorder treatment, lithium chloride. Overhead and side view images of development in WT, dgkA −... We continued the analysis of dgkA − cells in response to the bipolar disorder treatment lithium. In Dictyostelium, lithium provides a well-described effect through inhibiting development related to a block in inositol phosphate signalling. To test for resistance to the developmental effect of lithium following loss of dgkA, development assays were repeated using lithium chloride. In wild-type cells, development was blocked after aggregation, in early development, at first finger stage, as previously reported. In contrast, dgkA − cells were able to develop into mature fruiting bodies, showing distinct stalks and spore heads, following lithium treatment. These results suggest that the developmental effect of lithium chloride occurs through a mechanism dependent upon the presence of DGKA. Investigating a role for DGKA as a regulator of the effect of epilepsy and bipolar treatments on DAG levels We then went on to quantify the molecular changes in Dictyostelium DAG levels in the presence and absence of DGKA, and following treatment with VPA, lithium and other compounds, using DAG-specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. In these experiments, cells were prepared in the same way as for acute cell behaviour experiments, with pulsatile cAMP to induce early development. Results from this approach surprisingly showed that, in the absence of treatment, dgkA − cells showed lower levels of DAG compared with wild-type cells, which were only partially restored on reintroduction of the enzyme within dgkA −/+ cells. We then treated cells with VPA at concentrations in which dgkA − cells were resistant to treatment. In the presence of VPA, DAG levels significantly increased in wild-type and dgkA −/+ cells compared with dgkA − cells. In a similar fashion, cells treated with lithium chloride also showed significantly increased DAG levels. We also analysed the two unrelated structures with demonstrated seizure control activity, again at concentrations shown to block development in wild-type cells, and found that these compounds elevated DAG levels significantly above those in control cells. These results suggest that, in Dictyostelium, loss of DGKA reduces DAG levels, and treatment of wild-type cells with VPA, lithium and new compounds, gives rise to a common effect of increasing DAG levels. Fig. 6. Dictyostelium DGKA-dependent DAG regulation following treatment with VPA, lithium and novel antiepileptic compounds. WT, dgkA − and dgkA −/+ cells were induced into early development by pulsatile cAMP and exposed to VPA, lithium or novel... DISCUSSION Mechanistic insights into the biochemical basis of therapeutic treatments provides opportunities to increase our understanding of signalling pathways underlying these disorders and for the development of new treatments. In this study, we employed the simple biomedical model system Dictyostelium to investigate the cellular mechanisms of the epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatment, VPA, through the key enzyme, DGKA, which is responsible for the phosphorylation of DAG to PA. In mammalian models, DAG is a second messenger derived from phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate through excitatory neurotransmitter activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors to activate PLC. DAG has numerous roles including in the activation of PKCs, transient receptors channels and the endocannabinoid system. The roles of DGK thus include turning off DAG-dependent signalling, in addition to acting at the start of the phosphoinositide salvage pathway for the recycling of phosphoinositide signalling. By using Dictyostelium as a model, we were able to ablate all enzyme activity through loss of one protein, likely to represent the evolutionary origins of the family of mammalian DGK enzymes, with conserved structure and key amino acids. Consistent with the viability of yeast mutants, the Dictyostelium enzyme is not vital, although the encoded protein more closely resembles that found in higher eukaryotes rather than that in other single-cell models, such as yeast and bacteria. We show that loss of the Dictyostelium dgkA gene significantly reduced sensitivity to the acute effects of VPA on changes in cell behaviour and in multicellular development, suggesting that the effect of VPA on cellular function is at least partially dependent upon DGKA in Dictyostelium. It is therefore likely that VPA acts to change a cellular function in this model to cause acute and developmental effects, where these changes are dependent on the presence of DGKA, thus implicating either perturbed DGKA-related signalling or DGKA activity as a cellular mechanism for VPA action. We further used Dictyostelium development to analyse a range of compounds associated with both epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatments, to show that loss of DGKA decreases sensitivity to both treatments. At a biochemical level, loss of DGKA appears to reduce DAG levels, and exposure to both epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatments increases DAG levels. Removal of DGKA therefore counteracts the effect of these treatments in increasing DAG levels. These studies thus suggest that, in Dictyostelium, DGKA might regulate a cellular mechanism common for drugs used to treat both epilepsy and bipolar disorder. In this study, we used the dgkA − cell line to assess a role for DGKA in the biochemical activity of VPA. This approach is unusual, as we have removed all DGK activity in these cells. Our earlier studies have shown that VPA acutely blocks cell behaviour, with a concomitant reduction in phosphoinositide levels, and reduces inositol phosphate levels. Here, we extend these studies, using identical conditions, to show that loss of DGKA reduces the acute effect of VPA on cell behaviour, and blocks the VPA-dependent increase in DAG levels in wild-type cells. The most likely rationale for this resistant phenotype is that of molecular changes in the dgkA − mutant, either through loss of the enzyme as a direct target for VPA or by alterations in cell signalling regulated by DGKA to overcome the cellular effect of VPA in this model. Further studies are necessary to investigate a direct role for VPA in inhibiting DGKA, and to examine the VPA-dependent regulation of the phosphoinositide salvage pathway, phosphoinositide levels and inositol phosphates. This study provides the first analysis of Dictyostelium DAG levels. We show that nanomolar levels of DAG in unstimulated Dictyostelium cells are similar to those reported for human tissue, pigs and mice fibroblast Swiss 3T3 cells. Although Dictyostelium DAG levels were shown to be variable, consistent with those shown in in vivo mouse model studies, the dgkA − mutant showed a significant and large reduction in DAG levels. This result was unexpected, because elevated levels of DAG would be expected following removal of DGKA. Two potential mechanisms can be suggested for this result. First, the cellular response VPA treatment might be to upregulate the activity of the Kennedy pathway, through which DAG is recycled to PA through PE and PC to form CDP-DAG. This theory appears likely, because VPA treatment in Dictyostelium leads to the accumulation of nonpolar lipids in lipid droplets typically consisting of DAG and triacylglycerol species, and includes PE and PC. Thus, enhanced activation of the Kennedy pathway might be induced by acute exposure to VPA or to a chronic block in DGKA activity. A second potential mechanism could simply involve the stabilisation or protection of DAG levels through binding to DGKA, thus loss of the protein leads to the reduction in DAG levels. It must also be acknowledged that VPA-dependent changes in DAG, although providing a useful marker, could indeed arise through effects on a variety of other metabolites to give rise to this effect. However, through either direct or indirect processes, treated Dictyostelium cells showed a significantly altered DAG level, suggesting that DAG-dependent signalling might provide an important target pathway for VPA, lithium and other compounds. DGK-related activity might play an important role in epilepsy. A range of studies have demonstrated a role for phosphoinositide signalling in both seizure susceptibility and progression, and this signalling is dependent upon DAG recycling through DGK activity. In addition, mutations in several DGK isoforms have been linked with increased seizure activity. The data provided here suggest that, in Dictyostelium, one action of VPA is related to the cellular function of DGK, because ablation of DGKA attenuates the effect of VPA. Further studies will be necessary to investigate a VPA-dependent effect on seizure control through regulation of DGK-related signalling. It is also interesting to note that previous studies have shown a reduction in dendritic spines in epilepsy patients, that DGKβ controls dendritic spine outgrowth and maturation, and that VPA treatment increases dendritic spine formation in mouse models. Together, these data provide a view consistent with a role for VPA in regulating cell function through alterations in DGK-dependent signalling pathways related to seizure activity and neurological effects. We also sought to investigate a role for Dictyostelium DGKA in attenuating the effects of other potential epilepsy treatments. Here, we employed a range of novel compounds, identified in Dictyostelium to provide a similar cellular function to VPA, that show seizure control effects in mammalian models. Importantly, these compounds lack the potential adverse effect of histone deacetylase inhibition at therapeutically relevant concentrations, and this effect has been linked to teratogenicity of VPA and resulting birth defects. Using the Dictyostelium development assay to screen compounds, we showed that loss of DGKA also provided reduced sensitivity to decanoic acid and to 4-ethyloctanoic acid. In contrast, 2-methyhexanoic acid, a related compound with low activity in Dictyostelium without seizure control activity, did not show differential effects between the two cell lines. Furthermore, decanoic acid and 4-ethyloctanoic acid treatment also elevated DAG levels at concentrations shown to block development in wild-type cells, although the large increase in DAG levels shown here should be investigated further to exclude potential nonspecific effects on the assay. These studies therefore propose a role for DGKA in regulating the cellular effects of other potential epilepsy treatments, beyond that of VPA. DGK-regulated signalling also provides an attractive therapeutic target for bipolar disorder. Data provided here demonstrate that the previously reported effect of the bipolar disorder treatment lithium on Dictyostelium development is overcome by loss of DGKA. Earlier studies in Dictyostelium have shown that both VPA and lithium attenuate inositol phosphate signalling as a mechanism for bipolar disorder treatments. The reduction in phosphoinositide signalling caused by VPA, through attenuation of DGKA, might therefore underlie this change in inositol phosphate levels as a potential mechanism for bipolar disorder treatment. This association is further supported by the role of DAG in bipolar disorder-associated signalling. In mammalian models, DGK competes with PKC for binding to DAG, thereby regulating PKC activity, and dysregulation of the PKC signalling pathway has been widely demonstrated in bipolar disorder patient populations and following therapeutic treatment. Numerous studies have identified upregulated PKC activity in bipolar disorder patients, with this activity being reduced by both lithium and VPA in animal models and patient studies. Associations with bipolar disorder have been made with DGKβ and DGKη, with lithium treatment resulting in accumulation of DAG in a range of models, independent of phospholipase D. DGK also interacts with NR5A1, which in turn binds to phosphatidylinositol headgroups, in particular PIP 2 and PIP 3, providing a mechanism of DGK-dependent regulation of phosphoinositides beyond that of DAG recycling. Thus a VPA- and lithium-dependent effect on signalling components controlled by, or involving, DGK activity could provide a biochemical mechanism underlying the treatment of patients with bipolar disorder. Developing new treatments for bipolar disorder has remained a difficult prospect owing to a lack of clarity regarding a therapeutic mechanism of current drugs. One approach to overcome this is based upon the observation that a range of antiepileptic drugs are also effective in the treatment of bipolar disorder. In earlier studies, we have successfully translated a common molecular mechanism relating to both epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatments from Dictyostelium to mammalian neurons, demonstrating that it is possible to model bipolar disorder drug mechanisms in Dictyostelium. In our current study, we show that novel compounds function through modulating a DGKA-related pathway commonly affected by lithium and VPA, suggesting that these compounds should be investigated as new treatments for bipolar disorder as well as epilepsy. In summary, VPA is a widely used treatment for both epilepsy and bipolar disorder, without a clear mechanism of action and with significant side effects. Here, we propose that signalling regulated by DGK could provide a key role in the mechanisms of action for VPA, in addition to other proposed therapeutic compounds that could provide treatments for both epilepsy and bipolar disorder. Fig. 7. Proposing a mechanism for VPA, linking epilepsy and bipolar disorder with the phosphoinositide salvage pathway. Phosphoinositide signalling has been widely shown to be deregulated in seizures and epilepsy, is regulated by VPA, and is dependent... MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents All compounds were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise stated. Axenic medium, SM agar, phosphate buffer and blasticidin were obtained from ForMedium. Penicillin-streptomycin was purchased from Gibco, decanoic acid was from Alfa Aesar and all enzymes were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Cell culture, strains and plasmids Dictyostelium cell lines were grown at 22°C in Axenic medium which contained 100 µg/ml penicillin-streptomycin. dgkA − cell lines were generated from wild-type cells. Creation of the dgkA knockout construct was as previously described. DNA was amplified from the 5′ and 3′ regions of the dgkA gene and cloned into the pLPBLP vector on either side of a blasticidin resistance cassette using the restriction enzymes BamH I, Pst I, Nco I and Hind III. The knockout cassette was excised from the vector through restriction digestion and electroporated into wild-type cells. Transformants were selected in medium containing 10 µg/ml blasticidin, and surviving colonies were screened by PCR for homologous integration using a genomic and vector control bands and a diagnostic band. RT-PCR was performed to confirm loss of gene transcription. The dgkA −/+ rescue cell line was produced using the pTX-FLAG-DGK-GFP plasmid vector, which was kindly provided by T. Egelhoff. Dictyostelium random cell movement assay As previously described, wild-type and transformant cells were harvested from mid-log-phase-growing shaking cultures and washed in phosphate buffer, resuspended at 1×10 7 cells in 6 ml phosphate buffer, and pulsed with 30 nM cAMP at 6 min intervals for 5 h at 120 rpm. Cells were further washed in phosphate buffer, resuspended in 4 ml phosphate buffer and diluted 1:10. Cells were placed in a Nunc Lab-Tek coverglass chamber and incubated for 15 min in order for the cells to adhere prior to time-lapse microscopy for 900 s. After a control period of 225 s, 250 µl of double concentrate compound was added, and change in cell behaviour was monitored at 30 cells per condition from at least three independent experiments. To analyse random cell movement, the ImageJ Quimp 11b software package and accompanying scripts for MATLAB analysis were used. Individual cells were segmented and cell behaviour before and after drug addition were quantified using measures of circularity, protrusion formation to represent protrusive activity within short time periods, centred around discrete time points) and motility between each frame, counted automatically over a ten-frame running window. Dictyostelium development assay Dictyostelium wild-type and mutant cells were washed in phosphate buffer and developed on a nitrocellulose membrane filter above a hydrophobic membrane filter in the absence or presence of compounds. Filters were incubated for 24 h at 22°C prior to imaging. Experiments were repeated over at least three independent experiments. DAG analysis Levels of DAG were determined using ELISA. Cells were prepared by pulsing with cAMP. DAG levels were then measured from 5×10 6 cells, treated with VPA or lithium chloride for 10 min in shaking suspension. Cells were washed in phosphate buffer and resuspended in 100 µl phosphate buffer. The cell wall fraction was obtained from six rounds of freeze-thaw, centrifuged and the pellet was resuspended in 100 µl sample diluent from the kit. ELISA was conducted following the supplier's instructions. Data are derived from at least triplicate independent experiments. Data analysis and statistics In the analysis of cell behaviour, a Kruskal–Wallis analysis with Dunn’s post hoc test was employed to test for statistically significant changes between three independent groups that were not normally distributed. Differences were considered statistically significant if the P -value was less than 0.05. In the analysis of DAG levels, a Mann–Whitney analysis was employed to test for statistically significant changes between groups, again with data that were not normally distributed but enabling direct paired groups. Supplementary Material Supplementary information: Click here to view. First Person interview: Click here to view. Acknowledgements We thank M. Walker for comments on the manuscript, T. Egelhoff for provision of the GFP-DGK-expressing plasmid, and Dictybase.org and the Dictybase Stock Centre for provision of Dictyostelium strains and materials. Footnotes Competing interests R.S.B.W. has a range of patents submitted regarding new treatments for epilepsy and bipolar disorder, including compounds cited in this study. Author contributions Conceptualization: C.J.W., R.S.B.W.; Methodology: E.K., D.S., R.S.B.W.; Validation: D.S.; Formal analysis: E.K., D.S., R.S.B.W.; Investigation: E.K., D.S., R.S.B.W.; Data curation: E.K., R.S.B.W.; Writing - original draft: E.K., R.S.B.W.; Writing - review & editing: E.K., D.S., C.J.W., R.S.B.W.; Visualization: E.K., R.S.B.W.; Supervision: C.J.W., R.S.B.W.; Project administration: C.J.W., R.S.B.W.; Funding acquisition: R.S.B.W. Funding This work was supported by the National Centre for the Replacement, Refinement and Reduction of Animals in Research. Supplementary information Supplementary information available online at Article information Dis Model Mech. 2018 Sep 1; 11: dmm035600. Published online 2018 Aug 21. doi: 10.1242/dmm.035600 PMCID: PMC6176992 PMID: 30135067 Elizabeth Kelly, Devdutt Sharma, Christopher J. Wilkinson, and Robin S. B. Williams * Centre for Biomedical Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham TW20 0EX, UK * Author for correspondence. Received 2018 May 10; Accepted 2018 Jul 3. Copyright © 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed. Articles from Disease Models & Mechanisms are provided here courtesy of Company of Biologists 