SRCP1 conveys resistance to polyglutamine aggregation You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF SRCP1 conveys resistance to polyglutamine aggregation Mol Cell. 2018 Jul 19; 71: 216–228.e7. Author manuscript. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List HHS Author Manuscripts Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Molecular cell Author Manuscript HHS Public Access SRCP1 conveys resistance to polyglutamine aggregation Stephanie Santarriaga, Holly N. Haver,, and K. Matthew Scaglione Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials NIHMS981575-supplement.pdf GUID: 5C40F09B-3C95-40CF-AF88-326F1B162EA5 SUMMARY The polyglutamine diseases are a group of nine neurodegenerative diseases caused by the expansion of a polyQ tract that results in protein aggregation. Unlike other model organisms Dictyostelium discoideum is a proteostatic outlier, naturally encoding long polyQ tracts yet resistant to polyQ aggregation. Here we identify serine-rich chaperone protein 1 as a molecular chaperone that is necessary and sufficient to suppress polyQ aggregation. SRCP1 inhibits aggregation of polyQ-expanded proteins allowing for their degradation via the proteasome where SRCP1 is also degraded. SRCP1’s C-terminal domain is essential for its activity in cells, and peptides that mimic this domain suppress polyQ aggregation in vitro. Together our results identify a novel type of molecular chaperone and reveal how nature has dealt with the problem of polyQ aggregation. eTOC Santarriaga et al. identify a molecular chaperone that is both necessary for Dictyostelium’s unusual resistance to polyglutamine aggregation and is sufficient to impart resistance to polyglutamine aggregation in other organisms. These findings describe how nature has dealt with the problem of polyglutamine aggregation. INTRODUCTION The polyglutamine diseases are a group of nine inherited neurodegenerative diseases caused by the expansion of a polyQ repeat in the coding region of specific proteins. PolyQ-expanded proteins misfold and lead to the formation of protein aggregates, ultimately resulting in the loss of specific types of neurons. PolyQ aggregation is thought to be a key early event in polyQ toxicity and suppression of polyQ aggregation is one potential way to treat these diseases. PolyQ aggregation has been studied in a wide variety of organisms ranging from yeast to primates. In each case, expression of a polyQ-expanded protein results in the formation of protein aggregates, with the exception of one organism, Dictyostelium discoideum. Dictyostelium discoideum has a unique genome among sequenced organisms in that it encodes large numbers of homopolymeric amino acid tracts. Among the most common homopolymeric amino acid repeats are polyQ repeats, with 1,498 proteins containing 2,528 polyQ tracts of 10 or more glutamines. Endogenous polyQ tracts in Dictyostelium reach well beyond the disease threshold, reaching repeat lengths of 80 glutamines, yet these proteins remain soluble. Moreover, unlike other model organisms, overexpression of a polyQ-expanded huntingtin exon-1 construct does not result in protein aggregation. Together, this suggests that Dictyostelium encodes novel proteins or pathways to suppress polyQ aggregation. Here, we have analyzed known protein quality control pathways and show that Hsp70, autophagy, and the ubiquitin-proteasome system are not responsible for suppressing polyQ aggregation in Dictyostelium. Using a forward genetic screen, we identified a single Dictyostelium discoideum specific gene that is necessary for suppressing polyQ aggregation. This gene encodes serine-rich chaperone protein 1, a small 9.1kDa protein that suppresses polyQ aggregation. In the presence of SRCP1 aggregation-prone polyQ proteins are degraded via the proteasome where SRCP1 is also degraded. Upon conditions where polyQ degradation is impaired, SRCP1 also suppresses polyQ aggregation, consistent with a chaperone function for SRCP1. SRCP1 does not contain any identifiable chaperone domains, but rather utilizes a C-terminal domain that resembles amyloid to suppress aggregation of polyQ-expanded proteins. Together, our findings provide insight into how Dictyostelium discoideum resists polyQ aggregation and identifies a new type of molecular chaperone that conveys resistance to polyQ aggregation. RESULTS SRCP1 is necessary for Dictyostelium discoideum to evade polyQ aggregation Among known protein quality control pathways, molecular chaperones, autophagy, and the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway assist in combating polyQ aggregation. To determine if these pathways suppress polyQ aggregation in Dictyostelium, we stably expressed GFP Htt ex1Q103 in Dictyostelium and inhibited select protein quality control pathways. Inhibition of known protein quality control components, including Hsp70, autophagy, and the ubiquitin-proteasome system did not lead to an accumulation of GFP Htt ex1Q103 puncta, suggesting that other protein quality control pathways are responsible for Dictyostelium’s unusual resistance to polyQ aggregation. Figure 1: Identification of a novel protein that suppresses polyQ aggregation in Dictyostelium. We next utilized a forward genetic screen to identify genes responsible for suppressing polyQ aggregation in Dictyostelium. We performed a restriction enzyme-mediated integration screen in Dictyostelium stably expressing GFP Htt ex1Q103 and coupled it with high-content imaging to identify clonal isolates where a minimum of 5% of the cells contained GFP Htt ex1Q103 puncta. From this screen we identified a single uncharacterized Dictyostelium discoideum specific gene responsible for suppressing GFP Htt ex1Q103 aggregation. The protein encoded by this gene is a member of a large gene family of undefined function that encodes proteins with a serine-rich domain; therefore, we named it serine-rich chaperone protein 1. To confirm that SRCP1 is responsible for suppressing GFP Htt ex1Q103 aggregation, we generated SRCP1 knockout Dictyostelium strains. Knocking out SRCP1 led to no obvious growth phenotypes, while expression of GFP Htt ex1Q103 in SRCP1−/− cells resulted in the formation of numerous GFP Htt ex1Q103 puncta that are insoluble via filter trap assay consistent with a role for SRCP1 in suppressing polyQ aggregation. We next wanted to confirm that our results were due removal of SRCP1, and not an indirect effect. To accomplish this, we transformed SRCP1−/− cells with GFP Htt ex1Q103 and either RFP or RFP SRCP1. Consistent with SRCP1 suppressing GFP Htt ex1Q103 aggregation, expression of RFP SRCP1, but not RFP alone, prevented GFP Htt ex1Q103 aggregation. Together these data are consistent with SRCP1 being responsible for Dictyostelium discoideum’s unusual resistance to polyQ aggregation. We next wanted to determine SRCP1’s endogenous function in Dictyostelium. Because Dictyostelium contain an abnormally high number of homopolymeric amino acid tracts, we hypothesized that SRCP1 played a role in maintaining proteostasis in Dictyostelium’s repeat-rich proteome. To test this hypothesis, we collected lysates from two independent SRCP1−/− cell lines and performed differential centrifugation to separate soluble and insoluble fractions. Consistent with SRCP1 playing an important role in maintaining proteostasis in Dictyostelium, we observed an accumulation of ubiquitinated species in the insoluble fraction of the SRCP1−/− cells consistent with the presence of polyubiquitinated protein aggregates. In addition to polyubiquitinated proteins, the insoluble fraction was also enriched for endogenous polyQ proteins in the absence of SRCP1, suggesting that SRCP1 functions, at least in part, to maintain Dictyostelium’s polyQ-rich proteome. Together these data suggest that SRCP1 plays an important role in maintaining proteostasis in Dictyostelium. SRCP1 is sufficient to suppress polyQ aggregation Because reducing polyQ aggregation in patients is one potential therapeutic avenue for the polyQ diseases, we next assessed the ability of SRCP1 to suppress GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregation in human cells. To test this, we co-transfected HEK293 cells with GFP Htt ex1Q74 in the presence or absence of RFP SRCP1 and assessed the ability of RFP SRCP1 to prevent GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregation. Expression of GFP Htt ex1Q74 resulted in the formation of GFP Htt ex1Q74 puncta, while co-expression of RFP SRCP1 led to a dramatic decrease in the number and size of GFP Htt ex1Q74 puncta. Importantly, expression of RFP SRCP1 alone did not display any toxicity. PolyQ aggregates migrate more slowly in SDS-PAGE gels and form high molecular weight aggregates. To determine if SRCP1 suppressed the formation of polyQ aggregates, we next analyzed the amount of GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregates in the presence or absence of RFP SRCP1. Expression of GFP Htt ex1Q74 resulted in the presence of both soluble GFP Htt ex1Q74 and GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregates. Co-expression of RFP SRCP1 with GFP Htt ex1Q74 greatly reduced the amount of GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregates as measured by SDS-PAGE, filter trap assay, and confocal microscopy, while having no effect on the levels of monomeric, soluble GFP Htt ex1Q74. Consistent with SRCP1 having no effect on soluble polyQ protein, SRCP1 did not alter the levels of GFP Htt ex1Q23 suggesting that SRCP1 selectively affects polyQ-expanded proteins that have a propensity to form aggregates. Because the polyQ diseases are neurodegenerative diseases, we next tested if SRCP1 prevented polyQ aggregation in human neurons. To this end, induced pluripotent stem cell derived neurons were transfected with either GFP Htt ex1Q74 alone, or GFP Htt ex1Q74 and RFP SRCP1. Similar to HEK293 cells, co-expression of RFP SRCP1 led to a dramatic decrease in GFP Htt ex1Q74 puncta. In addition to human neurons, we also assessed SRCP1’s ability to suppress polyQ aggregation in an intact animal. We injected zebrafish embryos with RNA encoding either GFP Htt ex1Q74, or GFP Htt ex1Q74 and RFP SRCP1, and counted the number of GFP Htt ex1Q74 puncta in spinal cord neurons. Similar to human cells, co-expression of RFP SRCP1 in zebrafish led to a significant reduction of GFP Htt ex1Q74 puncta, consistent with SRCP1 suppressing GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregation. Together, these data demonstrate that SRCP1 is sufficient to suppress polyQ aggregation in human cells and in zebrafish neurons. Figure 2: SRCP1 reduces levels of aggregated, but not soluble GFP Htt ex1Q74. SRCP1 prevents polyQ aggregation and allows for proteasomal degradation of aggregation-prone polyQ In human cells co-expression of RFP SRCP1 and GFP Htt ex1Q74 led to a dramatic decrease in GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregates but did not cause a corresponding increase in soluble GFP Htt ex1Q74 levels. This suggests that SRCP1 was either increasing the clearance of GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregates or promoting degradation of GFP Htt ex1Q74 that misfolds prior to aggregation. One well established route for the clearance of both soluble and aggregated polyQ is autophagy. To determine if expression of SRCP1 resulted in autophagic degradation of polyQ protein, we transfected HEK293 cells with GFP Htt ex1Q74 in the presence or absence of RFP SRCP1 and treated with the autophagy inhibitor 3-MA 24-hours post-transfection. Consistent with previous publications, treatment with 3-MA led to a significant increase in soluble and aggregated GFP Htt ex1Q74. However, under conditions of autophagy inhibition, co-expression of RFP SRCP1 did not lead to a significant increase in soluble GFP Htt ex1Q74 levels, suggesting that SRCP1 does not promote GFP Htt ex1Q74 clearance via autophagy. Figure 3: SRCP1 expression results in proteasomal degradation of aggregation-prone GFP Htt ex1Q74. Because inhibiting autophagy did not increase levels of soluble GFP Htt ex1Q74 in the presence of SRCP1, we next turned our attention to the proteasome, the other major route for GFP Htt ex1Q74 degradation. To determine if the presence of SRCP1 resulted in proteasomal degradation of GFP Htt ex1Q74, HEK293 cells were transfected with GFP Htt ex1Q74 in the presence or absence of RFP SRCP1 and treated with proteasome inhibitor 24 hours post-transfection. Proteasome inhibition led to increased levels of both soluble and aggregated GFP Htt ex1Q74. However, co-expression of RFP SRCP1 in the presence of proteasome inhibition led to an even further increase in the amount of soluble GFP Htt ex1Q74 when compared to proteasome inhibition alone. This indicates that in the presence of SRCP1 aggregation-prone, polyQ-expanded protein was being degraded by the proteasome. Furthermore, in the presence of proteasome inhibition, SRCP1 prevented polyQ aggregation, consistent with SRCP1 functioning as a molecular chaperone. Together, these data demonstrate that the expression of SRCP1 results in the degradation of aggregation-prone GFP Htt ex1Q74 via the proteasome, but not the lysosome, and that SRCP1 acts as a molecular chaperone preventing GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregation upon conditions where GFP Htt ex1Q74 degradation is impaired. PolyQ accelerates the degradation of SRCP1 In the experiments where RFP SRCP1 and GFP Htt ex1Q74 were co-transfected, we observed that RFP SRCP1 levels were difficult to detect. However, in experiments where RFP SRCP1 was transfected alone, we could easily detect RFP SRCP1. This led us to hypothesize that GFP Htt ex1Q74 accelerated the turnover of RFP SRCP1. We next analyzed levels of RFP SRCP1 in human cells expressing GFP Htt ex1Q74, RFP SRCP1, or GFP Htt ex1Q74 and RFP SRCP1, and found that the presence of GFP Htt ex1Q74 led to a dramatic decrease in RFP SRCP1 levels. To determine if RFP SRCP1 is degraded by the proteasome, we transfected human cells with RFP SRCP1 in the presence or absence of proteasome inhibition and assessed levels of RFP SRCP1. Proteasome inhibition led to a marked stabilization of RFP SRCP1, consistent with RFP SRCP1 being degraded by the proteasome. Together, these data demonstrate that RFP SRCP1 is degraded by the proteasome in a manner that is stimulated by the presence of GFP Htt ex1Q74. Figure 4: GFP Htt ex1Q74 accelerates proteasomal degradation of SRCP1. SRCP1’s serine-rich domain is dispensable for SRCP1 function SRCP1’s ability to suppress polyQ aggregation in the presence of proteasome inhibition is consistent with SRCP1 being a molecular chaperone. SRCP1 does not contain a canonical chaperone domain; however, it does contain a serine-rich N-terminus. Because DNAJB6 utilizes a serine-rich domain to suppress polyQ aggregation, we hypothesized that SRCP1’s serine-rich N-terminus may be important for suppressing polyQ aggregation. To test this, we generated constructs where all serine and threonine residues in SRCP1’s N-terminus were mutated to alanine. However, mutation of SRCP1’s serine and threonine residues did not disrupt SRCP1’s ability to suppress polyQ aggregation. Together, these data demonstrate that SRCP1’s serine-rich domain is dispensable for its ability to suppress polyQ aggregation. Figure 5: SRCP1’s serine-rich domain is dispensable for SRCP1 function. SRCP1 utilizes a C-terminal pseudo-amyloid domain to suppress polyQ aggregation Because mutating ~40% of the residues in SRCP1’s N-terminal serine-rich domain did not cause any measurable defect in SRCP1 activity, we next turned our attention to SRCP1’s C-terminal region to identify a region that may be important for SRCP1’s chaperone function. One striking feature of SRCP1’s C-terminal region is a highly hydrophobic, glycine-rich region that resembles amyloid. Peptides that resemble amyloid can form mixed amyloid with amyloid-forming proteins and influence amyloid formation. To determine if SRCP1 encodes any predicted amyloidogenic domains, we utilized in silico approaches, including Tango, FISH Amyloid, FoldAmyloid, PASTA 2.0, and AmylPred2 and identified two potential amyloid-forming regions in SRCP1’s C-terminal region, which we termed pseudo-amyloid domains. We next mutated regions within SRCP1’s pseudo-amyloid domains and determined their ability to suppress GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregation. Consistent with SRCP1’s first pseudo-amyloid domain being important for suppressing polyQ aggregation, the RFP SRCP1 61−70A mutant lost the ability to suppress GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregation, while the RFP SRCP1 71−80A mutant retained full activity. This is consistent with amino acids 61–70, but not 71–80 of SRCP1 containing critical residues for SRCP1 function. To gain more detailed insight into residues important for SRCP1 function, we next mutated individual amino acid residues in SRCP1 from 61–70 to alanine and determined their ability to suppress GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregation via fluorescence microscopy. Two individual point mutations, RFP SRCP1 V65A and RFP SRCP1 I69A, resulted in a decrease in SRCP1 function, consistent with an important role for suppressing polyQ aggregation. Figure 6: SRCP1’s pseudo-amyloid domain prevents polyQ aggregation. We next wanted to determine if SRCP1 could directly suppress polyQ aggregation in vitro. Because we were unable to generate soluble recombinant SRCP1 protein, we generated a 20-amino acid peptide that mimics SRCP1’s C-terminal pseudo-amyloid region. This peptide remained soluble in vitro and was sufficient to suppress aggregation of Htt Q46 in vitro as measured by Thioflavin-T fluorescence. We next wanted to confirm that our SRCP1 derived peptide was inhibiting Htt Q46 aggregation and not disrupting the binding of Thioflavin-T to Htt Q46 aggregates. To accomplish this, we analyzed Htt Q46 aggregate formation at a 5 hour time point by electron microscopy and found that the addition of the SRCP1 peptide decreased Htt Q46 fiber formation and led to the appearance of spherical structures similar to previously described soluble oligomers. The presence of these spherical structures and decrease in fibers also correlated with a decrease in Htt Q46 aggregates as measured by filter trap assay and an increase in smaller species via dynamic light scattering. This, coupled with the observation that the 1.5:1 and 3:1 molar ratios of peptide to Htt Q46 resulted in a delay, but not prevention of Htt Q46 aggregation, led us to hypothesize that the SRCP1 peptide delayed, but did not prevent, Htt Q46 aggregation. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed Htt Q46 aggregation in the presence or absence of the SRCP1 peptide after a 72-hour incubation. Consistent with the SRCP1 peptide delaying, but not preventing aggregation, Htt Q46 aggregates were detected by EM and filter trap analysis and the smaller species observed via DLS at 5 hours were no longer detectable at 72 hours. To further analyze SRCP1’s pseudoamyloid domain in vitro, we tested peptides of the two predicted individual domains within the SRCP1 peptide. Consistent with our cell data, a peptide that encodes amino acids 61–70 was sufficient to suppress Htt Q46 aggregation in vitro whereas a peptide that consists of amino acids 71–80 did not. Similarly, a peptide consisting of amino acids 61–70 with V65 and I69 mutated to alanine resulted in a loss in activity in accordance with the fluorescent microscopy data in cells. Together, these data support a role for SRCP1’s C-terminal pseudo-amyloid domain in contributing to SRCP1’s ability to suppress polyQ aggregation. SRCP1 Reverses Neurite Shortening in Huntington’s Disease iPSC-derived Neurons Because SRCP1 suppressed polyQ aggregation, we next wanted to determine if SRCP1 reversed disease phenotypes associated with huntingtin aggregation. One such phenotype is the degeneration of neurons, which is believed to contribute to the early pathology of Huntington’s disease. To this end, we utilized two independent HD iPSC-derived neurons with either 60 or 180 glutamines. Neurons derived from HD iPSCs exhibit shortened neurites, so we tested if SRCP1 could reverse this phenotype. We expressed RFP SRCP1 in HD iPSC-derived neurons and quantified the length of the neurites in the presence or absence of RFP SRCP1. Overexpression of SRCP1 significantly increased neurite length and reversed the phenotype seen in the untreated HD iPSC-derived neurons. This is consistent with SRCP1 preventing aggregation-related phenotypes and suggests that SRCP1 may prevent toxic events associated with human HD. Figure 7: SRCP1 rescues defects in neurite outgrowth in HD iPSC-derived neurons DISCUSSION The model organism, Dictyostelium discoideum, is a proteostatic outlier that naturally encodes for a large number of homopolymeric amino acid tracts. Among the repeat sequences encoded in the Dictyostelium genome, polyQ is among the most abundant, and the length of these polyQ repeats can reach well within the disease range in humans. Here we have identified SRCP1 a chaperone that suppresses polyQ aggregation in Dictyostelium. We show that SRCP1 is sufficient to suppress polyQ aggregation in multiple systems, including Dictyostelium, HEK293 cells, iPSC-derived human neurons, and zebrafish spinal cord neurons. SRCP1 accomplishes this by suppressing polyQ aggregation ultimately resulting in degradation of aggregation-prone polyQ proteins by the proteasome. In addition, SRCP1 is also degraded by the proteasome and its degradation is enhanced by the presence of polyQ-expanded protein. 4 ). We show that SRCP1’s serine-rich N-terminus is dispensable for SRCP1 activity in cells. However, we did identify a C-terminal pseudo-amyloid domain that is necessary for SRCP1’s ability to suppress polyQ aggregation. Finally, we show that expression of SRCP1 in Huntington’s Disease iPSC-derived neurons rescues defects in neurite outgrowth. Together, our findings identify a new type of chaperone that effectively prevents the accumulation of polyQ aggregates and provides insight into how nature has dealt with the problem of polyQ aggregation. SRCP1 is a Dictyostelium discoideum specific protein While no previous reports have analyzed SRCP1 function and SRCP1 does not have any readily recognizable domains, our data indicate it functions as a molecular chaperone. SRCP1 is a member of a large class of Dictyostelium discoideum genes that encode small proteins with serine-rich regions that have been implicated in Dictyostelium’s developmental process. This suggests that Dictyostelium’s developmental process may have led to proteins and pathways that allow Dictyostelium to suppress aggregation of its repeat-rich proteome. Unlike most of these genes, SRCP1 levels are not sharply developmentally regulated and instead, SRCP1 is expressed throughout the Dictyostelium life cycle. In the future, more work is needed to understand the function of other members of this gene family to determine if they play similar roles to SRCP1 in suppressing protein aggregation. Because Dictyostelium encode for amino acid repeats for every amino acid except tryptophan, it will be important to expand studies beyond polyQ. SRCP1 is a molecular chaperone SRCP1 does not contain any readily identifiable chaperone domains. Instead we identified a C-terminal domain in SRCP1 that resembles amyloid. This pseudo-amyloid domain is necessary for SRCP1’s chaperone activity in cells, and peptides that mimic its C-terminus alter the rate of amyloid formation in vitro. Previous work identified that peptides that efficiently integrated into amyloid fibers served as potent inhibitors of amyloid formation. Supportive of this, our in vitro data suggests SRCP1 inhibits aggregation via a direct interaction, indicating that SRCP1’s pseudo-amyloid domain may bind GFP Htt ex1Q74 once it has converted to an aggregation-prone amyloid fold. Alternatively, SRCP1 may recognize aggregated species and function as a disaggregase dismantling amyloid once it has formed. Additional work will be necessary to determine what species SRCP1 recognizes and at what stage of aggregation SRCP1 functions. In addition to SRCP1’s chaperone activity, the presence of SRCP1 results in the degradation of GFP Htt ex1Q74 via the proteasome where SRCP1 is also degraded. The mechanism by which SRCP1 and polyQ are targeted to the proteasome is unclear. Proteasomal substrates are typically targeted to the proteasome via ubiquitination. However, it is unclear if SRCP1 targets GFP Htt ex1Q74 for ubiquitination or is ubiquitinated itself. Alternatively, some proteins, like the neurodegenerative disease protein tau, are degraded in the absence of ubiquitination. This raises the possibility that SRCP1 may stimulate GFP Htt ex1Q74 degradation independent of ubiquitin signaling. In addition to a potential direct role in targeting polyQ-expanded proteins for degradation, SRCP1 may also function in a more indirect manner. SRCP1 could also function to maintain polyQ-expanded protein in a soluble state where it can be recognized by the cell’s degradation machinery. This would be more similar to proteins like small heat shock proteins that prevent protein aggregation or protein disaggregases like Hsp104 that block prion seed formation. In the future the identification of members of the proteostatic network that function with or downstream of SRCP1 will be important. What polyQ species does SRCP1 recognize? While there remains some debate about whether large aggregates observed in Huntington’s disease are toxic or protective, it is increasingly clear that smaller oligomeric huntingtin species are toxic. In addition to smaller oligomeric species causing toxicity, monomeric polyQ has also been shown to cause toxicity in cells. Interestingly, the toxicity of this monomeric polyQ protein is conformation dependent as only polyQ that has adopted a β-sheet conformation induces toxicity in cells. This is interesting because SRCP1’s pseudo-amyloid domain is necessary for its ability to prevent polyQ aggregates in cells and peptides that mimic this domain can delay the formation of polyQ aggregates in vitro. As a conformational change to a β-sheet-rich structure is an integral component of amyloid formation, we hypothesize that SRCP1’s pseudo-amyloid domain forms mixed amyloid nand selectively identifies monomeric polyQ that has adopted this β-sheet conformation. Consistent with this we see that SRCP1 has no effect on the levels of GFP Htt ex1Q23 or soluble GFP Htt ex1Q74 suggesting SRCP1 can selectively identify monomeric, aggregation-prone polyQ protein.. Additionally, we observe that overexpression of SRCP1 results in proteasomal degradation of aggregation-prone GFP Htt ex1Q74. This supports the notion that SRCP1 is selectively influencing the monomeric version of GFP Htt ex1Q74 as the proteasome is inefficient at degrading aggregated polyQ protein. SRCP1 could be influencing monomeric levels of GFP Htt ex1Q74 through multiple mechanisms, potentially stabilizing monomers prior to oligomerization or perhaps recognizing oligomers and promoting the formation of monomers. In the future, more mechanistic details are needed to determine how SRCP1 influences the oligomeric status of polyQ. SRCP1 provides insight into therapies SRCP1’s ability to selectively allow for the degradation of aggregation-prone, but not soluble GFP Htt ex1Q74 3 ) has important therapeutic implications. For example, huntingtin has essential roles in development, and ataxin-3, the polyQ protein that causes Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3, plays an important role in autophagy. These results argue that depletion of soluble polyQ proteins may be problematic. Instead, development of molecules that selectively identify and clear aggregation-prone, polyQ-expanded proteins may be a better therapeutic avenue. In the future, delineation of the molecular details that mediate the SRCP1/polyQ interaction may lead to the development of novel therapeutics to suppress polyQ aggregation. STAR * Methods Key Resources Table Contact For Reagent and Resource Sharing For all reagents and resource requests, please email the Lead Contact, Dr. Scaglione. Experimental Model and Subject Details Mammalian Cell Culture Human embryonic kidney293 cells were grown at 37°C and 5.2% CO 2. HEK293 cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin. Dictyostelium discoideum Cell Culture Dictyostelium discoideum AX4 cells were maintained in shaking cultures at 22°C in HL5 media. Cells were maintained at a density no greater than 6×10 6 cells/ml. For growth on bacteria, Dictyostelium cells between a density of 1×10 6 - 6×10 6 cells/ml, were diluted 1:100, 1:1000, and 1:10,000. Approximately, 500 μl of dilutions were spread on bacterial plates. To prepare bacterial plates, K. aerogenes was grown at room temperature for two days and then plated on freshly made SM plates, 1.9 g KH 2 PO 4, 0.6 g K 2 HPO 4, 20 g Agar) and incubated overnight at room temperature. Bacterial Cell Culture To obtain plasmid DNA, overnight bacterial cultures were grown overnight at 37°C with a selection anti biotic at 50 μg/ml. One Shot TOP10 chemically competent E.coli cells were used for any cloning procedures. For all other plasmids XL-10 E.coli cells were used. All E. coli cells were stored at −80°C until necessary. iPSC Culture Induced pluripotent stem cells used were karyotypically normal and mycoplasma negative. iPSCs were cultured in T25 ultra-low attachment culture flasks as non-adherent neural progenitor cell aggregates in Stemline medium supplemented with 100 ng/ml epidermal growth factor, 100 ng/ml fibroblast growth factor, 5 μg/ml heparin, and 0.5% N2 in humidified incubators at 37°C and 5.0% CO 2. Subsequently, neural progenitor cells were differentiated into neurons and astrocytes as previously described. Briefly, cells were dissociated with TrypLE and seeded onto Matrigel coated glass coverslips at 2.6×10 4 cells/cm 2. For differentiation, GFAP+ astrocytes and Tuj1+ neurons were grown in Neurobasal medium supplemented with 2% B27 and Antibiotic-Antimycotic for 1–2 weeks. Following differentiation, iPSC-derived astrocytes exhibit functional calcium responses to ATP and potassium currents, and iPSC-derived neurons exhibit NR2B NMDA receptor expression and appropriate electrophysiological properties Zebrafish Colony Management Zebrafish were housed in a closed circulating system using water purified by reverse osmosis, and subjected to 10% daily flush. Conductivity was maintained at 800 μS. Particulates were removed by drum filtration. The light:dark cycle was 14L:10D. Fish were fed three times per day with hatched artemia. For experiments, embryos derived from group crosses of the ZDR strain were used. Method Details Expression Constructs For Dictyostelium expression huntingtin exon-1 with 103 glutamines was cloned into pTX-GFP using KpnI and XbaI. For restriction-enzyme mediated integration, the kanamycin resistance cassette was swapped in place of the ampicillin resistance cassette using BamHI and SpeI sites in the pDM323 vector resulting in a kanamycin resistant pDM323 plasmid. GFP Htt ex1Q103 with 103 glutamines was cloned into the generated pDM323 KAN plasmid. The pBSR3 plasmid was used for the integration step. SRCP1, SRCP1 with amino acids 61–70 or 71–80 mutated to alanine, and SRCP1 with serine and threonine mutated to alanine were synthesized for mammalian expression into the PS100049 vector by Blue Heron. Individual point mutants of SRCP1 61–70 were generated using QuikChange Lightning Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit. Plasmids for mammalian expression encoding pEGFP huntingtin exon-1 with 23 or 74 glutamines were obtained from Addgene. Dictyostelium Cell Transformation Transformations were performed via electroporation as described previously. Briefly, 5×10 6 cells were spun down at 500 g for 5 minutes at 4°C. Cells were then washed three times with ice-cold H-50 buffer, resuspended in 100 μl of ice-cold H-50 buffer, and combined with 10 pg of DNA. Cell and DNA mixture was added to a pre-cooled 1 mm cuvette and electroporated at 0.85 kV/25 μF/time constant 0.6 msec twice with about 5 seconds between pulses. Cells were then incubated on ice for 5 minutes and added to 10 ml of HL5 media on 10 cm plates. Appropriate selection drugs were added the following day and included in media going forward. Selection drugs include G-418 at 10 μg/ml, blasticidin at 10 μg/ml, and hygromycin B at 50 μg/ml. Restriction Enzyme-Mediated Integration 10 μg of the pBSR3 construct was linearized with BamHI, electroporated into AX4 cells along with 50 units of DpnII, and selected for one week with blasticidin at 4 μg/ml. Following selection, pBSR3 cells were electroporated with pDM323 GFP Htt ex1Q103 construct and selected for one week with blasticidin at 4 μg/ml and G-418 at 10 μg/ml. To obtain individual colonies, cells were then plated on SM bacterial plates in serial dilutions. This was performed until the number of clones desired was obtained. Upon the appearance of Dictyostelium colonies on the bacterial plates, colonies were picked and grown in HL5 media in 96-well plates. Once cells had reached confluency, 96-well plates were washed with ice-cold starvation buffer twice and screened for aggregates using the ArrayScan High-Content Imaging System. Cells with greater than 5% aggregates were considered “hits” and grown up in 10 cm plates. For gene identification, genomic DNA was first isolated from Dictyostelium “hit” clones. Genomic DNA was then digested with either ClaI, HindIII, or Bglll for an hour at 37°C, purified and ligated for 30 min utes at room temperature. Ligated DNA was then transformed into One Shot TOP10 chemically competent E.coli. Bacterial colonies were screened by restriction digest for insert and then sent for sequencing. Dictyostelium Knockout Generation Dictystelium knockout vectors were generated following the StarGate® Acceptor Vector pKOSG-IBA-Dicty1 system. The knockout vector was then linearized, electroporated into AX4 cells, and selected for one week with blasticidin at 10 μg/ml. To isolate clones, the electroporated cells were plated on SM bacterial plates. Individual colonies were then picked and grown up to confluency in 10 cm dishes. To screen knockouts, genomic DNA was obtained and utilized in PCR to confirm blasticidin insertion as well as flanking regions of SRCP1. To confirm SRCP1 knockouts, clones were electroporated with GFP Htt ex1Q103 and selected with G-418 for one week at 10 μg/ml. Cells were then imaged by fluorescent microscopy and analyzed for GFP Htt ex1Q103 aggregates. Differential Centrifugation in Dictyostelium For differential centrifugation, 1 × 10 7 cells were washed with 1x PBS and lysed with NETN ). Samples were centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was removed and subjected to BCA protein assay. Remaining pellet was washed three times with NETN, resuspended in 1x Laemmli buffer and analyzed by western blot. Genomic DNA Isolation in Dictyostelium Approximately, 3 × 10 7 cells were pelleted by centrifugation for 4 minutes at 500 g at room temperature and washed twice with 1x PBS. Cells were resuspended in 1 ml of nuclei buffer sucrose, 1 mM EGTA) and lysed by the addition of 200 μl of 20% Triton X-100 and incubation on ice for 20 minutes. To obtain genomic DNA, lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant was removed and pellet was resuspended in 300 μl of proteinase K Buffer SDS) and incubated at 65°C for 30 min. Nucleic acids were extracted by adding an equal volume. Samples were inverted to mix and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The aqueous layer was transferred into a fresh tube and mixed with one volume of chloroform by inversion. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The aqueous layer was transferred into a fresh tube and precipitated overnight at −20°C with 2.5 volumes containing 10 μg ml −1 RNase A and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. DNA was precipitated again overnight at −20°C by the addition 1/10 volume for 18 hours. Following treatment, cells were imaged and/or harvested by spinning at 500 g at room temperature for 5 minutes. Cell pellets were washed three times with 1x PBS and lysed with ice-cold NETN. Lysates were then sonicated twice for 10–15 seconds. To verify inhibition, samples were run on SDS-PAGE and analyzed by western blot for ubiquitin. For autophagy inhibition, 1×10 7 cells were incubated either with vehicle or 150 μM NH 4 Cl for 8 hours. Following treatments, cells were imaged by fluorescent microscopy and plated on coverslips at a density of 2×10 6 cells per ml and allowing cells to adhere. Cells were then washed three times with 1x PBS and fixed with 100% ice-cold methanol at −20°C for 10 m inutes. Methanol was aspirated and cells were washed twice with 1x PBT, incubated in blocking buffer for 30 minutes at room temperature, and put in primary Rb anti ATG8a overnight at 4°C. Following primary cells were washed three times with 1x PBT and incubated in secondary goat anti rabbit for 2 hours at room temperature. Following secondary, cells were washed an additional three times with 1x PBT and mounted on slides with ProLong Gold Antifade reagent. Slides were imaged with a Nikon eclipse 90i confocal microscope. For Hsp70 inhibition, 1×10 7 cells were incubated either with DMSO or 80 μM VER155008 for 24 hours. Following treatments, cells were imaged and/or harvested by spinning at 500 g at room temperature for 5 minutes. Cell pellets were washed three times with 1x PBS and lysed with ice-cold NETN. Lysates were then sonicated twice for 10–15 seconds. To verify inhibition, samples were run on SDS-PAGE and analyzed by western blot for ATG8. Cell Viability Assay HEK293 cells were transfected as described with RFP or RFP SRCP1. Following transfections, cells were diluted to 500,000 cells/mL with 50,000 cells plated per well in duplicate from each transfection reaction in a 96-well plate. Serial dilutions were then performed down each column of the plate down to 390 cells per well. Cells were cultured for an additional 24 hours, then lysed using the CellTiter-Glo Kit. Luminescence was quantified between 565–700nm wavelengths on a Spark microplate reader to determine cell viability. Mammalian Cell Transfections Transfections were performed with Lipofectamine 2000 and adapted from the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells were plated on either 12- well or 6- well plates and transfected at 50–70% confluency. For 12- well transfections, 0.833 μg of DNA per well was mixed with 50 μl of OptiMEM media and incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature. Lipofectamine 2000 in a 2:1, μl of lipofectamine: μg DNA ratio was mixed with 50 μl of OptiMEM media and incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature. DNA and Lipofectamine were mixed and incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature. Fresh media was added to cells prior to the addition of DNA and lipofectamine. For 6- well transfections, the same protocol is followed except that 1.25 μg of DNA per well and 100 μl of OptiMEM for dilution was used. Media was changed 24 hours post-transfection and cells were harvested 48 hours post-transfection. Prior to harvesting, HEK293 cells were washed three times with ice-cold 1x PBS. Samples were then lysed with either 150 μl of ice-cold NETN or 1x Laemmli Buffer and sonicated twice for 5–8 seconds. iPSC transfections were performed with mixed cultures of astrocytes and neurons adhered to matrigel-coated coverslips, seeded at 2.6×10 4 cells/cm 2. iPSC transfections were performed using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions and recommended DNA concentrations for a 24-well transfection. Chemical Inhibition in HEK293 cells For proteasome inhibition, 30 hours post-transfection cells would be replenished with DMEM containing either DMSO or 10 μΜ MG132 for 18 hours. Prior to harvesting, HEK293 cells were washed three times with ice-cold 1x PBS and imaged by fluorescent microscopy with a 20x objective using the Evos FL Auto Imaging System. Cells were then lysed with either 150 μl of ice-cold NETN or 1x Laemmli Buffer and sonicated twice for 5–8 seconds. For autophagy inhibition, 24 hours post-transfection cells would be replenished with DMEM and treated with either DMSO or 5 mM 3-Methyladenine for an additional 24 hours. Prior to harvesting, HEK293 cells were washed three times with ice-cold 1x PBS and imaged by fluorescent microscopy with a 20x objective using the Evos FL Auto Imaging System. Cells were then lysed with either 150 μl of ice-cold NETN or 1x Laemmli Buffer and sonicated twice for 5–8 seconds. Microscopy For HEK293s’, slides were prepared by placing coverslips in 6- well plates and incubating with poly-L-lysine hydrobromide for an hour at room temperature. Coverslips were rinsed with 1x PBS three times prior to plating HEK293 cells. HEK293 cells were then transfected and fixed by incubation in 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 minutes at room temperature. Coverslips were mounted with ProLong Gold Antifade reagent and imaged with a 20x objective using the Evos FL Auto Imaging System or with a 40x objective using the Leica TCS SP5 Confocal Microscope System. For confocal, Z-stack images were obtained at 0.5- m intervals at 1024 × 1024 pixel resolution and merged using Fiji. Plated iPSC derived cultures of astrocytes and neurons were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 minutes at room temperature, 3–5 days after transfection. Cells were permeabilized and blocked prior to antibody labeling. Nuclei were labeled with Hoechst nuclear dye. Primary antibodies used were rabbit anti-Tuj1, chicken anti-Tuj1 and mouse anti-GFAP. Images were taken using an upright Nikon fluorescent microscope with a 40X objective. The number of neural cells with GFP positive puncta was quantified using NIS Elements object quantification tool and neurite length was measured using NIS Elements length measurement tool. For Dictyostelium cells, 1×10 7 cells were washed three times with ice-cold starvation buffer and then imaged with a 20x objective using the Evos FL Auto Imaging System. Zebrafish Analysis To test the effect of RFP SRCP1 on GFP Htt ex1Q74 aggregation in zebrafish, each plasmid was used for in vitro synthesis of mRNA. Newly fertilized embryos were injected with either 200 pg mRNA each of RFP SRCP1 and GFP Htt ex1Q74, or RFP alone and GFP Htt ex1Q74. Embryos were developed until 54 hours post fertilization, at which time live specimens were anesthetized in Tricane, embedded in 1% low-melt agarose, and subjected to confocal microscopy. Spinal cord images were taken at 100 μm x 100 μm and a scan depth of 50 μm. Single image planes from 488 nm and 568 nm excitation were collected. Images were then processed for threshold analysis using ImageJ and the total number puncta were scored. SDS-PAGE and Western Blot Following sonication, lysates were subjected to BCA protein assay and prepared for loading by the addition of 4x laemmli buffer and boiling for four minutes. Samples then loaded on SDS-polyacrylamide gels, ran at 175 V, and transferred onto an Immuno-blot PVDF membrane overnight at 30 V. Membranes were blocked in 5% milk in TBS with 0.1% Tween and incubated in primary antibody overnight at 4°C. Following primary, membranes were washed for 10 minutes at room temperature three times with TBST and incubated in secondary for an hour at room temperature. Membranes were then washed for 10 minutes at room temperature three times with TBST and then incubated in buffer for enhanced chemiluminescence. Anti-GFP, anti-RFP, anti-polyglutamine-expansion, and anti-ubiquitin were used at 1:1000. Peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies were used at 1:5,000 dilution. Anti-β-Actin was used as a loading control at 1:1000. Filter Trap Assay For HEK293 lysates, BCA protein assay was used to determine protein concentration. Forty micrograms of protein were diluted up 90 μl with NETN 10 μl of 10% SDS was added to protein sample and diluted to 1 ml with 1% SDS in 1x PBS, and filtered through a 0.2 mm cellulose acetate membrane filter using a DHM-48 filter trap hybridization manifold. Membrane was then washed with 1 ml of 1% SDS in 1x PBS and analyzed by western blotting. Huntingtin Exon-1 46Q Purification Huntingtin exon-1 with 46 glutamines in pET-32 was obtained from Addgene. Htt Q46 was grown in BL21 cells at 37°C to an optical density of 0.6 and indu ced with IPTG at 1 mM overnight at 16°C. After indu ction cells were spun down at 7,000 rpm for 5 minutes and resuspended in resuspension buffer. For lysis, lysozyme was added and cells were incubated at 4°C for 45 minutes. To obtain solub le fraction, lysates were spun down at 12,000 rpm for 10 minutes, after which supernatant was added to 3 ml of Ni-beads per 100 ml of lysate and tumbled for 4 hours at 4°C. Beads were then washed three t imes with resuspension buffer and then washed three more times with wash buffer. Protein was then eluted off beads by tumbling overnight at 4°C in 25 mL o f wash buffer with 250 mM imidazole. Thioflavin Aggregation Assays Aggregation assays were performed as previously described in Kakkar, V. et al. Briefly, 15 μM Htt 46Q was mixed with 90 pM SRCP1 peptide and 10 pM Thioflavin-T. All samples were prepared on ice in buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl 2. Enterokinase was added at 1.6 units/sample to initiate aggregation. All samples were prepared on ice and 50 μL aliquots were transferred to a flat, black 384-well plate and allowed to aggregate at 37°C for 16–18 hours. Fluorescence was measured wit h the excitation at 440 nm and emission at 480 nm, every 5 minutes using a Tecan Plate reader. Filter Trap Analysis of Recombinant Protein For filter trap assays, Htt 46Q was used at a concentration of 15 μM alone or with 90 μM of SRCP1 peptide. Peptide alone was used at 50 μM. All samples were prepared on ice in buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl 2. Enterokinase at 1.6 units/sample was added to initiate the reactions and samples were allowed to aggregate at 37°C for 5 and 72 hours. Approximately 40 μg of protein sample were then used for filter trap assay. Dynamic Light Scattering For dynamic light scattering measurements, Htt 46Q was used at a concentration of 15 μM alone or with 90 μM of SRCP1 peptide. Peptide alone was used at 50 μM. All samples were prepared on ice in buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl 2. Enterokinase at 1.6 units/sample was added to initiate the reactions and samples were allowed to aggregate at 37°C for 5 and 72 hours. Following aggregation, 10 μL of sample was loaded into a Hellma Analytics QC High Precision Cell Quartz Suprasil Cuvette. DLS measurements were collected at 25 °C by using a Malvern Zetasizer μV with a 50 mW laser at 830 nm, using a detector angle of 90°. The laser power was set to 30% power and integration time was set to 100 seconds. Each measurement consisted of 50–60 collections and are representative of n = 2, where each n consisted of at least 2 technical replicates. DLS spectra were analyzed and visualized in R by using the tidyverse, scales, and directlabels packages. Electron Microscopy For EM, samples were prepared on ice in buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl2. Htt 46Q was used at a concentration of 30 μM alone or with 174 μM of SRCP1 peptide. Peptide alone was used at 50 μM. Enterokinase at 2.2 units/sample was added to initiate the reactions and samples were allowed to aggregate at 37°C for 5 and 72 hours. Following aggregation assays, freshly ionized 400mesh Formvar / carbon coated copper grids were floated onto 10μl droplets of sample and stain for 2 minutes to allow adsorption of the sample to the formvar /carbon film. After adsorption, the sample was then wicked away from the edge of grid surface and the grid was immediately floated on the droplet of negative stain for 1 minute. The stain was wicked away from the edge of the grid and the grid was then allowed to air dry. Samples were examined in a Hitachi H600 TEM. Quantification and Statistical Analysis For the high-content imaging, HCS program was used to develop custom algorithms to detect puncta and number of cells. Using the two algorithms, the HCS program quantified the percent of cells with aggregates. For general microscopy analysis, ImageJ was used to quantify the number of cells per puncta and the puncta size where indicated. ImageJ was also used for the quantification of western blots. Briefly, band of interest would be measured for intensity and normalized to the intensity of the loading control. Values were then entered in Graph Pad where they were analyzed by either an ANOVA for multiple comparisons and Students t-tests for 1:1 comparisons followed by Tukey’s post-hoc analysis. Differences were considered statically significant at a p-value less than 0.05. For control iPSCs, four biological replicates from two independent differentiations were analyzed and for HD iPSCs, four biological replicates were analyzed from four separate differentiations using two independent HD lines. ​ Highlights SRCP1 is necessary for Dictyostelium’s resistance to polyglutamine aggregation SRCP1 is sufficient to convey resistance to polyglutamine aggregation in other organisms SRCP1 reduces the level of SDS-insoluble but not soluble polyQ-expanded protein Residues in SRCP1’s C-terminus are necessary for its function Supplementary Material Click here to view. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health Grant R35 GM119544, and the National Ataxia Foundation to K.M.S., F31 NS098754 to S.S., R01 GM067180 to R.B.H., and by grants from the Research and Education Program, a component of the Advancing a Healthier Wisconsin endowment at the Medical College of Wisconsin to A.D.E., B.A.L., and K.M.S. E.R.S. is supported in part by the Sophia Wolfe Quadracci Memorial Fellowship. We thank Dr. Jason King for providing an ATG8a antibody. We thank Dr. Clive Wells, EM Facility, Microbiology & Immunology, and MCW for help with the EM experiments. We thank Dr. Nathaniel Safren and Dr. Sami Barmada for helpful discussion. We thank Sokol Todi, Henry Paulson, and Hayley McLoughlin for feedback on the manuscript. Footnotes AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS: Contributions: S.S, A.J.K., H.N.H., A.F., S.L.S., J.M.E. J.R.B., E.R.S., and A.D.E. performed experiments. S.S., A.J.K., H.N.H., J.M.E., R.B.H., B.A.L., A.D.E, and K.M.S. planned experiments and analyzed results. S.S. and K.M.S. wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript. Declaration of Interests The Medical College of Wisconsin has a pending patent application on the use of SRCP1 and related derivatives for treatment of the polyglutamine diseases. Competing interests: The authors declare that no competing interests exist. Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. Article information Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 Jul 19. Published in final edited form as: Mol Cell. 2018 Jul 19; 71: 216–228.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.07.008 PMCID: PMC6091221 NIHMSID: NIHMS981575 PMID: 30029002 Stephanie Santarriaga, 1 Holly N. Haver, 1 Adam J. Kanack, 1 Alicia S. Fikejs, 1 Samantha L. Sison, 2 John M. Egner, 1 Jonathan R. Bostrom, 2 Emily R. Seminary, 2 R. Blake Hill, 1 Brian A. Link, 2 Allison D. Ebert, 2 and K. Matthew Scaglione 1, 3, * Stephanie Santarriaga 1 Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA Find articles by Stephanie Santarriaga Holly N. Haver 1 Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA Find articles by Holly N. Haver Adam J. Kanack 1 Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA Find articles by Adam J. Kanack Alicia S. Fikejs 1 Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA Find articles by Alicia S. Fikejs Samantha L. Sison 2 Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA Find articles by Samantha L. Sison John M. Egner 1 Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA Find articles by John M. Egner Jonathan R. Bostrom 2 Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA Find articles by Jonathan R. Bostrom Emily R. Seminary 2 Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA Find articles by Emily R. Seminary R. Blake Hill 1 Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA Find articles by R. Blake Hill Brian A. Link 2 Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA Find articles by Brian A. Link Allison D. Ebert 2 Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA Find articles by Allison D. Ebert K. Matthew Scaglione 1 Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA 3 Lead Contact Find articles by K. Matthew Scaglione 1 Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA 2 Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA 3 Lead Contact * For correspondence: ude.wcm@enoilgacsm PMC Copyright notice Publisher's Disclaimer The publisher's final edited version of this article is available free at Mol Cell 