 The data present here is related to the research article entitled “Sestrin-like protein from Dictyostelium discoideum is involved in autophagy under starvation stress”. The article provides data to show that Dictyostelium Sestrin share conserved amino acid residues, cysteine and aspartic acid with human Sestrin2. In human Sestrin2, these residues are involved in antioxidant activity along with AMPK activation and mTORC1 suppression. The article provides the method of purification and expression of the fusion protein driven by the endogenous sesn promoter and show prestalk expression during development. Keywords: Sestrin, Dictyostelium, Purification, Expression Specifications table 1. Data Our aim was to identify, express and purify the Sestrin from Dictyostelium discoideum, a protist whose development is initiated under starvation stress and thus require mechanism to mobilize resources that could help maintain cellular homeostasis, which largely depends on autophagy. Accordingly, we found one Sestrin-like protein in Dictyostelium, which showed homology to human Sestrin2. Sestrins are involved in autophagy. Thus, studies in Dictyostelium would be beneficial in delineating the process of Sestrin-mediated autophagy as it naturally follows a caspase-independent cell death, thus preventing any crosstalks with apoptosis. The conserved cysteine residue at position 221 in DdSesn is also present at position 125 in the catalytic region of HsSesn2. This residue present in HsSesn2 has similarity to bacterial AhpD family proteins that are involved in oxido-reductase activity and is essential for antioxidant functions. The conserved aspartate residues present at positions 525 and 526 in DdSesn is also present at positions 405 and 406 in HsSesn2. These residues present in HsSesn2 play a key role in the activation of AMPK and also the suppression of mTORC1. Based on the presence of these conserved residues it is speculated that DdSesn may exert a possible cytoprotective action via the antioxidant property and modulate the TOR signaling pathway. The Ddsestrin gene was overexpressed, purified through nickel column and identified by MALDI-TOF. The fusion protein was localized in the prestalk region in all the multicellular structures developed. 2. Experimental design, materials and methods 2.1. Experimental design To further evaluate the above idea regarding the functions of Sestrin, the single sestrin-like gene from Dictyostelium database was identified and the mutants were created. 2.2. Materials and methods 2.2.1. Determination of conserved amino acids in DdSesn Based on the human Sestrin protein, DdSesn also has three domains. The MUSCLE program for the multiple sequence alignment between the full-length DdSesn and human Sesn2 domains was used. Fig. 1 Multiple sequence alignment between human Sesn A, B and C domains with the full-length protein sequence of DdSesn. Alignment with human Sesn A domain. Alignment with human Sesn B domain... 2.2.2. Purification of DdSesn protein Protein was purified from cells, which expressed DdSesn fusion protein having enhanced green fluorescent protein at the C-terminal and a 6x-His tag at the N-terminal. Nickel affinity gel column from Sigma Aldrich was used for the purification of the protein. Protein was confirmed by immuno-blotting using anti-His antibody and further by MALDI-TOF. Briefly, cells from the log phase culture were harvested using chilled 1x KK2 buffer and washed twice with the same buffer. Pellet obtained was re-suspended in 10 ml of cell lysis buffer having 1x protease inhibitor cocktail and 1% v/v Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 5% Glycerol). The cell suspension was incubated for 30 min on ice with intermittent mixing and then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm at 4 °C for 20 min. The binding of clear supernatant with affinity gel was allowed by keeping the column at 4 °C under shaken conditions for approximately 3–4 hours. The affinity gel was pre-equilibrated with 2 ml of equilibration buffer before binding to the supernatant. The mixture was allowed to settle in the purification column and flow throw was collected under gravity and stored for further use. Washing of beads with wash buffer was performed and the eluate was stored. Serial elution of bound protein using elution buffer concentrations of imidazole) was carried. The last elution was for overnight at 4 °C. Eluants having 6x-His tag were run on the SDS-PAGE followed by excision of the desired band and further sequenced using MALDI-TOF. Mascot search and further confirmation by western blotting using anti-His antibody was performed. Fig. 2 Purification and confirmation of DdSesn protein. Sestrin protein was purified using the overexpressing strain and confirmed by western blotting using anti-His antibody. Immunoblot using anti-His antibody. Expression of fusion protein was driven under the endogenous sestrin promoter. For this, the region harboring the putative promoter and the ORF was PCR amplified using the primers given in Table 1 and cloned in p vector using XbaI and BglII restriction sites that replaces the original promoter. The construct. We have analyzed both prestalk and prespore specific genes in the wild type and sestrin knockout cells collected from different developmental stages. The data is shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4 mRNA expression patterns of cell-type specific genes as studied by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Relative abundance of ecmA, ecmB and pdsA transcripts in Ax2 and sesn - cells during development. ig7 was... Funding sources SS thanks partial grants from DST-PURSE, UPE-II and FIST-II. SR thanks UGC for research fellowship. Footnotes Transparency document associated with this article can be found in the online version at Transparency document The following is the transparency document related to this article: Multimedia Component 1 Click here to view. Article information Data Brief. 2019 Apr; 23: 103733. Published online 2019 Mar 8. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2019.103733 PMCID: PMC6660483 PMID: 31372400 S. Rafia and S. Saran ∗ School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, 110067, India S. Rafia: moc.liamg@762aifar ; S. Saran: ni.ca.unj.liam@narass : moc.liamtoh@naras_atewhs ∗ Corresponding author. ni.ca.unj.liam@narass, moc.liamtoh@naras_atewhs Received 2018 Dec 31; Revised 2019 Jan 23; Accepted 2019 Jan 30. Copyright © 2019 The Author This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( Articles from Data in Brief are provided here courtesy of Elsevier 