 Entamoeba histolytica is one of the least understood protists in terms of taxa-, clone- and kin-discrimination/recognition ability. Yet, the capacity to tell apart same or self from different or non-self has long been demonstrated in pathogenic eukaryotes like Trypanosoma and Plasmodium, free-living social amebas, budding yeast, and in numerous bacteria and archaea. Kin discrimination/recognition is explained under inclusive fitness theory; that is, the reproductive advantage that genetically closely related organisms can gain by cooperating preferably with one another, minimizing antagonism and competition with kin, and excluding genetic strangers. In this review, we rely on the outcomes of in vitro pairwise discrimination/recognition encounters between seven Entamoeba lineages to discuss the biological significance of taxa-, clone- and kin-discrimination/recognition in a range of generalist and specialist species. We then focus our discussion on the importance of these laboratory observations for E. histolytica ’s life cycle, host infestation, and implications of these features of the amebas’ natural history for human health. Keywords: Amoebozoa, biological cheating, green-beard genes, inclusive fitness, kin recognition, kin selection, population bottleneck, protists SCIENTIFIC observations indicate that a large variety of unicellular eukaryotes, members of major phylogenetic lineages, can tell apart same or self from different or non-self. Indeed, protists have taxa-, clone- and kin-discrimination/recognition ability. One of such protists is Entamoeba histolytica, an iconic Amoebozoa due to its relevance to human health. Figure 1 Entamoeba histolytica, a member of the Amoebozoa/Archamoebae, belongs to one, among many, eukaryotic unicellular lineages in which taxa-, clone- or kin-discrimination/recognition ability has been documented in the... The capacity to discriminate/recognize kin, which is also common in invertebrates, vertebrates and plants, has been explained historically under inclusive fitness theory ; that is, the reproductive advantage that genetically closely related organisms can gain by cooperating preferably with one another, minimizing antagonism and competition with kin, and excluding genetic strangers. The term inclusive fitness refers to the total genetic contribution an individual makes to future generations via its/his/her own reproduction or via helping others to reproduce. For comprehensive reviews of kin recognition in unicellular eukaryotes, as well as prokaryotes see Espinosa and Paz-y-Miño-C, Paz-y-Miño-C and Espinosa. In recent clone-recognition experiments, we demonstrated that amebas of diverse species could discriminate self from different. We first showed that seven Entamoeba cell-lines kept in our laboratory could be characterized morphometrically as per the amebas’ length, width, and cell-surface area ; we documented that the lineages differed statistically from one another based on these measurements. More importantly, we also demonstrated that in mix-cell-line cultures between closely-related or distant-phylogenetic clone-lines, amebas consistently aggregated with clone members and avoided unrelated clones. Our studies included the identification of putative cell-signals secreted by the amebas and which known functions in Entamoeba spp. included cell proliferation, cell adhesion, cell movement, and stress-induced encystation. Figure 2 The seven Entamoeba clones kept in our laboratory were morphometrically different from one another as per cell length, width and soma surface area. Of these three measurements, cell length was the most informative for clone-morphometric discrimination... In this review, we center our analysis on E. histolytica HM-1:IMSS and discuss the significance of its taxa-, clone- and kin-discrimination/recognition potential for the life cycle, host-infestation, and implications of these aspects of the amebas’ biology for human health. Based on our in vitro discrimination/recognition experiments and analogous evidence reported in the literature about other pathogenic or free-living protists, we propose that E. histolytica can cooperate with kin to colonize hosts and deter genetically unrelated, or distantly related rivals. Even though kin-recognition alleles have not yet been identified in E. histolytica, we think that such alleles do exist and that silencing them, or chemically altering the proteins they encode for, the amebas’ capacity to aggregate and, therefore, colonize hosts, encyst or form abscesses inside them, can potentially be disrupted. INTRA- AND INTER-LINEAGE DISCRIMINATION ABILITY Although evidence of taxa- and kin-discrimination/recognition in invertebrates, vertebrates and some plants has been gathered since the 1960s, the advent of protists models into this field of research is new, early 2000s onwards. Entamoeba species are among the least understood protists in terms of taxa-, clone- and kin-discrimination/recognition potential. Here we often use the terms discrimination/recognition together in reference to the academic field of kin recognition and for that practical reason, but there is a historical debate about the proper use of both terms that goes beyond the scope of this review. The seven cell-lines kept in our laboratory are representative of major lineages within the genus Entamoeba. Some, like E. invadens IP-1 and E. invadens VK-1:NS, differ only in a single nucleotide in the ssrRNA sequence, yet they discriminate one another as much as any other pair of phylogenetically more distant taxa. In fact, all cell lines segregate into single-clone clusters when grown in diverse combinations of mixed cultures, as noted in the phylogeny of Fig. 3 : most closely related sister taxa E. invadens IP-1 vs. E. invadens VK-1:NS ; more distantly related sister taxa E. histolytica HM-1:IMSS vs. E. dispar ; between a representative of a known multi-species clade vs. the most distant member of that clade ; as well as between members of two distinct clades. Note that we have obtained comparable results with the pair E. histolytica HM-1:IMSS vs. E. moshkovskii Laredo. In Fig. 4 we only show the microscopy images corresponding to the exemplar pair E. histolytica HM-1:IMSS vs. E. dispar. Figure 3 Phylogeny based on ssrRNA sequences of the Entamoeba clones discussed in this review. The seven clones depicted are representative of major lineages within the genus Entamoeba or single-cell-line cultures. A. Fluorescent micrograph of E. histolytica HM-1:IMSS labeled... The morphometric data combined with the mix-cell-line-culture outcomes between phylogenetically close or distant lineages 4 ) demonstrate that Entamoeba spp. are capable of in vitro taxa- and clone-discrimination/recognition. Equal abilities have been reported previously in other Amoebozoa/Mycetozoa, including the free-living social amebas in the genera Dictyostelium and Polysphondylium. Note that the cell-lines in our laboratory correspond to niche-generalists/specialists: commensal and pathogenic. Entamoeba moshkovskii can be found in riverine sediments to brackish coastal pools or, like E. dispar, it can also be pathogenic. IMPLICATIONS OF CLONE-DISCRIMINATION ABILITY FOR E. histolytica ’s life cycle Host-biont colonization in various pathogenic protists includes sequential population crashes, from the moment of arrival at the host-biont to the colonization of tissues and organs, proliferation within them, and subsequent dispersal to new host-bionts. The host-biont immune system, the gut digestive enzymes, or competition with con- and heterospecifics that had settled previously in the host-biont anatomy contribute to crash the populations of invaders. Repetitive population bottlenecks combined with serial founder effects lead to clonality in surviving invaders, which ultimately benefit from cooperating with kin. In instances in which Trypanosoma or Plasmodium detect the presence and proliferation of competitor clones inside the host, the cells can respond via fast clonal expansion, active inhibition of competitors, habitat/niche partitioning within the host by colonizing distinctive host environments, or cooperative behaviors with kin, like social motility in Trypanosoma, which exclude unrelated cells. Comparably, Plasmodium can reduce the investment in sexual reproduction and instead continue in blood-stages, replicate clonally, achieve “safety in numbers,” and postpone the terminal maturation into gametocytes. These strategies help explain why Trypanosoma and Plasmodium monoclonal infections tend to be more frequent than polyclonal infections, although ecological contingencies inside and outside the host-biont environments also play a role in inducing clonality. We think that E. histolytica experiences analogous population dynamics during host-biont colonization, from the instant of arrival at the host’s oral cavity, to the exposure to digestive secretions in the gut, colonization of the intestinal lumen and the mucous layer in the small/large intestines, and encystation prior to dispersal out, to other host bionts. Host colonization infrequently includes the perforation of the colon endothelium, invasion of the blood capillaries and vessels, and migration to the host-biont organs. In fact, just like in other pathogenic or free-living protists, each successful stage of E. histolytica ’s life cycle is probably preceded by a population bottleneck. Figure 5 Population bottlenecks in the life cycle of Entamoeba histolytica. Upon host’s ingestion of contaminated food and water, ameba-cysts will face the enzymatic milieu of the oral... Why are the in vitro taxa- and clone-discrimination experiments 4 ) informative of E. histolytica ’s life history? To address this question, we would like to take a look at Trypanosoma ’s social motility, which was discovered in the laboratory fairly recently. When T. brucei cells were inoculated in the center of an agar surface, the trypanosomes formed migration swarms, star-shaped and with multiple spreading fronts or “spokes.” The collective in vitro motility depended on each individual cell’s flagellum for propulsion. It was later proposed that swarming was central to the trypanosomes journey from the vector-biont midgut to the salivary glands, where the cells completed development into mammalian-infective morphs. Imhof et al. documented that intact social motility gave a virulence advantage to wild-type T. brucei carriers of the Rft1 allele over null mutants Rft1 ‒/‒ whose ability to migrate was compromised and, therefore, could not perforate the insect’s midgut, mobilize into the fly’s body cavity and, therefore, aim for the salivary glands. A parallel scenario of arduous migration, population crashes and repetitive founder effects are experienced by Plasmodium spp. once inside a mosquito-biont. Cell death is such that in P. berghei 80–90% of the infective cells perish inside the insect vector. Part of this mortality is attributable to the vector’s immunity and the toxicity inside the mosquito’s midgut. Thus, our in vitro clone discrimination/recognition experiments with Entamoeba spp. 4 ) are, possibly, an indication that, to maximize fitness and deter rivals, amebas associate and cooperate with clone members precisely to overcome the predictable challenges of population demise and stochastic opportunities to recover inside the host. Single amebas cannot survive, and associations or cooperation with genetic strangers will be maladaptive in terms of fitness and prone to cheating. Consequently, clonal proliferation of kin, or cooperation with the closest genetic relatives that are still compatible for cell-cell alliances, shall be most advantageous. In cases of co-infections by diverse clones or ameba species, the ameba ability to discriminate/recognize taxa-, clone- or kin will also facilitate fine-scale niche partitioning when invading the host and colonizing its tissues/organs, or forming abscesses. Reyna-Fabián et al. have reported bi-species infection in a liver abscess from a single human host in Mexico, respectively; see Ali et al. 2005 for genotyping approach). Ali et al. have documented genetically distinctive E. histolytica infections in 16 patients from Bangladesh, one from the United States and one from Italy, when contrasting the ameba genotypes in the intestine versus the liver. Because liver abscesses developed during months after the initial amebas arrived in the gut, it was likely that the distinctive genotype in the intestine, which differed from the liver abscess genotype, originated in secondary infections among the Bangladeshi patients. By contrast, the United States and Italy patients carried closely related genotypes in the intestine and liver, possibly derived from a single ancestor. In the total 18 cases examined, the liver abscesses were monoclonal. We are confident to suggest that in these scenarios of mixed-species presence in liver abscesses, amebas use their ability to tell apart same from different to actively segregate and associate preferentially with kin or with the closest genetic relative available. Fine-scale clone segregation has been widely documented in both free-living and laboratory experiments with social amebas. Although chimeric clusters of unrelated cells have been observed in free-living social amebas when forming fruiting bodies, clonal associations for fruiting-body formation and spore production often surpass reproductive success in respect to mixed cell aggregations. Mating types have also been reported in D. purpureum and successful crossings tend to occur preferentially between genetically closely related, compatible cell lines. In dictyostelids, kin-discrimination/recognition ability is crucial because fruiting body formation and spore production involve inevitable cell death. Likewise, mortality in E. histolytica during host invasion has been linked to the interaction among host immunity, virulence of the ameba strain and species composition of the gut biome. Thus, in our view, altruistic cooperation between close E. histolytica relatives shall maximize survival and reproduction of self, self-like or kin. Moreover, in cyst-forming taxa like E. histolytica as well as in other protists, encysting allows groups of cells to survive the harshness of the host environment, but because both cyst formation and programmed cell death co-occur as integral parts of these organisms’ life cycles, the need for a synchronous balance between encysting/abscessing and PCD has been proposed. Because abscesses are communities of organisms living in close proximity, sometimes formed by multiple clones prone to cheat on one another, the occurrence of adaptive PCD requires the ability to discriminate between same/clone- and different/non-clone-members. Keep in mind that like Trypanosoma and Plasmodium, pathogenic or social amebas do undergo instances of sexual reproduction in their life cycles, but the predominant clonal expansion of populations and subpopulations has long been associated with opportunistic fitness advantage during host invasion and when facing stochastic environmental change inside the host or in the wild. Recombination, therefore, does not occur with enough frequency to alter the prevalent pattern of clonal population structure. The role of clonality as a maximizing-fitness strategy has also been documented in Giardia, Leishmania, Naegleria, Toxoplasma and Trichomonas. POSSIBLE RELEVANCE TO HUMAN HEALTH Since encystation and/or abscess formation require cell aggregation, we think that disruption of the amebas’ capacity to group might be a viable approach to mitigate amebiasis. Blocking encystation could reduce the dissemination of infection because transmission relies on cyst dormancy, but it shall not cure amebiasis considering that most hosts are asymptomatic and release cysts undetected. However, we know little, if anything, about the genes involved in E. histolytica taxa-, clone- or kin-discrimination/recognition. We speculate that such potential genes might operate analogously to the “green-beard” alleles csA or tgrB1 and tgrC1 in D. discoideum, but homologs to these genes in Entamoeba spp. have not been identified. To remain in intimate proximity, D. discoideum amebas rely on cell-membrane adhesion proteins encoded by csA ; when wild-type csA + cells are grown in mixed cultures with csA ‒ knockouts, the amebas cluster preferentially with those equipped with fully functional adhesion polypeptides. Interestingly, the tgrB1 and tgrC1 alleles work as complementary pairs; tgrB1 and tgrC1 are necessary and sufficient for amebas to discriminate between same and different, and to adhere to each other during the social phase of the life cycle. Just like csA, the tgr genes are polymorphic and encode for plasma membrane glycoproteins. Hirose et al. have demonstrated that the tgrB1 - tgrC1 genes not only work in reciprocal recognition between cells, but also that these alleles are required for two major functions during the amebas’ social cycle. First, discrimination/recognition between genetically compatible cell lines during active aggregation for social cooperation and fruiting body formation ; this includes prevention of exploitation by unrelated cells or cheaters. And, second, coordinated and cooperative cell motility, cell polarization for collective movement, and later cell differentiation during fruiting body formation. These allorecognition-mediated events, without which the multicellular aggregation cannot occur, are likely coupled by cell signaling codependent on the compatibility and matching between cells carrying the right copies of the tgrB1 - tgrC1 alleles. Note that green-beard-gene mediated cellular aggregations for cooperation have also been documented in budding yeast, the bacteria Myxococcus xanthus, Burkholderia thailandensis, Escherichia coli, as well as in Agrobacterium, Bacillus, Citrobacter, Dickeya, Edwardsiella, Enterobacter, Erwinia, Klebsiella, Neisseria, Paenibacillus, Pectobacterium, Photorhabdus, Proteus, Rhizobium, Salmonella, Pseudomonas, Xenorhabdus, Vibrio and Yersinia. In essence, green-beard genes are quite common in microbes and it is reasonable to suspect their existence in Entamoeba spp. As noted earlier, we have identified putative cell-signals secreted by the amebas during co-growth in clone-discrimination/recognition experiments. Briefly, we found six proteins common to Ei -IP-1 and Ei -VK-1:NS, as follows: RasGap/Ankyrin, coronin-WD40, actin, protein kinases, heat shock 70, and ubiquitin. Some of their known functions in Entamoeba spp. included: cell proliferation, cell adhesion, cell movement, migration, and stress-induced encystation. Specifically, in E. histolytica, heat shock 70 helps amebas cope with oxidative stress and it is expressed during liver-abscess formation. Heat-shock proteins are also synthesized during thermal stress in S. cerevisiae and encystation in Giardia lamblia. And in E. invadens, a variety of analogous polypeptides are expressed during stress-induced encystation. Moreover, comparable protein-functions to those listed here have been identified in homologs in Dictyostelium and Plasmodium. In P. falciparum, coronin coordinates the alignment of actin filaments that seem to guide directional motility in the cells. Other researchers have proposed that during encystation, Entamoeba cells attach to one another via molecular bindings of galactose -terminated ligands to specific receptors on neighboring cells. Although the identity of the hypothetical -terminate ligand is unknown, another protein, the Gal/Gal-NAc lectin, is suspected to be “the receptor.” The latter inference is based on experiments with E. histolytica in which Gal/Gal-NAc lectin mediates cell-cell adherence, binding of trophozoites to the mucous layer of the host’s intestinal endothelia, or to bacteria and red-blood cells during colonization of the gut. Thus, the hypothetical galactose -terminated ligand and its suspected Gal/Gal-NAc lectin receptor might mediate trophozoite aggregation for encystation, but this needs extensive research. In sum, we have suggested that these extra- and intracellular signals likely interact in the overall physiology of Entamoeba spp., inducing cells to respond adaptively to clone-clone associations for proliferation, locomotion or encystation. In this respect, there is evidence that secretion of coronin to the milieu, by E. histolytica, and of RasGap, actin, protein kinases, heat-shock, and ubiquitin, by D. discoideum, are directly involved in cell-cell adhesion, regulation of proliferation, or cell aggregation. This implies that the proteins we have identified have similar functions in other Entamoeba clones. Realize that this area of work requires the identification of the genes involved in these cell-cell interactions, but it is evident that E. invadens IP-1 and E. invadens VK-1:NS, and likely E. histolytica, excrete to their surroundings chemical cues for recognition and aggregation. Thus, by interfering with the production of these secretions and/or altering their active chemical properties once present in the milieu, we think that amebas’ aggregations could be disrupted and, therefore, their capacity to encyst and be transmitted from infected to healthy individuals. Current anti-amebic drugs seem to work either at the level of the intestinal lumen, where trophozoites proliferate via cell divisions or at the level of the intestine’s endothelium or tissue abscesses, on the invasive trophozoites that have already penetrated the gut or colonized internal organs, but not at both levels. Note that the localized efficacy of these drugs is linked to their differential absorption in the lumen versus the intestinal endothelium/tissue abscesses, rather than to the amebas’ sensitivity to the compounds; in fact, some nitroimidazoles can work well in the lumen if they are chemically prevented from being absorbed and allowed to remain in the lumen where they can act upon the trophozoites. The nitroimidazole drugs apparently bind to amebas’ metabolic enzymes and block the trophozoites’ capacity to cope with oxidative stress. However, these drugs, particularly the nitroimidazoles that are most commonly prescribed, are highly toxic to patients, have generated resistance, or can be mutagenic and carcinogenic. For these reasons, we think that exploring the possibility of managing amebiasis from an alternative perspective may supplement current therapeutics. But these research programs need further development. CONCLUSIONS The Entamoeba spp. ability to discriminate/recognize taxa-, clone-, or kin, as observed in laboratory aggregation/segregation experiments, suggests that amebas use it during their life cycles to associate and cooperate preferentially with kin, and to deter genetically distant or unrelated rivals. Because taxa-, clone- and kin-discrimination/recognition has been documented in a variety of unicellular-eukaryotic lineages, bacteria and some archaea, as well as in animals and plants, we infer that in Entamoeba spp., and specifically in E. histolytica, 4 ), taxa-, clone- and kin-discrimination/recognition are ‒like in other organisms‒ crucial for survival and reproduction in terms of direct and indirect fitness. Analogously to the in vitro social migration observations in Trypanosoma, which were later linked to swarm coordinated movements inside the tsetse fly gut and body cavity, our in vitro observations of Entamoeba spp. aggregation behavior, in which cells segregate with kin and avoid unrelated clones, are an indication that group-forming with kin helps amebas to survive population bottlenecks awaiting them inside the host. Population recovery via fast clonal propagation and subsequent association and cooperation with close genetic relatives will secure highest fitness gain. In cases in which Entamoeba spp. form abscesses in the host’s tissues and/or organs, it is possible that amebas segregate spatially according to kinship and clone identity, similar to the segregation observed in social amebas in the field or laboratory. But this needs to be investigated by carefully sampling the abscesses at increasing microscopic to macroscopic distances in order to assess clone-clone spatial distribution in multi-clone or multi-species infections. This is relevant since abscesses are communities of microbes and studies suggest that they can be composed of genotype mixes, although the prevalence of clonality in protistan infections is often assumed ; thus, clone segregation in abscesses needs to be confirmed. Even though we do not know the genes encoding for E. histolytica preferential aggregation with kin, we think that such alleles exist and operate comparably to the csA or tgrB1 - trgC1 green-beards in D. discoideum or perhaps FLO1 in S. cerevisiae. But we do know that aggregations of E. invadens IP-1 and E. invadens VK-1:NS secrete into the milieu signals associated with cell proliferation, cell adhesion, cell movement, and stress-induced encystation. Thus, because encystation and abscess formation require cell aggregation, we postulate that disruption of E. histolytica capacity to group, via silencing of alleles yet to be discovered, or drugs that alter the chemistry of the recruitment signals secreted into the milieu, might be approaches to mitigating amebiasis. 