 Anthropogenic global change is increasingly raising concerns about collapses of symbiotic interactions worldwide. Therefore, understanding how climate change affects symbioses remains a challenge and demands more study. Here, we look at how simulated warming affects the social ameba Dictyostelium discoideum and its relationship with its facultative bacterial symbionts, Paraburkholderia hayleyella and Paraburkholderia agricolaris. We cured and cross‐infected ameba hosts with different symbionts. We found that warming significantly decreased D. discoideum's fitness, and we found no sign of local adaptation in two wild populations. Experimental warming had complex effects on these symbioses with responses determined by both symbiont and host. Neither of these facultative symbionts increases its hosts’ thermal tolerance. The nearly obligate symbiont with a reduced genome, P. hayleyella, actually decreases D. discoideum's thermal tolerance and even causes symbiosis breakdown. Our study shows how facultative symbioses may have complex responses to global change. Keywords: bacterial symbionts, Dictyostelium discoideum, global warming, Paraburkholderia, symbiosis Experimental warming had complex effects on the social amoeba symbioses with responses determined by both symbiont and host. The less facultative symbiont, P. hayleyella, actually decreases D. discoideum's thermal tolerance and even causes symbiosis breakdown. 1. INTRODUCTION Global warming causes biodiversity crises, which impact organisms not only directly but also indirectly through other organisms with which they interact. Symbiosis is important for global biodiversity, ecosystem services, and agriculture. In recent years, the possibility that elevated temperatures resulting from global warming may substantially affect biodiversity through disrupting mutualistic associations such as the coral–dinoflagellate symbiosis, insect–bacteria symbioses, and plant–pollinator interactions has been highlighted. The coral–dinoflagellate model, which is an obligate symbiotic relationship, showed that thermal stress could lead to coral bleaching. The stable, long‐term mutualistic relationship between insects and their carried symbionts is also vulnerable to thermal stress. However, empirical investigations of facultative mutualism under global warming have been scarce and mostly focus on insects. Research on facultative symbiosis is needed. The symbiosis between social amebae and certain Paraburkholderia bacterial species is a promising system for gaining insight into how facultative mutualisms respond to global warming. The soil‐dwelling ameba Dictyostelium discoideum is a good model to address eukaryote–microbe interactions because of its dynamic relationship with bacteria. In a nutrient‐rich environment, D. discoideum lives as independent haploid amebae that reproduce by binary fission. When food is scarce, cAMP‐mediated aggregation occurs, leading to the formation of multicellular slugs that move to a favorable location to develop into fruiting bodies. In these fruiting bodies, approximately 20% of the cells die to form a long thin stalk that supports a spherical structure called the sorus, while the remaining 80% ascend into the sorus and turn into spores. D. discoideum is a predator of bacteria and a popular model for studying biological phenomena, including multicellularity, chemical signaling, and social phenomena. In addition to eating bacteria, D. discoideum can also form symbiotic associations with some bacterial species. About one‐third of wild‐collected clones of D. discoideum, which are referred to as “primitive farmers,” have stable associations with their symbiotic bacteria throughout their life cycle. These farmer clones can carry bacteria during spore dispersal and seed them as new food sources. Later studies found that farming status is induced by symbiotic bacteria belonging to the genus Paraburkholderia ). These Paraburkholderia are not edible themselves, but they facilitate further carriage of food bacteria that on their own would be digested. The inedible symbionts actively find their ameba hosts through chemotaxis, reside within food vacuoles, and form very stable associations. Therefore, we also define their association as “bacterial carriage” by social ameba. FIGURE 1 Scheme summarizing the social ameba– Paraburkholderia symbiosis. Figure courtesy of Susanne DiSalvo Both D. discoideum and their Paraburkholderia symbionts can live independently, making them facultative symbioses. However, P. hayleyella shows three indications of being more obligate than P. agricolaris. First, it is a sister species comprising a very long branch in the phylogeny, suggesting that it has been associated with amebas for a long time. Second, consistent with greater dependence on the host, it grows slowly on its own under laboratory conditions compared to P. agricolaris. P. hayleyella also has greatly reduced carbon usage compared to P. agricolaris. Finally, it shows the genome size reduced by over one half compared to close relatives. This system gives us an opportunity to investigate how increased temperatures associated with global warming could potentially affect facultative symbioses. Facultative symbioses could be more vulnerable to global warming compared to obligate symbioses because their relationships are less stable. Alternatively, facultative symbioses may be more resilient to global warming because both partners can live on their own and therefore may be more resilient to environmental changes. We will test whether these facultative symbionts help or harm their hosts under warming, and also whether the symbiosis is less or more resilient with the more facultative species P. agricolaris versus the more obligate species P. hayleyella. We first tested the thermal tolerance of social amebas using common garden experiments. Then, we mixed and matched social ameba hosts with different Paraburkholderia symbionts to investigate how different combinations respond to simulated global warming. FIGURE 2 Diagram of symbiosis experimental design. The experiment explores how thermal stress affects D. discoideum – Paraburkholderia symbiosis by mixing and matching D. discoideum with two facultative symbionts P. agricolaris... 2. MATERIALS AND METHODS 2.1. D. discoideum clones and culture conditions We used wild D. discoideum isolates collected at Mountain Lake Biological Station in Virginia, Houston Arboretum and Nature Center in Texas and Little Butt's Gap in North Carolina. These clones were uninfected or infected with either P. agricolaris or P. hayleyella. We grew D. discoideum from previously frozen spores on SM/5 agar plates, 2 g yeast extract, 0.2 g MgCl 2, 1.9 g KH 2 PO 4, 1 g K 2 HPO 4, and 15 g agar per liter) with food bacterium Klebsiella pneumoniae at room temperature. TABLE 1 List of wild D. discoideum clones and Paraburkholderia isolates used in this study. Checkmarks indicate specific clones in each test 2.2. Symbionts We used D. discoideum ‐associated Paraburkholderia symbionts isolated and described in previous studies. P. agricolaris strains were isolated from QS70, QS159, and NC21 D. discoideum hosts, while P. hayleyella strains were isolated from QS11, QS21, and NC28 D. discoideum hosts, respectively. Specific isolates used in this study are listed in Table 1. 2.3. Choosing experimental temperature for simulating warming We wanted to choose an experimental temperature that is stressful to social amebae but does not cause complete death. We tested growth conditions of D. discoideum under different temperatures ranging from 21 to 30°C. We found that almost no clone can survive above 28°C, while there were drastic changes between 27 and 28°C. Therefore, we chose 27.5°C as the thermal stress temperature for this experiment. We want to test how extreme warming event affects the social ameba symbiosis and whether its bacterial symbionts could help. 2.4. Effects of thermal stress on two wild D. discoideum populations We used two D. discoideum populations from geographic and climate divergent locations Texas and Virginia to investigate how D. discoideum responds to simulated thermal stress and whether they could locally adapt to it. We randomly chose 10 Texas clones and 10 Virginia clones of wild D. discoideum and plated those in association with K. pneumoniae on SM/5 plates. We incubated these clones at room temperature 21°C and 27.5°C, respectively. We harvested spores from each plate after one week. We flooded the plate with 10 ml KK2 + 0.1%NP‐40 and collected spores into 15 ml falcon tubes. We counted spores on a hemocytometer using a light microscope. This design resulted in a total of 2 × 10 × 2 × 3 = 120 experimental units. The mean of three replicates was used for further statistical analyses. 2.5. Effects of thermal stress on D. discoideum – Paraburkholderia symbiosis We generated symbiont‐free native host clones by curing them of their bacteria with tetracycline, or by ampicillin–streptomycin treatment as previously described. We confirmed the loss of infection status by plating them out on bacteria‐free plates and confirming that the social amebae could not proliferate, a test we call a spot test. We mixed and matched D. discoideum with two facultative symbionts P. agricolaris and P. hayleyella to investigate how thermal stress affects their symbiotic relationships. We tested four combinations under two temperature treatments : native hosts— P. agricolaris, naïve hosts— P. agricolaris, native hosts— P. hayleyella and naïve hosts— P. hayleyella with three replicates. To set up each experiment, we plated 2 × 10 5 spores in association with K. pneumoniae on SM/5 plates. For experiments adding Paraburkholderia, we mixed the specified Paraburkholderia clones at 3% and K. pneumoniae at 97% vol and plated D. discoideum spores with 200 µl of the bacterial mixture on SM/5 plates. We incubated these clones at room temperature 21°C and 27.5°C, respectively. We harvested spores from each plate after one week and flooded the plate with 10 ml KK2 + 0.1%NP‐40 and collected spores into 15 ml falcon tubes. We counted spores on a hemocytometer using a light microscope. 2.6. Statistical analyses 2.6.1. Effects of thermal stress on two D. discoideum populations We analyzed the data with a general linear mixed model in IBM SPSS Statistics 24. In these analyses, population, temperature, and their interactions were used as fixed factors. D. discoideum clone was nested within population and used as a random factor. The data passed the normality test and tested for homogeneity of variance. We analyzed spore production as a measure of ameba fitness. A significant temperature main effect would indicate thermal stress affects D. discoideum's fitness, a significant population type main effect would indicate that populations differ in their fitness, and a significant population × temperature interaction would indicate adaptive divergence in thermal tolerance in two populations. 2.6.2. Effects of thermal stress on D. discoideum –Paraburkholderia symbiosis We analyzed and plotted four combinations separately. Native hosts— P. agricolaris, naïve hosts— P. agricolaris, and native hosts— P. hayleyella data were log‐transformed to improve normality. Transformed data passed the normality test and tested for homogeneity of variance. We analyzed these data with general linear models. Naïve P. hayleyella data were analyzed with a generalized linear model with Negative binomial distribution in IBM SPSS Statistics 24. FIGURE 3 Spore counts of D. discoideum hosts under two temperature treatments. P. agricolaris with their native... We used spore production as a measure of ameba fitness. A significant temperature main effect indicates that thermal stress can affect D. discoideum fitness. A significant symbiont main effect indicates that the presence of a symbiont can affect D. discoideum fitness. A significant temperature × symbiont interaction will indicate that the presence of symbiont can affect D. discoideum fitness under thermal stress. 3. RESULTS 3.1. The pattern of local adaptation to thermal stress in D. discoideum Increased temperature decreased the fitness of both the Texas clones and the Virginia clones, as indicated by the significant temperature main effect. Virginia clones outperformed Texas clones at both temperatures. However, we found no variation in thermal tolerances of Texas and Virginia populations, as shown by the nonsignificant population × temperature interaction. These results suggest that increased temperature significantly decreases D. discoideum's fitness. We did not find adaptive divergence to thermal stress in two wild populations of D. discoideum from locations that differed in ambient temperature. 3.2. The complex effects of simulated warming on D. discoideum – Paraburkholderia symbioses 3.2.1. P. agricolaris had no effect on D. discoideum's thermal tolerance When P. agricolaris clones were mixed with their native hosts, thermal stress decreased D. discoideum's fitness, as indicated by the significant temperature main effect. However, adding P. agricolaris made no difference to host fitness. The effect of thermal stress did not change with the addition of P. agricolaris, as indicated by the nonsignificant temperature*symbiont interaction. When P. agricolaris clones were mixed with naïve hosts, the pattern is the same. Thermal stress decreased D. discoideum's fitness, while adding P. agricolaris made no difference to host's fitness. Also, there was no significant temperature*symbiont interaction, indicating that the effect of thermal stress did not change with the addition of P. agricolaris. Overall, these results suggest that the more facultative P. agricolaris neither helps nor harms D. discoideum under thermal stress. In addition, there is no difference between native and naïve hosts. 3.2.2. P. hayleyella decreased D. discoideum's thermal tolerance and caused a symbiosis breakdown when mixed with naïve hosts When P. hayleyella clones were mixed with their native hosts, thermal stress decreased D. discoideum's fitness, as indicated by the significant temperature main effect. We also found that adding P. hayleyella decreased host fitness. There was no significant temperature*symbiont interaction, indicating that adding P. hayleyella did not further decrease the native host's fitness under thermal stress. When P. hayleyella clones were mixed with naïve hosts, both adding P. hayleyella and thermal stress decreased D. discoideum's fitness. There was also a significant temperature*symbiont interaction, indicating that adding P. hayleyella further decreased naïve host's fitness under thermal stress. In addition, 2 out of 3 tested naïve hosts showed zero growth under thermal stress when mixed with P. hayleyella, indicating symbiosis breakdown, while this did not happen in any of the native hosts. Taken together, these results suggest that adding P. hayleyella, like thermal stress, can decrease D. discoideum's fitness. In addition, it further decreases host fitness under thermal stress. We also found evidence of symbiosis breakdown when P. hayleyella was mixed with naïve hosts, while this does not happen in the native hosts. This indicates potential partner adaptation between P. hayleyella and their native hosts. 4. DISCUSSION Overall, we show that increased temperature affects symbiotic interactions. Increased temperature can significantly decrease D. discoideum's fitness. We found no adaptive divergence to thermal stress in two wild populations. Neither symbiont increased its hosts’ thermal tolerance. Our study shows that facultative symbioses can also have complex responses to warming. Previous studies found that facultative symbionts provide greater flexibility in response to temperature change compared to obligate symbioses. For example, facultative bacterial symbionts benefit aphids under heat stress and may protect both host and obligate symbiont from thermal stress. However, in the social ameba symbiosis system, we find no evidence that facultative Paraburkholderia symbionts increase D. discoideum hosts’ thermal tolerance. We find that different symbionts behave differently within the same host under simulated warming, and we also find evidence of host adaptation. Of the two symbionts, the more facultative P. agricolaris has no effects on the thermal tolerance of either native or naïve D. discoideum hosts. On the other hand, the more obligate P. hayleyella induces a significant difference to the host's thermal tolerance, imposing a higher cost to D. discoideum. Our study shows that the addition of P. hayleyella to its native host decreases host fitness at both temperatures indicating that native hosts suffer a fitness cost when they carry P. hayleyella. In addition, P. hayleyella harms and even kills naïve hosts exposed to thermal stress, disrupting the symbiosis. The more severe fitness costs exerted by P. hayleyella colonization in naïve hosts compared to native hosts suggest potential host adaptation between P. hayleyella and their native host clones. One potential drawback of this study is that we did not monitor the population dynamics of K. pneumoniae and Paraburkholderia symbionts under different temperatures. Simulated warming can directly affect the interactions between food bacteria and symbionts, which in turn affects the growth of amebae. Indeed, a recent study reported that the optimal growth temperature for both Paraburkholderia symbionts is 30°C, and P. agricolaris grows faster than P. hayleyella. Therefore, in this study, both food bacterium Klebsiella pneumoniae and Paraburkholderia symbionts grow faster under warming conditions. However, we argue that their interactions may have little effect on host fitness. First, K. pneumoniae grows much faster than symbionts, and their starting proportion is very high compared to symbionts. Second, the faster‐growing symbiont, P. agricolaris, did not change host's fitness in both temperatures, indicating its frequency has little effect on host fitness. Moreover, P. hayleyella grows much slower than P. agricolaris. Therefore, despite their faster growth under warmer temperatures, the major conclusion of this study still holds. Still, it will be useful to have such information in future studies. Taken together, our results provide insight into facultative symbioses under extreme warming. For the ameba– Paraburkholderia symbiotic relationship, the effects of adding different Paraburkholderia can be complex. The responses of social ameba symbioses to warming depend on both symbiont types and host types. Our study also shows that facultative symbionts are not necessarily more resilient to global change. In this system, the less facultative, more obligate symbiont has the less resilient symbiosis. Different symbioses may develop different evolutionary trajectories leading to unpredictable symbiosis resiliency with global warming. CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no conflicts of interest. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION Longfei Shu: Conceptualization ; Data curation ; Formal analysis ; Funding acquisition ; Visualization ; Writing‐original draft. Xinye Qian: Data curation ; Formal analysis ; Visualization ; Writing‐original draft. Debra A. Brock: Data curation ; Formal analysis ; Writing‐review & editing. Katherine S. Geist: Data curation ; Formal analysis ; Visualization ; Writing‐review & editing. David C. Queller: Conceptualization ; Data curation ; Formal analysis ; Funding acquisition ; Supervision ; Writing‐review & editing. Joan E. Strassmann: Conceptualization ; Data curation ; Formal analysis ; Funding acquisition ; Supervision ; Writing‐original draft ; Writing‐review & editing. 