 Tubercular Mycobacteria and Legionella pneumophila are the causative agents of potentially fatal respiratory diseases due to their intrinsic pathogenesis but also due to the emergence of antibiotic resistance that limits treatment options. The aim of our study was to explore the antimicrobial activity of a small ligand-based chemical library of 1255 structurally diverse compounds. These compounds were screened in a combination of three assays, two monitoring the intracellular growth of the pathogenic bacteria, Mycobacterium marinum and L. pneumophila, and one assessing virulence of M. marinum. We set up these assays using two amoeba strains, the genetically tractable social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum and the free-living amoeba Acanthamoeba castellanii. In summary, 64 compounds showed anti-infective/anti-virulence activity in at least one of the three assays. The intracellular assays hit rate varied between 1.7% for M. marinum and 2.8% for L. pneumophila with seven compounds in common for both pathogens. In parallel, 1.2% of the tested compounds were able to restore D. discoideum growth in the presence of M. marinum spiked in a lawn of food bacteria. We also validated the generality of the hits identified in the A. castellanii – M. marinum anti-infective screen using the D. discoideum – M. marinum host–pathogen model. The characterization of anti-infective and antibacterial hits in the latter infection model revealed compounds able to reduce intracellular growth more than 50% at 30 μM. Moreover, the chemical space and physico-chemical properties of the anti- M. marinum hits were compared to standard and candidate Mycobacterium tuberculosis drugs using ChemGPS-NP. A principle component analysis identified separate clusters for anti- M. marinum and anti- L. pneumophila hits unveiling the potentially new physico-chemical properties of these hits compared to standard and candidate M. tuberculosis drugs. Our studies underscore the relevance of using a combination of low-cost and low-complexity assays with full 3R compliance in concert with a rationalized focused library of compounds to identify new chemical scaffolds and to dissect some of their properties prior to taking further steps toward compound development. Keywords: Mycobacterium, Legionella, anti-infective, ChemGPS, amoebae Introduction The emergence of frequent antibiotic-resistant bacteria is reaching a critical point. Classical strategies to identify new antibiotics based on their inhibitory effect on in vitro bacterial growth were successful during the 50–60s to identify the main antibiotic classes used today, but they are now reaching their limits. The vast majority of promising chemical scaffolds identified in vitro and/or against validated molecular targets failed to show anti-infective activity in infected cells or organisms. This is due largely to unfavorable pharmacokinetic properties or toxicity problems that are revealed at later stages during animal testing or clinical trials. It is necessary today to design new screening procedures, as well as new chemical libraries. In addition, the development of new curative treatments against pathogenic bacteria coupled to rationalized political choices constitutes a major challenge for the future of public health. Over the years, millions of compounds have been synthesized or extracted from natural sources worldwide and are now available for biological screens. In addition, the general concept behind the re-screening or repurposing of compounds with new assay systems is that small molecules have an intrinsic ability to interact with different targets with different potency and that an identified chemical scaffold can be developed for a new indication. At the same time, new phenotypic screening methodologies have been established, allowing the detailed study of small molecules interfering with host–pathogen interactions. These types of assays are amenable to low or medium throughput screens. Taking into account the availability of compounds and the existence of new assays, two strategies can potentially be followed. The first one is based on random screening of millions of compounds, while the second one is based on screening a representative selection enriched for potential hits by using a virtual screening approach. Random, high throughput screening campaigns yield a hit rate of ∼1% and are expensive. Screening a selected database yields similar hit rates at a lower cost, with a maximized chemical backbone diversity, and allows the use of low to medium throughput screening systems. Indeed, for the design of such small, highly diverse libraries, chemical information scientists have identified unique scaffolds by analyzing the chemical diversity of all the available compounds. Furthermore, microbiology provides information on the pathways and their ligands involved in host–pathogen interactions that allow enriching the highly diverse library with compounds possessing a pharmacophore known to interact with targets of these pathways. In drug discovery projects, the chemical entities that are prioritized for biological assessment may encompass a large chemodiversity. In order to visualize the various physico-chemical properties of these compounds, various descriptors such as molecular mass, lipophilicity, and topological features can be computed. They are used to define a multi-dimensional descriptor space known as “Chemical space”. ChemGPS-NP is an eight-dimensional standardized space that can contribute to compound selection and prioritization notably by cluster analysis and neighborhood mapping. Previous studies used the chemical space navigation tool ChemGPS-NP to compare 60 anti-mycobacteria-active natural products and 39 anti-Mtb drugs and drug candidates with respect to physico-chemical properties and their occupation of chemical space. In physico-chemical space, both sets largely overlapped and defined a sub-region of Chem-GPS-NP space. In recent years, several phenotypic screens performed in the context of infected animal host cells have identified compounds active against pathogenic mycobacteria and Legionella pneumophila. Interestingly, elucidation of the mode of action of hits revealed that intracellular bacteria proliferation can be affected by targeting bacterial metabolic pathways key to their intracellular life, but also by modulating host pathways. Alternative screening systems have also been established to take advantage of previously underexplored cellular amoeba host models. Free-living amoebae, naturally present in soil and water, predate on bacteria and fungi that they ingest by phagocytosis. Indeed, amoebae share ecological niches with most bacteria, and are putative cellular reservoirs for pathogenic bacteria. In addition, FLA have been described as “trojan horses” for many pathogens including Legionella and mycobacteria species. Due to the extreme conservation of phagosomal composition and function with human phagocytic cells, Dictyostelium discoideum is used as a host cell to investigate interactions with pathogenic bacteria such as Salmonella, Mycobacteria, Legionella, or Pseudomonas. It has also been used to identify anti-virulence compounds against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. At the cellular level, L. pneumophila and Mycobacterium marinum subvert cellular compartments and machineries to establish a permissive replication niche. After their uptake by the host cell, each pathogen develops specific strategies. M. marinum, like Mycobacterium tuberculosis, induces phagosome maturation arrest and restricts its acidification. Then, the phagosome becomes an active interface between the host cell and the mycobacteria, by interacting with host machineries such as autophagy, endosomal, and other compartments, and finally loses its integrity, giving M. marinum access to the host cytosol. On the other hand, L. pneumophila establishes a structurally unique spacious vacuole, the LCV, that intimately interacts with the host endoplasmic-reticulum compartment. To establish the LCV, Legionella deeply modifies the host vesicular traffic by delivering, via a type-IV secretion system, a panel of effectors interacting with host components. In addition, the fates of each pathogen are also different. L. pneumophila resides and proliferates in the LCV and bacteria are possibly released by host cell lysis, while M. marinum escapes to the cytosol and finally egresses the host cell using various routes including a specific structure named “ejectosome”. In the present study, we focused on two pathogenic bacteria that currently represent a human threat: L. pneumophila, the causative agent of a severe pneumonia known as legionellosis or Legionnaires’ disease, and M. marinum, a close relative to Mtb that causes tuberculosis, a major health burden in human populations. Both mycobacteria are considered facultative intracellular species because of their capacity to grow within the host cell and also in the extracellular space or the environment. Since the primary target of Mtb is macrophages, amoebae that are also professional phagocytes, are a rational choice to study host–pathogen interactions. For example, D. discoideum and Acanthamoeba castellanii were used to characterize compounds of the GlaxoSmithKline TB-set of anti-mycobacterial compounds. This study showed that most compounds previously selected for their antibiotic activity against Mtb and Mycobacterium smegmatis were active against the closely related M. marinum, but showed little or no activity in the intracellular context of an infection. Most importantly, it demonstrated that compounds with anti-infective activities were similarly active in the M. marinum –amoebae system and the more standard M. marinum –macrophage model. This study also underlined the relevance of using evolutionary distant pathogen and host models to reveal conserved mechanisms of virulence and defense. Here, we tested compounds derived from a unique ligand-based virtual screen to determine their anti-infective properties in the two infection models A. castellanii – L. pneumophila and A. castellanii–M. marinum for their abilities to inhibit intracellular growth. In parallel, the “anti-virulence” activity of the compounds was determined by monitoring their capacity at reverting the growth arrest of D. discoideum on lawns of food bacteria spiked with pathogenic M. marinum. Finally, the potency, specificity, and toxicity of the hits were evaluated. In addition, we conducted further analyses to evaluate the drug-like properties and chemical space of the anti-mycobacterial and anti- Legionella hit compounds using ChemGPS-NP. Results Design of a Chemically Highly Diverse Pathway-Based Library of Compounds Legionella and Mycobacteria interact with a host through different pathways, which can be searched for potential drug targets. Instead of focusing on a single target for a drug design, we have explored the pathways involved in the host–pathogen interaction process, and not only those having a significant pathogen–host selectivity ratio. We selected in total 18 host and pathogen pathways as potential pharmacological targets. Ligands/metabolites known to interfere/interact with these host and pathogen pathways were identified from the available literature, and used as queries or search templates to prepare pharmacophores for launching a campaign of ligand-based virtual screening of the ZINC database 1 using ROCS, a tool from the OpenEye software package 2. Subsequently, we applied the following workflow : we screened the ZINC lead-like database composed of 2.5 million compounds saving the 25,000 best hits for each query; we ranked the hits according to the ROCS TanimotoCombo score; we selected the first hit and the following, if they passed a test of structural dissimilarity, using the Lingo method program, thereby increasing the chemical diversity and maximizing the coverage of the chemical space of the ZINC lead-like database; we chose at most two analogs per series from each screened pathway, saving 100 selected compounds to the pool of potential hits composing the physical library for the experimental screen. The VS of the 18 different pathways yielded ∼1800 compounds of which 1255 were purchased to compose the final Highly Diverse Pathways-Based Library; we named HD-PBL. FIGURE 1 Schematic representation of the LVS workflow applied per each pathway. A visualization of the Ligand-based virtual screen of the ZINC lead-like database; ranking of the 25,000 best virtually screened hits according to the ROCS TanimotoCombo... Characterization of the Pathways-Based Library Properties: Chemical Diversity and Drug Likeness The chemical diversity of the pathways-based library was investigated and analyzed on the basis of the Z-matrix calculated according to Tanimoto’s chemical similarity metrics using Canvas, a tool from the Schrödinger software package. The corresponding heat map drawn using Netwalker1.0 clearly shows that the library is highly diverse. We deliberately limited the number of analogs in the primary library to concentrate on the validated hits selected from the different screens. The analysis of the drug likeness of the compounds composing the library and the comparison with the known drug-likeness standards reveals that the vast majority of the compounds have the properties to be drug-like. FIGURE 2 The heat map of pathways-based library. The Z-matrix was calculated according to T sim values: T sim = 0 for total dissimilarity ; T sim = 1 for total similarity. FIGURE 3 Physico-chemical prediction of the HD-PBL. The prediction descriptors of the library were performed using the cheminformatics package Canvas to evaluate the drug-likeness properties of library’s compounds. MW: molecular weight,... Screens Characteristics The 1255 HD-PBL compounds were assayed using three biological phenotypic screens. The categories of pharmacophore queries are indicated in Table 1, and the hallmarks of the various screens are summarized in Table 2. TABLE 1 Host and pathogen metabolic pathways used for selecting the query molecules. TABLE 2 Screen assays characteristics. Each of the three assays was established and optimized separately prior to testing the 1255 compounds. The three screens were run simultaneously using the same compounds batch. The compounds’ concentration was adjusted to 30 μM for the two cell infection screening assays, taking into account the shielding effect of A. castellanii cells on intracellular bacteria, whereas a final concentration of 10 μM was used in the anti-virulence assay monitoring D. discoideum growth on bacteria lawns. Considering screen stringency variations, the threshold for hit detection was arbitrarily fixed at a minimum of 20% reduction of the intracellular growth of M. marinum, and 40% reduction for intracellular growth of L. pneumophila compared to the DMSO control. Fluorescence from GFP-producing bacteria was used as a readout of intracellular growth for both anti-infective assays in the A. castellanii host. Briefly, A. castellanii cells were infected with GFP-producing M. marinum or L. pneumophila. Intracellular bacteria growth was monitored by measuring the fluorescence increase using a plate reader with time-points taken every 3 h for M. marinum, and at various time intervals for L. pneumophila as indicated in Figure 4. Extracellular M. marinum growth was inhibited by adding 10 μM amikacin to the medium, whereas no antibiotic was added to L. pneumophila since the PYG medium used for infections does not support extracellular bacterial growth. Examples of the intracellular bacterial growth curves are presented in Figures 4A,B for M. marinum and L. pneumophila, respectively. Normalization and analysis of the data generated in these two screens were performed as previously reported for the AcMm screen and the AcLp screen host–pathogen assays, respectively. In brief, normalization of bacterial growth in the presence of each compound was calculated related to the DMSO carrier. FIGURE 4 A representative selection of the HD-PBL compounds tested in the three different assays. Phagocytic host cell A castellanii was infected with M. marinum msp12:GFP and GFP-expressing L. pneumophila, 5 × 10 4 infected cells were transferred... For the plaque assay, a semi-quantitative visual inspection and scoring of the compounds was applied, as described previously. As shown in Figure 4C, the ability of hits to restore D. discoideum growth was quantified to range from inert molecules to compounds that fully restore host growth. Following their identification in their respective initial screen, candidate hits were independently validated at least three times in their respective assay. Hit Frequency and Overlap Between Screens The two intracellular growth assays used for screening all 1255 compounds resulted in a broad range of inhibitory activities. The hit rate was considerably higher for L. pneumophila, where 2.8% of the compounds tested at 30 μM showed a growth inhibition of at least 40%, compared to 1.7% withat least 20% inhibition for M. marinum. The DdMm plaque assay screen showed that 1.2% of the compounds at 10 μM are valuable hits restoring amoeba growth. In comparison to infection assays, full restoration of amoeba growth on a bacteria lawn containing pathogenic mycobacteria appeared to be more restrictive and identified only 15 hits from the library. Taken together, 64 compounds showed anti-infective activity in one of the intracellular growth assays or attenuated mycobacterial virulence, respectively. As depicted in the Venn diagram, the AcLp screen shared eight hits with the other two screens, and among these, seven are common for the two infection assays and only one for the L. pneumophila – A castellanii test and the phagocytic plaque assay. Surprisingly, no hit was common to the two assays using M. marinum as pathogenic bacterium. Notably, we also identified a certain number of pro-infective compounds, namely, chemicals that lead to a significant increase of the intracellular bacterial numbers compared to the DMSO control. Five pro-infective compounds were identified with at least twofold increase in the intracellular M. marinum bacterial load. In contrast, the AcLp assay identified only one compound that increased the intracellular growth more than 40% when compared to the DMSO control. FIGURE 5 Percentage hit rate and hits overlap of the three screens. All 1255 compounds were tested for potential intracellular growth inhibition. Library compounds were plotted based on their anti-infective properties. Compounds resulting in decreased... Effect of Hit Compounds on Amoeba Fitness To evaluate the effect of hit compounds on host fitness, we used D. discoideum cells expressing a GFP construct to measure toxicity and growth inhibitory activities of compounds. In parallel, a cell viability test using Alamar blue was performed using A. castellanii 4 h after hit compound addition at a 30 μM concentration. For each assay, values were normalized to the DMSO carrier control. The compounds’ toxicity and growth inhibition data for each phenotypic screen are represented in Figures 6A–C. FIGURE 6 Characterization of cytotoxic and growth inhibitory activities of primary hits. Primary hits come from the three different screens [ AcMm refers to A. castellanii–M. marinum, AcLp refers to A. castellanii–L. pneumophila, and... Only one compound was excluded from further analysis, because its strong fluorescence at the GFP emission wavelength confounded the results. At the end, five hits did not pass the set threshold and were rejected for this deleterious effect on host fitness. Properties of the Hits To determine whether hits had antibiotic properties, we measured their activity against M. marinum or L. pneumophila growing in broth. Compounds at 30 μM in DMSO were transferred to 96-well plates containing 10 5 GFP-producing M. marinum or L. pneumophila per well. Growth was monitored for 48 hours, and the total fluorescence intensity was used as a proxy to quantify the bacterial numbers. In parallel, we tested the ability of hits identified by the phagocytic plaque assay to directly inhibit M. marinum growth on agar at 10 μM. The normalized results of the hits detected during cell infection assays are shown in Figures 7A,B for M. marinum and L. pneumophila, respectively. In summary, none of 21 hits exhibited antibiotic properties against M. marinum, whereas 18 of the 35 hits against intracellular L. pneumophila showed an antibiotic activity. Lastly, 11 compounds out of fifteen from the anti-virulence hits against M. marinum exhibited mild to strong antibiotic activity when assayed for bacterial growth inhibition on agar. FIGURE 7 Intracellular and extracellular growth of the pathogenic bacteria in presence of the primary hits. Growth of M. marinum and L. pneumophila in the presence of hits was determined for both intracellular and extracellular... The D. discoideum–M. marinum Host–Pathogen Model System To validate the generality of the anti-infective screen performed using the AcMm system, we tested the 21 identified hits using the DdMm host–pathogen model. Fourteen compounds out of 21 exhibited at least a 20% inhibitory activity on intracellular mycobacteria. Interestingly, from the hits identified in the “extracellular” anti-virulence plaque assay, almost 50% of the compounds showed a growth inhibitory effect on mycobacteria when tested in the intracellular D. discoideum infection model. Curiously, the antibiotic potency of these hits, as detected using growth of bacteria on agar, was barely detectable in the 2-days bacteria growth assay in suspension, and only two compounds showed an inhibition intra- and extracellularly. FIGURE 8 Comparison of two amoeba host models. Comparison of anti-infective properties of primary hits on intracellular M. marinum growth in D. discoideum and A. castellanii host cells. Selected anti-virulence hits plotted based on their anti-infective... Classification and Clustering of Anti- M. marinum Hits, Anti- L. pneumophila Hits, and Anti-Mtb Drugs Using CHEM-GPS In order to evaluate the distribution of the 1255 compounds and hits from the HD-PBL in the physicochemical space, we used the chemical global positioning system of natural product. ChemGPS-NP is a global chemical positioning system that utilizes eight standardized dimensions, similar to principal components to describe the physico-chemical properties of compounds, and is specifically tuned for the exploration of the biologically relevant chemical space of natural products. We used this tool to compare the compounds described in the present study with known standard and candidate anti-Mtb drugs, as well as the compounds and hits from the GSK TB set, together with the 211,000 compounds from the in silico MS/DS Database. The ChemGPS-NP eight-dimensional output was explored by inspecting every pair of dimensions. Eventually, the two-dimensional representation provided by t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding was utilized to visually summarize the ChemGPS-NP analysis. Figure 9A clearly shows that the drug-like properties of anti-Mtb drugs are remarkably scattered on the full ISDB reference cloud, possibly indicating a large variety of mode of actions and targets. The 1255 compounds from the HD-PBL and the 177 from the GSK TB set formed two separate clouds that occupy a much more restricted subspace compared to the anti-Mtb drugs. The hits from HD-PBL appeared dispersed inside the cloud of the HD-PBL, and surrounded by standard and candidate anti-Mtb drugs. However, closer inspection revealed that some HD-PBL hits formed two sub-clusters separated from the other HD-PBL hits. In addition, 3 HD-PBL hits stand further apart, indicating a distinct structural scaffold. A hierarchical classification of standards and candidate anti-Mtb drugs, together with the hits from the GSK TB set, and HD-PBL was computed using average linkage of Euclidian distances in the original ChemGPS-NP space. This classification confirmed the structural differences existing between the various standard and candidate anti-Mtb drugs, which also appeared dispersed in the dendrogram. Overall, the hits from the GSK TB set and HD-PBL appear to have diverse structural scaffolds and are distributed along the dendrogram. Interestingly, a mixed group of hits from GSK TB set and of HD-PBL clustered on the right of the dendrogram, likely exhibiting distinctive structural properties from the known anti-Mtb drugs. FIGURE 9 ChemGPS-NP analysis of anti-Mtb hits. ChemGPS-NP-based analysis of the chemical space occupied by 211,000 compounds extracted from ISDB, the standard and candidate anti-Mtb drugs, the HD-PBL M. marinum and L. pneumophila in A. castellanii and identified antibiotics, potential anti-virulence, and host defense boosters. In parallel, we used a phagocytic plaque assay, in which a compound restoring growth of D. discoideum on a lawn of Klebsiella pneumoniae spiked with M. marinum has either selective antibiotic activity against M. marinum, or attenuates the virulence of infecting M. marinum. We identified 64 compounds showing activity in at least one of the assays for intracellular bacteria growth inhibition, or attenuation of mycobacterial virulence. Although the same host was used for the two infection assays, only few hits were common against M. marinum and L. pneumophila. The number of identified hits was considerably higher for L. pneumophila compared to M. marinum. While no strong antibiotic hit was identified using the AcMm model, almost half of the hits identified in the AcLp screen are potent antibiotics. A possible explanation might be the difference in growth rate between the two bacteria. L. pneumophila grows almost unrestrictedly inside the amoeba, with a doubling time close to 3 h, whereas M. marinum is a considerably slower grower, with a doubling time of around 8 h. A related aspect is the temperature used for the intracellular assays, which is closer to the optimum for L. pneumophila. Another plausible reason might be that the two pathogens have a very distinct cell wall composition. In contrast to the Gram-negative L. pneumophila cell wall, M. marinum has an elaborate and highly hydrophobic structure with unique components such as arabinogalactan, a highly branched polysaccharide that connects the peptidoglycan with the outer mycolic acid layer, strongly limiting the permeability to compounds. In addition, cellular components like efflux pumps might also play an important role in the bioavailability of the compounds. Another aspect is the nature of the bacteria proliferation niche. While L. pneumophila resides and proliferates in an ER-associated vacuole, M. marinum starts proliferating in a phagosome-derived vacuole and then continues after escape to the cytosol. Surprisingly, the two assays used to identify anti-infective or anti-virulence compounds against M. marinum did not identify any common hit. As presented in Table 2B, hits hallmarks are linked to the intrinsic screen design. Indeed, in the two infection assays, the compounds are added post-infection, and therefore, compounds that hamper bacteria uptake cannot be detected. Thus, both assays detect anti-infective hits that inhibit virulence or boost host defenses. On the contrary, in the anti-virulence assay, the uptake efficiency of M. marinum might be directly affected by compounds that either target the host phagocytosis machinery, or modify the mycobacterial cell wall. In addition, 11 of the 15 anti-virulence hits identified in the phagocytic plaque assay had selective antibiotic activity against M. marinum. To better understand the contrasting results of the anti-infective and the anti-virulence screens on M. marinum, the hits from both primary assays were re-tested in the DdMm infection assay. Satisfyingly, two-thirds of the anti-infective hits originally identified in the A. castellanii assay were confirmed using the D. discoideum infection assay, likely reflecting the overall conservation of basic metabolic pathways between these two evolutionarily close organisms. In contrast, only half of the anti-virulence hits showed mild but significant activity in the D. discoideum infection assay. One possibility is the presence of an MCV membrane around M. marinum that restricts the bioavailability of the compounds. In addition, it is known that M. marinum undergoes drastic metabolic adaptations to different carbon sources when transitioning between its extracellular life to the intracellular environment, possibly explaining the differential sensitivity to the anti-virulence hits. Pro-infective Hits, Another Facet to Better Understand the Mycobacterium –Host Interactions On the other hand, identification of infection enhancers in the set of compounds was quite surprising, although the same observation was already reported in the phenotypic screen of the GSK TB set of anti-mycobacterial antibiotics in the AcMm model of infection. Notably here, five compounds were identified that increased the intracellular M. marinum load at least twofold. As discussed in the Trofimov et al.’s paper, such compounds may be targeting and disarming crucial anti-bacterial host defense pathways and therefore, might lead to a better understanding of these pathways and might ultimately lead to the design of host-directed anti-mycobacterial therapies. Confirmation of the Low Cytotoxicity of Compounds on D. discoideum Measurement of the hits’ cytotoxicity/growth inhibition activity was performed by monitoring the growth of GFP-expressing D. discoideum. Four out of six compounds that are either toxic for D. discoideum or affect its growth are common between two screens. This low number of toxic compounds might be explained by the fact that the pathways selected for the LVS are non-essential for host metabolism and survival. In addition, the LVS likely enriched the library for compounds with drug-like properties that are anticipated to have low toxicity. The anti-infective hits with mild cell growth inhibition activity should be further investigated to optimize their therapeutic window. Navigation in the Biologically-Relevant Chemical Space Identifies a Potential Structural Class of Anti-mycobacterial Compounds The chemical entities that were prioritized for biological assessment encompassed a large chemodiversity. In order to visualize the various physico-chemical properties of the tested compounds, we computed these characteristics using the eight-dimensional standardized space of ChemGPS-NP. Although this analysis did not show a clear separation between the hits and non-hits in each library, two groups of compounds formed distinct clusters, one containing M. marinum and anti- L. pneumophila hits and a second one containing solely anti- M. marinum hits with the exception of one compound which belongs to the anti- L. pneumophila hits. One might speculate that Box B highlights compounds that hit mycobacteria-specific targets, while Box A either contains compounds that hit targets common to both bacteria or that enhance the activity of host defenses active against both bacteria. In parallel, the hierarchical classification identified a promising group of hits clustered away from the standard and candidate anti-Mtb drugs, suggesting the existence of a new group of anti-Mtb compounds, which need to be further studied. This analysis suggests that it might be interesting to use the ChemGPS-NP analysis to instruct the initial compound selection and the prioritization steps, notably by cluster analysis and neighborhood mapping. Mapping of collections of compounds with reported bioactivities and those discovered in our studies on such a chemical space will allow to partly orient the research and can also support SAR studies. Combination of 3R Model Assays Increases the Chances of Identifying Potential Anti-mycobacterial Compounds Virtual screening is an efficient traditional strategy for quick evaluation of large libraries of compounds that permits a focus on the supposedly best candidates, reducing the amount of in vitro and in vivo experiments. It has become an integral part of the drug discovery process, with proven value in several therapeutic areas. In conclusion, our data show that the LVS efficiently selected anti-bacterials from the 2.5 Mio lead-like compounds of the ZINC library, giving rise to hit rates two to three times superior to the 1% usually observed by random screening. The data also demonstrate that the validated virtual hits are chemically diverse, suggesting that they most likely target different pathways within the host pathogen system. We suggest that our combination of cost-effective, 3R compliant amoebae-based phenotypic assays to screen structurally diverse chemical libraries efficiently identifies a variety of promising non-toxic anti-infective compounds that then will be validated in more complex infection systems such as the zebrafish or mouse models. Materials and Methods Design and Characterization of the Chemically Highly Diverse Pathway-Based Library for Phenotypic Screening In recent years, the design of diverse libraries based on the principle of functional diversity has become a major trend in library design. This includes designing libraries containing privileged structures as well as diverse scaffolds to best cover the chemical space. In this work, we selected in total 18 host and pathogen pathways as potential pharmacological targets to develop pharmacophores queries based on ligands/metabolites known to interfere/intervene within these host and pathogen pathways. These pharmacophore queries have been used in LVS of the ZINC lead-like database 3 using ROCS, a tool from the OpenEye software package 4. The ligand-based VS was performed with ROCS using previously published default settings and the TanimotoCombo score. To ensure chemical diversity and maximize the coverage of the chemical space of the ZINC lead-like database, we applied the Lingo method program. We screened the ZINC lead-like database composed of 2.5 million compounds and finally selected 100 compounds per host and pathogen pathways for a total of 1800 compounds using the workflow described in Figure 1. Thus, the selected virtual hits correspond to 0.07% of the whole ZINC lead-like database. The number of virtual hits was tractable by the medium throughput assays described in this work. The pathways-based library properties were characterized in term of chemical diversity and drug likeness. To assess chemical diversity, we used the Z-matrix calculated according to Tanimoto’s chemical similarity metrics using Canvas, a tool from the Schrödinger software package. The results have been displayed as a heat map drawn using Netwalker1.0. The drug-likeliness of compounds of the library was assessed by predicting physico-chemical descriptors using Canvas and comparing them with the different known rules in drug discovery. Bacterial and Cell Cultures Acanthamoeba castellanii was grown in PYG medium at 25°C as described using proteose peptone and yeast extract. The D. discoideum strain was grown in HL5c medium at 22°C. Legionella pneumophila were re-suspended from plates in appropriate growth medium, ACES Yeast Extract, and diluted to a starting OD 600 of 0.01. Compounds were added to these cultures such that the maximal DMSO concentration was 0.1%. Cultures were grown overnight and the OD 600 was measured. Mycobacterium marinum were cultured in Middlebrook 7H9 supplemented with 10% OADC, 0.5% glycerol, and 0.2% Tween80 at 32°C in shaking culture. The M. marinum strain constitutively expressing GFP was obtained by transformation with msp12:GFP, and cultivated in the presence of 30 μg/ml kanamycin. Intracellular Replication of M. marinum in A. castellanii Acanthamoeba castellanii were cultured in PYG medium in 10 cm Petri dishes at 25°C, and passaged the day prior to infection to reach 90% confluence. M. marinum were cultivated in a shaking culture at 32°C to an OD 600 of 0.8–1 in 7H9 medium. Mycobacteria were centrifuged at RT at 500 g for two periods of 10 min onto a monolayer of Acanthamoeba cells at an MOI of 10 to promote efficient and synchronous uptake, followed by an additional 20–30 min incubation. Un-ingested bacteria were washed off with PYG and infected cells re-suspended in PYG containing 10 μM amikacin; 5 × 10 4 infected cells were transferred to each well of a 96-well plate with pre-plated compounds and controls. The course of infection at 25°C was monitored by measuring fluorescence in a plate reader for 72 h with time points taken every 3 h. Only experiments with a Z -factor > 0.6 were taken into account for analysis. Time courses were plotted and data from all time points were used to determine the effect of compounds versus vehicle controls. The primary hit rate cut off was set at 20% inhibition for M. marinum. Intracellular Replication of M. marinum in D. discoideum Dictyostelium discoideum were cultured in HL5c medium in 10 cm Petri dishes at 22°C, and passaged the day prior to infection to reach 90% confluency. Mycobacteria were grown in 7H9 medium to a density of OD 600 = 0.8–1.0, centrifuged and re-suspended in HL5c medium and clumps disrupted by passaging through a 25−gauge needle. GFP-expressing M. marinum were added at an MOI of 10 and centrifuged onto the Dictyostelium cells at 500 g twice for 10 min. The cells were left at 25°C for an additional 10–20 min before uningested bacteria were washed off by three washes with HL5c and attached cells were then re−suspended in HL5c containing 10 μM amikacin. The course of infection was monitored as described above. Intracellular Replication of L. pneumophila in A. castellanii Acanthamoeba castellanii were cultured in PYG medium at 25°C, and passaged the day prior to infection such that 2 × 10 4 cells were present in each well of a 96-well plate. Cultures of L. pneumophila harboring the GFP-producing plasmid pNT-28 were re-suspended from plate to a starting OD 600 of 0.1 in AYE medium, and grown overnight in shaking conditions at 37°C to an OD 600 of 3. Re-suspended bacteria in LoFlo medium were centrifuged onto a monolayer of A. castellanii cells at an MOI of 20 to promote efficient and synchronous uptake. Compounds were added to at least triplicate wells after infection, and infected cells were incubated at 30°C. GFP fluorescence was measured by a plate spectrophotometer at appropriate intervals. Because the culture media used for A. castellanii do not support the growth of L. pneumophila, GFP fluorescence accurately reflects intracellular replication. The hit rate cut off was set at 40% inhibition for L. pneumophila. Time courses were constructed, and data were used to determine the effect of compounds versus vehicle control. Anti-virulence Assay Against M. marinum To test the effect of the compounds on M. marinum virulence, 10 ml of mid-log phase mycobacterial cultures were pelleted by centrifugation and re-suspended in 5 ml of an overnight culture of K. pneumoniae diluted to 1/10,000 in LB medium. The mixture was de-clumped by passaging through a 25-gauge blunt needle. In each well of a 24-well plate, 10 μM of each compound was added and allowed to diffuse on 2 ml of solid standard medium agar supplemented with glucose followed by the addition of 50 μl of the bacterial suspension Once dried, 1000 D. discoideum cells were added in the center of the well. Plates were incubated for 5–9 days at 25°C and the formation of phagocytic plaques was monitored visually, a negative control was included in every plate. Antibiotic Activity Assays Antibiograms used to monitor the inhibitory effect of compounds on mycobacterial growth were performed as described previously, each molecule was added in a 24-well plate well containing 2 ml of 7H11 agar medium at 10 μM. Once dried, 1000 bacteria were deposited in each well and plates were incubated at 32°C for 7 days to allow bacterial growth. To monitor M. marinum growth, GFP-producing bacteria were cultivated in shaking at 32°C in 7H9 medium supplemented with OADC up to an OD 600 of 0.8–1. 10 5 GFP-producing M. marinum were transferred into each well of 96-well white plates. To monitor L. pneumophila growth, a pre-culture of GFP-producing bacteria was diluted to a starting OD 600 of 0.01 and grown overnight. Compounds at 30 μM in DMSO were added in each well, seeded with 100 μl of pre-culture, and bacterial growth was monitored for at least 48 h by measuring the fluorescence in a plate reader every 3 h. D. discoideum Growth Inhibition Assay 10 4 GFP-ABD-expressing Dictyostelium cells were transferred to each well of 96-well plates allowed to attach for 20–30 min. Cell growth at 25°C was monitored by measuring the GFP fluorescence in a fluorescent plate reader for 72 h with the time point every 3 h. Cytotoxicity Assay Cytotoxicity of compounds against A. castellanii was determined using the Alamar Blue reagent. To mimic the conditions found in the intracellular replication assay, 96-well plates were set up as previously described and uninfected triplicate wells were treated with compounds in 100 μl LoFlo media. Plates were incubated at 30°C for 24 h, after which 10 μl Alamar Blue reagent was added, and plates incubated for a further 3 h. The fluorescence at 595 nm was measured, and data normalized between 1 and 0. Means from each individual experiment were then combined for analysis. ChemGPS Analysis ChemGPS-NP is a PC analysis -based model that serves as a tool for navigation in the biologically-relevant chemical space. It is composed of eight PCs based on 35 chemical descriptors, which represent physico-chemical properties such as size, shape, flexibility, rigidity, polarizability, lipophilicity, polarity, and hydrogen bonding capacity 5. The prediction scores were calculated based on the structural information derived from SMILES using the ChemBioDraw software. All salts, hydration information, and counterions were excluded from the SMILES annotation, and differences in stereochemistry ignored, since ChemGPS-NP only uses two-dimensional descriptors. For visualization in 2D, tSNE was applied to the eight output PCs from ChemGPS-NP on the ISDB library, standard and candidate anti-Mtb drugs, the GSK TB set, and the HD-PBL. In a second approach, tSNE was applied on the above libraries, excluding the ISDB reference library. The tSNE computation was performed using a perplexity value of 50 and a maximum number of iterations of 500. To ensure reproducibility, a fixed seed was used for tSNE, as well as for random subsampling the large ISDB reference library. For visualization, the resulting dimensions were represented in a scatter plot, and complemented by a 2D density estimation. The following programs, packages, and versions were used: R, Rstudio, package Rtsne, package dplyr, package ggplot2, package MASS. Data Analysis Data analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism 7. To compare the effect of compound treatment on intracellular replication, fluorescence values were taken from the first time point following entry to stationary phase. The results were then normalized such that media-only wells were “0,” while vehicle-treated wells were “1”. The average of the replicate wells was then plotted as dose–response curves, such that each individual point represented the average of a single experiment. Compound treatments were repeated a minimum of three times to control for the increased variability of bacteria–host cell interactions. Author’s Note This manuscript has been released as a Pre-Print at BioRxiv. Data Availability Statement All datasets generated for this study are included in the article/ Supplementary Material. Author Contributions TS, LS, HH, and PC conceived, designed, and supervised the work. NH, SK, CH, HS, VT, JN, and MP performed the experiments and analyzed the data. GC and AK provided the HD-PBL compounds. NH, TS, and SK structured and drafted the manuscript. All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript. Conflict of Interest MP was employed by Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Footnotes 1 2 3 4 5 Funding This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation “Sinergia” grant CRSI33_130016, SNF grant N° 310030_169386, and an RTD grant from SystemsX.ch. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. Supplementary Material The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: TABLE S1 Primary screen data of the 1255 compounds in A. castellanii–M. marinum and A. castellanii–L. pneumophila models. Click here for additional data file. TABLE S2 Hit compounds characteristics: anti-infective, antibacterial, cytotoxic, and growth inhibitory data. Click here for additional data file. Article information Front Microbiol. 2020; 11: 266. Published online 2020 Feb 21. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00266 PMCID: PMC7047896 PMID: 32153546 Nabil Hanna, 1, * † Sébastien Kicka, 1, † Gianpaolo Chiriano, 2 Christopher Harrison, 3 Hajer Ouertatani Sakouhi, 4 Valentin Trofimov, 1 Agata Kranjc, 2 Jahn Nitschke, 1 Marco Pagni, 5 Pierre Cosson, 4 Hubert Hilbi, 6 Leonardo Scapozza, 2 and Thierry Soldati 1, * Nabil Hanna 1 Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Nabil Hanna Sébastien Kicka 1 Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Sébastien Kicka Gianpaolo Chiriano 2 Pharmaceutical Biochemistry/Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Gianpaolo Chiriano Christopher Harrison 3 Max von Pettenkofer Institute, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, Munich, Germany Find articles by Christopher Harrison Hajer Ouertatani Sakouhi 4 Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Hajer Ouertatani Sakouhi Valentin Trofimov 1 Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Valentin Trofimov Agata Kranjc 2 Pharmaceutical Biochemistry/Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Agata Kranjc Jahn Nitschke 1 Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Jahn Nitschke Marco Pagni 5 Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland Find articles by Marco Pagni Pierre Cosson 4 Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Pierre Cosson Hubert Hilbi 6 Institute of Medical Microbiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Find articles by Hubert Hilbi Leonardo Scapozza 2 Pharmaceutical Biochemistry/Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Leonardo Scapozza Thierry Soldati 1 Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland Find articles by Thierry Soldati 1 Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland 2 Pharmaceutical Biochemistry/Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland 3 Max von Pettenkofer Institute, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, Munich, Germany 4 Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland 5 Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland 6 Institute of Medical Microbiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Edited by: Natalia V. Kirienko, Rice University, United States Reviewed by: Salvatore Bozzaro, University of Turin, Italy; Marina Santic’, University of Rijeka, Croatia *Correspondence: Nabil Hanna, hc.eginu@annah.liban Thierry Soldati, hc.eginu@itadloS.yrreihT † These authors have contributed equally to this work This article was submitted to Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy, a section of the journal Frontiers in Microbiology Received 2019 Nov 7; Accepted 2020 Feb 5. Copyright © 2020 Hanna, Kicka, Chiriano, Harrison, Sakouhi, Trofimov, Kranjc, Nitschke, Pagni, Cosson, Hilbi, Scapozza and Soldati. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License. The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author and the copyright owner are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. Articles from Frontiers in Microbiology are provided here courtesy of Frontiers Media SA 