 !!NCR1!! presents a great challenge to antimycobacterial therapy due to its innate resistance against most antibiotics. M. abscessus is able to grow intracellularly in human macrophages, suggesting that intracellular models can facilitate drug discovery. Thus, we have developed two host cell models: human macrophages for use in a new high-content screening method for M. abscessus growth and a Dictyostelium discoideum infection model with the potential to simplify downstream genetic analysis of host cell factors. A screen of 568 antibiotics for activity against intracellular M. abscessus led to the identification of two hit compounds with distinct growth inhibition. A collection of 317 human kinase inhibitors was analyzed, with the results yielding three compounds with an inhibitory effect on mycobacterial growth, strengthening the notion that host-directed therapy can be applied for M. abscessus. KEYWORDS: Mycobacterium abscessus, drug screening, high-content assay, host-directed therapy INTRODUCTION Mycobacterium abscessus is a nontuberculous mycobacterium and the causative agent of severe human infections. M. abscessus predominantly infects patients with a suppressed immune status and/or structural lung disease, e.g., cystic fibrosis or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. M. abscessus is often referred to as the “incurable nightmare”, due to a high level of antibiotic resistance. Effective treatments against its well-known genus member, M. tuberculosis, including the cornerstones of tuberculosis therapy, rifampin and isoniazid, show insufficient activity against M. abscessus. Further complicating matters, M. abscessus can produce two morphotypes, a more virulent and clinically prevalent rough morphotype and a smooth morphotype that is able to form biofilms, making treatment even more problematic. Currently, treatment regimens employ macrolides, aminoglycosides, and β-lactams for at least 12 months to achieve sputum conversion, followed by another year of treatment to eradicate infection. The long treatment time, an increase in the number of cases, and the poor treatment outcome due to the high level of drug resistance create an urgent need to develop new antibiotics suited particularly for this resilient pathogen. During infection, M. abscessus is engulfed by human macrophages, overcomes host defense mechanisms, and replicates inside these immune cells. M. abscessus is also able to grow extracellularly, and biofilm formation contributes to the virulence of the pathogen. Nevertheless, the eradication of intracellular bacteria remains an important goal for drug development in order to address this replicative niche, in which, as a component of the immune system, bacterial replication can also reduce the patient’s ability to combat the disease and worsen the prognosis. We have recently developed a high-content screening approach for the in vitro screening of candidate anti- M. abscessus compounds. This follow-up study describes the development of an HCS-applicable assay for M. abscessus growth in human macrophages. This method enables the consideration of compound permeation, activation by the macrophage, and host-targeting effects during the initial screening. The newly developed assay was used for a pilot screen of three libraries consisting of anti-infective compounds and kinase inhibitors. We also examined the use of an M. abscessus -amoeba infection using the genetic model organism Dictyostelium discoideum, which is a well-established model for Mycobacterium avium and Mycobacterium marinum infection and which has the potential to facilitate future genetic analysis of host factors. Current assay methods for M. abscessus infection of macrophages mainly use colony counting, the gold standard for intracellular growth analysis of bacteria. Because of the time- and material-consuming plating step, colony counting is generally feasible for evaluating limited amounts of compounds. Additionally, a second method, such as host cell counting or the 3--2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay, is necessary to analyze the viability of macrophages. High-content fluorescence microscopy offers the possibility to analyze the growth of M. abscessus and macrophage viability, based on cell counting, in one automated readout. In this study, we adapted a rapid, fluorescence-based method used in M. tuberculosis drug screening for M. abscessus. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION HCS against intracellular M. abscessus in human macrophages. For assay development, we used a previously constructed strain of M. abscessus expressing red fluorescence protein carried by the episomal pTEC27 plasmid, which provides a straightforward platform for intracellular assay development. Successfully transformed bacteria were selected by the use of hygromycin-containing medium. The more virulent rough morphotype of M. abscessus was used, as it is also more clinically relevant due to its prevalence in CF patients. For the development of a robust, effective, and HCS-applicable assay to assess the intracellular growth of M. abscessus, several adjustments to our recently developed in vitro M. abscessus protocol were necessary. First, the rough morphotype of M. abscessus shows extensive clumping even when it is grown in the presence of a detergent, preventing uniform phagocytosis during macrophage infection. Thus, we filtered the culture through a 5-μm-pore-size filter to generate a single-cell suspension of M. abscessus, which is a requirement for uniform infection of the macrophages. Second, the ability of M. abscessus to escape from the phagosome leads to cell-to-cell spread or the uncontrolled growth of extracellular bacteria. By addition of amikacin to the assay medium, it was possible to overcome this phenomenon and to analyze the growth solely inside the macrophages. Amikacin by itself is inactive against intracellular M. abscessus, as it cannot enter the macrophage cytosol. For infection studies, we used the THP-1 monocyte cell line, cells of which were differentiated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate and infected with M. abscessus at a multiplicity of infection of 5:1 in batch. THP-1 cells were used mainly for their uniformity, their similar behavior to macrophages derived from human stem cells, and the option to compare our studies to those described in the literature. The infected cell suspension was dispensed into 96-well plates. After incubation, the bacterial growth was analyzed by automated high-content microscopy. For evaluation of the assay, image data for the DAPI, RFP, and brightfield channels were recorded, as shown in Fig. 1A, and bacterial growth was calculated based on the RFP emission from M. abscessus. FIG 1 Intracellular growth of M. abscessus in THP-1 cells. Image data for 1.5 μM bedaquiline and 1% DMSO at 4 days postinfection. Dose-dependent effect of bedaquiline analyzed based on fluorescence and counting of the number... The HCS method described in this study was calibrated using 1.5 μM bedaquiline and 1% dimethyl sulfoxide as positive and negative controls, respectively. To ensure sufficient quality, the Z′ score was calculated for each experiment, with a resultant Z′ score of 0.51 ± 0.10, on average, indicating an excellent quality of the assay. Further characterization of the ATP synthase inhibitor BDQ as a reference compound was carried out based on the fluorescence assay described above. BDQ showed excellent, dose-dependent growth suppression against intracellular M. abscessus. For validation of the newly developed RFP assay, the growth inhibition curve of BDQ against intracellular M. abscessus was determined by counting the numbers of CFU, the standard method for determination of the growth of M. abscessus in macrophages. As shown in Fig. 1B, both methods delivered comparable inhibition profiles, and a MIC 90 of 0.4 μM was determined in both experiments. This is consistent with published data for the in vitro activity of BDQ. The time-dependent growth of intracellular M. abscessus was analyzed. No growth with 1.5 μM BDQ was detected following 5 days of incubation, while the DMSO control showed characteristic bacterial growth over the entire time period. For cytotoxicity assessment, we followed the effect of the compounds on macrophage survival. The number of macrophages, counted based on the DAPI channel, was normalized to that for the 1% DMSO control. Compounds with normalized values of less than 70% were considered cytotoxic, and those test compounds were rejected from further analysis. A reliable analysis is crucial for screening, because missed cytotoxicity can lead to false-positive results. The assay developed in this study offers a means of investigation of growth inhibition and cytotoxicity by fluorescence microscopy within one experiment, which is not possible by colony counting or a luciferase-based method. Initial screen of two predefined compound libraries and characterization of hit compounds. In the next step, we screened two preselected compound libraries, the Pathogen Box and GlaxoSmithKline's small-molecule leads against M. tuberculosis, for activity against intracellular M. abscessus. The initial screen was performed at a single dose of 10 μM for the Pathogen Box and at 25 μM for the GSK library, in duplicate. Compounds with growth inhibition of >80% were considered hits, in compliance with a macrophage count of >70% normalized to the DMSO reference. We tested 568 compounds in total, and the results are summarized in Fig. 2 and Tables S1 and S2 in the supplemental material. M. abscessus is naturally resistant against a wide range of antibiotics, leading to lower hit rates during screening. It was previously shown by us and others that hit rates can be lower than 0.1%, which is in agreement with our findings reported below. Even though the test compounds were preselected for ideal drug-like properties, 15% were found to be cytotoxic against macrophages infected by M. abscessus. This result underlines that an analysis of cytotoxicity in infected cells is necessary and should be considered in assay development. FIG 2 High-content screening of compound libraries against intracellular M. abscessus. Blue squares, macrophage count of ≥70%; red circles, macrophage count of ≤70%. Pathogen Box compounds at 10 μM; GSK’s small-molecule... Among the 568 compounds screened, we identified 3 compounds with growth inhibition of >80%, and these are shown in Table 1. One of them is the reference drug BDQ, which is present in the Pathogen Box, and the other two compounds, MMV688846 / GSK1985270A and MMV688845 / GSK1055950A, are present in both libraries. A growth inhibition curve was performed for BDQ and the two hit compounds by serial dilution, 3 ), based on the fluorescence assay described above, in order to determine the MICs summarized in Table 1. TABLE 1 Activity data for hit compounds FIG 3 Growth inhibition curves of hit compounds found by intracellular HCS. MMV688846/GSK1985270A; MMV688845/GSK1055950A. The piperidinol MMV688846 / GSK1985270A is a known inhibitor of the mycolic acid transport MmpL3 -like protein in M. abscessus. In accordance with the findings of Dupont et al., we found growth inhibition of intracellular M. abscessus, but with a distinct, nearly 15-fold increase of the MIC 90 compared to that obtained by the in vitro assay in 7H9 medium. The phenylalanine derivative MMV688845 / GSK1055950A has been described to be active against M. abscessus grown in vitro in previous studies. In one study, it was considered an inhibitor of CTP synthase, while a recent publication reports inhibition of the RNA polymerase in M. tuberculosis by a similar compound. The effect against intracellular M. abscessus is reported in this study for the first time and underlines the suitability of MMV688845/GSK1055950A for further development. While the compounds showed a distinct increase in the MIC 90 compared to that in broth as well, 50% growth inhibition was already achieved at 4.6 μM, which is below the MIC 90 in vitro. Effects of kinase inhibitors against M. abscessus during macrophage infection. Our newly developed intracellular assay has the additional benefit of enabling analysis of compound libraries for compounds with host-targeting effects on macrophages infected with M. abscessus, compounds that would otherwise be excluded in in vitro screens. Targeting functions in the macrophage is already a well-established concept to suppress the replication of M. tuberculosis within the host cell. In particular, kinase inhibitors are a promising compound class for this approach. Compounds like imatinib and everolimus have a pronounced effect against intracellular M. tuberculosis without showing any antimicrobial activity in vitro. As M. abscessus is able to infect and replicate within macrophages, host-targeting therapies, which have not yet been studied, may be a promising approach against this pathogen. To investigate this concept of host-directed therapies, we screened a set of 317 human kinase inhibitors—the University of North Carolina library —for activity against M. abscessus intracellular growth. Figure 4 and Table S3 give a summary of the results of the kinase inhibitor screen. Due to the fact that those compounds are not antibiotics, growth inhibition is limited compared to that by the compounds in the Pathogen Box or GSK library. Nevertheless, Table 2 summarizes the inhibition properties of three kinase inhibitors demonstrating activity against intracellular M. abscessus. FIG 4 High-content screening of the UNC library at 10 μM for activity against intracellular M. abscessus. Blue squares, macrophage counts of >70%; red circles, macrophage counts of <70%. TABLE 2 Kinase inhibitors with growth reduction of >40% against intracellular M. abscessus GW559768X is known to be an inhibitor of the rearranged during transfection kinase, with a 50% inhibitory concentration of 3 nM. GW296115X is an indolocarbazole targeting the autophosphorylation activity of platelet-derived growth factor receptors. Both compounds showed approximately 50% growth inhibition against the pathogen with only a slight reduction of the macrophage cell count. In contrast, GW406731X, an aza-stilbene active in an RAF/MEK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase scintillation proximity assay, demonstrated an increase in macrophage cell number compared to that for the control, presumably due to a protective effect on the eukaryotic cells. Based on the initial results shown in this publication, further experiments will be necessary to evaluate the potential of kinase inhibitors for host-directed therapy against M. abscessus. Evaluation of Dictyostelium discoideum as a host model for M. abscessus. Currently, the THP-1 cell infection model for M. abscessus is difficult and costly to genetically modify. M. abscessus was shown in the past to infect the amoeba Acanthamoeba castellanii, and many other Mycobacterium species were shown to infect D. discoideum. The vast array of available genetic tools and the ease of genetically modifying D. discoideum favor D. discoideum as a model infection system, which can potentially provide an advantage over the THP-1 cell model of investigating the effect of host genetics on infectivity. Following established infection techniques used for other Mycobacterium species, we observed that M. abscessus can infect and persist in D. discoideum over a period of 2 days, however, without notable clearance or replication, as similarly reported for M. marinum in the same D. discoideum strain. Unlike THP-1 cells, D. discoideum replicates during infection and reaches confluence after 2 days, which is a well-described differentiation trigger, forcing D. discoideum out of its monocytic life stage. While this feature greatly affects the suitability of monocytic D. discoideum to serve as a drug-screening model for slowly replicating bacteria, such as M. tuberculosis, we found that a 2-day time frame is sufficient to observe significant drug effects on M. abscessus persisting in the amoeba. FIG 5 Dictyostelium suitability as an M. abscessus infection model. Established persistence in D. discoideum over 2 days. Treatment with compounds active intracellularly against M. abscessus in THP-1 cells was also effective in the D. discoideum... We, therefore, wanted to check if D. discoideum is also a viable model for anti- M. abscessus drugs. For this, we tested our reference compound and the compound MMV688845 identified in the present study. Following a toxicity curve in D. discoideum, the maximal noncytotoxic concentrations were tested. Both BDQ and MMV688845 were able to reduce intracellular bacteria by at least a log fold after 1 day of treatment. To assess the suitability of D. discoideum for HCS, we infected D. discoideum amoebae with an increasing MOI and compared the number of CFU per host cell and the fluorescence readout automatically normalized to the number of host cells. Our results demonstrated a direct correlation between the number of CFU and fluorescence, thus validating the HCS approach using this model. Conclusion. In this study, we present two newly developed methods to investigate the growth of and the development of drugs with activity against M. abscessus in host cells, taking into account the ability of the pathogen to infect human immune cells. First, we used a THP-1 macrophage cell infection model and made it applicable for high-content screening. Two libraries—the Pathogen Box and GSK’s small-molecule leads—were screened with this technique, modeling the infection of human macrophages. Second, this study established that D. discoideum can be a valuable host infection model that is highly amenable to genetic modifications. Two antibiotics, BDQ and the hit compound MMW688845, were characterized in this model, and both demonstrated the ability to significantly reduce M. abscessus growth in the infected amoeba cells. The straightforward, readily available D. discoideum model can be used as a complementary validation model for drugs targeting the host cell. Though this study is focused on drugs preselected to target the bacilli, relevant host genetic alterations can significantly modify the infection burden, and with the demonstrated ability of compounds to clear M. abscessus intracellularly, genetic manipulations can provide a model for complementation studies for future investigation of host-targeting drugs. Using the newly developed THP-1 model, we identified two hit compounds with previously reported in vitro activity, MMV688846 and MMV688845, to have dose-dependent intracellular activity. Furthermore, we confirmed the activity of MMV688845 in the D. discoideum infection model, indicating a promising starting point for this hit compound and future development. In an initial study, we analyzed the effect of kinase inhibition on THP-1 cell-derived macrophages infected with M. abscessus to evaluate the potential of host-directed therapy against this pathogen. The results indicated growth inhibition for three compounds, encouraging further investigation of kinase inhibition in the THP-1 cell model. MATERIALS AND METHODS Equipment. A CellInsight CX5 fluorescence microscope was used. Compound libraries. The compound libraries came from the Pathogen Box, which was established by the Medicines for Malaria Venture and which is composed of 400 compounds active against various pathogens. The small-molecule leads established by GSK are a collection of potent antimycobacterial compounds. The UNC library is a collection of 317 human kinase inhibitors provided by the University of North Carolina. All compounds were dissolved and diluted in DMSO and treated at a 1% final DMSO concentration. Bacterial cells and culture media. For transformation with the pTEC27 plasmid, M. abscessus ATCC 19977 T R was used. The plasmid pTEC27 carries a gene for the expression of tomatoRFP. For transformation, 7H9 medium supplemented with 10% ADS and 0.05% Tween 80 was inoculated with M. abscessus ATCC 19977 T and incubated for 1 to 2 days. M. abscessus electrotransformation was carried out using a Gene Pulser apparatus at 2.50 kB, 25 μF, and 1,000 Ω. For isolation of transformed bacteria, the suspension was plated on 7H10 plates with hygromycin. M. abscessus expressing tomatoRFP was used for the activity assays. Stocks of the bacteria grown in complete 7H9 medium were stored in approximately 15% glycerol at −80°C. Using an inoculation loop, the bacteria were spread on 7H10 plates and grown for 5 days in an incubator at 37°C. New plates were prepared every month from frozen stock. Bacteria were grown in complete 7H9 broth supplemented with 10% ADS and 0.05% Tween 80, after scraping one colony off the 7H10 plate. Hygromycin was added for M. abscessus /pTEC27. The culture was grown for 3 or 4 days before subculturing in liquid broth. Subculturing was done for only 1.5 weeks, after those new colonies from the 7H10 plate were used for new cultures. The culture volume was 10 ml in a 50-ml Falcon tube. The tubes were covered to protect the photosensitive hygromycin and shaken in an incubator at 37°C. Solid cultures were grown on 7H10 medium supplemented with 0.5% glycerol and 10% ADS. For M. abscessus /pTEC27, hygromycin was added. Liquid cultures were grown in 7H9 medium supplemented 10% ADS and 0.05% Tween 80. For M. abscessus /pTEC27, hygromycin was added. THP-1 cells and culture media. The THP-1 cells used were derived from human monocytes obtained from a 1-year-old male infant with acute monocytic leukemia. The cells were stored in liquid nitrogen. THP-1 cells were grown in complete RPMI medium. The cells were grown in a tissue culture flask with a minimum volume of 20 ml and a maximum volume of 50 ml and were incubated in an atmosphere of 95% air and 5% carbon dioxide at a temperature of 37°C. The cell density was kept between 0.25 million and 1 million cells/ml. Every 2 or 3 days the cells were counted in a microscope and diluted to 0.25 million cells/ml. The cells doubled every 48 h. A culture from nitrogen stock could be subcultured for up to 3 months; after this time, a change in morphology and growth behavior was observed. For culturing of THP-1 cells, RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum, 2% glutamine, 1% nonessential amino acids, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin was used. For the assays, RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 5% FBS, 1% glutamine, and 1% nonessential amino acids was used. M. abscessus infection assay in human macrophages. For the infection assay, an M. abscessus /pTEC27 culture was centrifuged and was washed with 7H9 medium with 0.05% Tween 80. After another centrifugation, 7H9 medium was replaced by RPMI medium and was incubated at RT for 5 min. After incubation, the bacterial suspension was filtered through a 5-μm-pore-size filter to remove the clumps. The OD 600 was determined after filtration. The appropriate amount of bacteria was incubated in the presence of 10% human serum at 37°C for 30 min for opsonization. A cell suspension of THP-1 cells in RPMI incomplete medium was incubated with the opsonized M. abscessus single-cell suspension and PMA for 4 h at 37°C under constant agitation. After infection, the THP-1 cell suspension was centrifuged and washed with RPMI medium. This procedure was repeated twice, and afterwards the cell suspension was dispensed in 96-well plates with 1 × 10 5 THP-1 cells/well. The test compounds at the appropriate concentration were added, and the plates, which were sealed with Parafilm, were incubated for 4 days. After incubation, the cells were stained with NucBlue Live and fixed with paraformaldehyde for 30 min. After removal of the PFA, the plates were washed twice with RPMI medium. Image acquisition and analysis were done with a CellInsight CX5 fluorescence microscope. The mean circular spot average area of the RFP channel was used for calculation of growth inhibition. Data analysis. Every assay plate contained eight wells with DMSO as a negative control, which correspond to 100% bacterial growth, and eight wells with bedaquiline as a positive control, in which 100% inhibition of bacterial growth was reached. The controls were used to monitor assay quality through determination of the Z′ score and for normalizing the data on a per plate basis. The Z′ factor was determined using the following formula: Z′ = 1 –, where SD is the standard deviation and M is the mean. Percent inhibition was calculated as follows: percent inhibition = ×. For MIC 90 determination, growth inhibition curves were calculated with OriginPro 2017G software. The curves were fitted using the following formula: y = A 2 + where A 1 is the initial value for y, A 2 is the final value for y, x is the concentration of the test compound, x 0 is the concentration of the test compound at the center of the curve, and p is the power. Dictyostelium cells and culture media. The Dictyostelium cells used were obtained from the dictyBase Stock Center, funded by the NIH. D. discoideum cells were grown in HL5-C medium supplemented with 100 μg ampicillin and 300 μg/ml streptomycin. The cells were grown with shaking in a 250-ml Erlenmeyer flask in a volume of 50 ml at room temperature. The cell density was kept between 5 × 10 4 to 1 × 10 6 cells/ml, to maintain the cells at a monocytic stage. Each culture was kept for up to 1 month to avoid genetic drift. M. abscessus infection assay in Dictyostelium. D. discoideum cells were seeded in a 6-well plate at 0.5 × 10 6 cells/well and left to adhere for 30 min. The medium was replaced with HL5-C medium without antibiotics. The MOI of M. abscessus was calculated as described above for THP-1 cell infections. For all but the MOI dose-response curve, an MOI of 5 was used. The volume required for 2 infection batches was centrifuged, the medium was replaced with HL5-C medium, and clumps were disrupted with a 25-gauge syringe. After M. abscessus was added to the infection wells, the plates were centrifuged at 500 × g for 20 min. The medium was discarded, and a 2nd infection volume was added. The plates were centrifuged at 500 × g for 20 min and were oriented so that they faced the direction opposite of that in the first infection. Infection was carried out for 2 h total. Extracellular M. abscessus bacteria were washed 5 times with HL5-C medium. To prevent reinfection, 70 μM amikacin was added to the growth medium after the washes. Infection times of 0, 1, or 2 days correspond to 2 to 4 h, 20 to 27 h, and 40 to 52 h postinfection, respectively. Image acquisition was performed as described above for THP-1 cells, with two exceptions: 6-well and 24-well plates rather than 96-well plates were used and the mean circular total intensity showed a slightly better fit in the CFU/MOI correlation, so it was used instead of the mean circular spot average area for D. discoideum - M. abscessus infections. Counting of numbers of CFU and compounds. Infected D. discoideum cells were grown in HL5-C medium supplemented with 70 μM amikacin and either 0.1% DMSO, 1 μM bedaquiline, or 15 μM MMV688845 in triplicate with 3 wells per triplicate. The compound concentration first tested for the D. discoideum MIC 90 was determined using a 2-fold dilution curve over 11 concentrations. After 0, 1, or 2 days of infection, infected D. discoideum amoebae were washed once with HL5-C medium, detached using HL5-C medium, placed into 1.5-ml Eppendorf tubes, and centrifuged at 500 rpm for 5 min. Supernatant lysis was performed by vortexing in a lysis medium. M. abscessus bacteria were extracted from the lysis medium by centrifugation. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was resuspended in 80 μl 7H9 medium. Eight microliters was transferred into 72 μl 7H9 medium in serial dilutions for 1:10, 1:100, and 1:1,000 dilutions. Twenty microliters from each well was seeded onto 4 ml 7H10 agar per well in 6-well plates. The agar was supplemented with 10% ADS, 2% glycerol, and 50 μg/ml hygromycin B. The plates were tilted to spread the drops, air dried, and incubated at 37°C upside down in the dark for 48 h. The numbers of CFU were manually counted from the 1:1,000 and 1:100 dilutions when the colony number was <200. Supplementary Material Supplemental file 1: Click here to view. 