 In Brief Senoo et al. report that GPCR-mediated chemotactic stimulation induces hetero-oligomerization of phosphorylated GDP-bound Rho and GTP-bound Ras in cell migration. Rho-Ras hetero-oligomers directly stimulate mTORC2 activity toward AKT in cells and in vitro. Therefore, GPCR-stimulated hetero-oligomerization of Rho and Ras provides a critical regulatory step in mTORC2-AKT signaling. INTRODUCTION The mechanistic target of rapamycin is a serine/threonine kinase that plays an important role in human health and disease. mTOR forms two distinct complexes, mTOR complex 1 and mTOR complex 2. Both complexes contain a common regulatory subunit, mLST8, with a specific scaffold protein, Raptor for mTORC1 or Rictor for mTORC2. mTORC1 senses nutrient levels and regulates cell growth through protein synthesis. On the other hand, mTORC2 regulates the actin cytoskeleton and cellular metabolism. Through the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, mTORC2 controls directed cell migration toward chemoattractants. A key substrate of mTORC2 in cell migration is another protein kinase AKT. mTORC2 directly phosphorylates a highly conserved serine residue in the hydrophobic motif of AKT. This mTORC2-mediated phosphorylation, together with the phosphorylation in the activation loop by PDK1, stimulates AKT. The phosphorylation step by PDK1 is spatially controlled by the recruitment of AKT to the plasma membrane, where PDK1 is located. Active AKT, in turn, phosphorylates multiple substrates that control the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton and cell-to-substrate adhesion. Although it has been well described that chemoattractants bind to G-protein-coupled receptors located on the cell surface and stimulate mTORC2 toward AKT, a mechanism that links GPCRs to mTORC2 is largely unknown in cell migration, as well as other cellular processes in general. Using Dictyostelium cells as a model system, we have recently shown that two small GTPases in the opposite guanine nucleotide-binding status, GDP-bound Rho and GTP-bound Ras, directly stimulate the kinase activity of mTORC2 toward AKT in GPCR-mediated directed cell migration. In addition to their function in cells, biochemical reconstitutions showed that purified GDP-Rho and GTP-Ras stimulate the enzymatic activity of mTORC2 toward AKT in vitro. In contrast to the current view that small GTPases are active in a GTP-bound form, GTP binding to Rho is not a critical regulatory step in this activation mechanism, but chemoattractant-stimulated phosphorylation of GDP-Rho by glycogen synthase kinase-3 is critical. However, it is unknown how phosphorylated GDP-Rho together with GTP-Ras activates mTORC2. It is also unknown whether GTP-Rho, which is present in a small amount compared to GDP-Rho, has any role in mTORC2-AKT signaling. In the current work, we report that chemoattractant-induced phosphorylation of GDP-Rho promotes its hetero-oligomerization with GTP-Ras. The Rho-Ras hetero-oligomers directly activate mTORC2 toward AKT phosphorylation in cells and in vitro. In contrast, GTP-Rho inhibits mTORC2-AKT signaling by blocking the hetero-oligomerization of GDP-Rho with GTP-Ras. Furthermore, human KRas4B functionally replaces Dictyostelium Ras in the activation of mTORC2. Thus, these data identify the stimulation-dependent assembly of the Rho-Ras hetero-oligomers as an important conserved mechanism that couples GPCR activation to mTORC2 activation. RESULTS Identification of the Interaction Interface between RasC and RacE We have previously shown that RacE is a Dictyostelium homolog of human RhoA and activates the kinase activity of mTORC2 toward AKT in response to the chemoattractant stimulation. The chemoattractant stimulation does not lead to guanine nucleotide exchange from GDP to GTP on RacE. Instead, it induces phosphorylation of GDP-bound RacE at serine 192 by GSK-3. In addition to RacE, a Ras GTPase, RasC, functions in this pathway. In contrast to RacE, RasC is switched from a GDP-bound form to a GTP-bound form in response to the chemoattractant. Both RacE and RasC are necessary for mTORC2 activation, and these two GTPases directly interact in cells, as shown by co-immunoprecipitation of ectopically expressed GFP-RacE and FLAG-RasC. Furthermore, we showed that endogenous RacE and RasC interact in response to the chemoattractant stimulation. In vitro protein-protein interaction assays confirmed that, for these GTPases to associate, RacE needs to be GDP bound and phosphorylated at serine 192 or carry a phosphomimetic mutation, S192D. In contrast, RasC needs to be GTP bound. Only a specific combination of phospho-GDP-RacE and GTP-RasC enables their interaction. Figure 1. Identification of the Interface for RacE-RasC Binding To investigate the mechanism underlying the interaction between phospho-GDP-RacE and GTP-RasC, we modeled this interaction based on an interface that mediates the dimerization of human KRas for the following reasons. First, we found that the overall amino acid sequences of human KRas and Dictyostelium RasC and RacE are highly conserved. Second, two critical amino acids in the dimerization interface of human KRas are conserved in Dictyostelium RasC and RacE. Third, the interface is located near the phosphorylation site S192, which regulates RasC-RacE interaction. To test the interfaces in RacE-RasC interactions, we—individually or in combination—mutated two residues E157 and R164 in a constitutively GTP-bound RasC Q62L and E173 and R186 in a constitutively GDP-bound, phosphomimetic RacE T25N,S192D. We purified these mutant proteins, which were tagged with FLAG for RasC proteins and with GFP for RacE proteins, from Dictyostelium cells under high-salt conditions, as described previously. We then tested their interactions in our in vitro binding assay. In this assay, FLAG-RasC was incubated with GFP-RacE that was bound to GFP-Trap agarose beads. After washes, GFP-Trap beads were pelleted by centrifugation and bound FLAG-RasC, and GFP-RacE proteins were analyzed by western blotting with antibodies to FLAG and GFP. Systematic analysis of all combinations of two wild-type and six mutant proteins revealed that E157 in RasC binds R186 in RacE, while R164 in RasC binds E173 in RacE, likely through electrostatic interactions based on the following data. First, single mutations in any of the four residues dramatically decreased RasC-RacE interactions. Second, double mutants in either RasC or RacE completely blocked RasC-RacE interactions. Third, swapping charges between R164E and E173R or between E157R and R186E completely restored interactions between mutant proteins. Fourth, complete swapping of charges between R164E/E157R and E173R/R186R also restored their interaction. Thus, the pair of residues with opposite charges directly mediate interactions between GDP-RacE and GTP-RasC. It has been reported that Ras dimerization requires membrane anchoring of Ras. Consistent with these studies, we did not detect interactions between purified RasC proteins regardless of its guanine nucleotide-binding status in our in vitro binding assay, which does not contain membranes. RasC-RacE Interaction Is Required for mTORC2 Activation toward AKT To ask whether RasC-RacE interactions are necessary for the activation of mTORC2 toward AKT, we tested binding mutants of RasC and RacE in our in vitro AKT phosphorylation assay. In this assay, we incubated human unactive AKT with mTORC2 purified from Dictyostelium cells using FLAG-Tor along with purified, high-salt washed RasC and RacE. Consistent with our previous report, AKT was phosphorylated by mTORC2 in the presence of GTP-RasC Q62L and phosphomimetic GDP-RacE T25N,S192D. We found that the GTP-RasC Q62L,E157R,R164E mutant that does not bind phosphomimetic GDP-RacE T25N,S192D failed to activate mTORC2. Similarly, the phosphomimetic GDP-RacE T25N,S192D,E173R,R186E mutant that does not bind GTP-RasC Q62L did not activate mTORC2. In contrast, when we included both GTP-RasC Q62L,E157R,R164E and phosphomimetic GDP-RacE T25N,S192D,E173R,R186E, which restored normal interaction, mTORC2 activation was also restored to the normal level. These data indicate that interaction between RasC and RacE is essential for mTORC2 activation toward AKT. Chemoattractant-Induced Phosphorylation Promotes Homo-oligomerization of GDP-RacE To determine how chemoattractant-induced S192 phosphorylation of RacE regulates interactions of RasC and RacE, we first examined the impact of the phosphorylation on RacE itself using size exclusion chromatography. WT FLAG-RacE was purified from Dictyostelium before or after the chemoattractant stimulation and analyzed by SEC. RacE was detected by absorption at 280 nm and western blotting with antibodies to FLAG and phosphorylated RacE at S192. Without cAMP stimulation, WT FLAG-RacE showed a peak of roughly 50 kDa, which appears to be a dimer considering the size of the monomer. B ). In contrast, with chemotactic stimulation, the major peak of WT FLAG-RacE was shifted to a higher molecular weight, suggesting a further assembly of RacE. Figure 2. GDP-RacE Forms Homo-oligomers Since the chemoattractant induces S192 phosphorylation of RacE, but does not change its GDP-bound status, these data suggest that GDP-RacE is present as dimers before stimulation and stimulation-induced S192 phosphorylation promotes the homo-oligomerization of GDP-RacE. To test this model, we purified phosphodefective GDP-RacE mutant and phosphomimetic GDP-RacE mutants in the absence of chemoattractant stimulation and analyzed them by SEC. Supporting the model, phosphodefective GDP-RacE ran as dimers in the SEC, while phosphomimetic GDP-RacE ran as oligomers. Identification of the Interface that Mediates RacE-RacE Association To understand how RacE interacts with itself, we examined the amino acids in the interface for its interaction with RasC using our in vitro binding assay. Interestingly, E173R did not affect the RacE-RacE interaction, while R186E greatly decreased it. E173R,R186E double mutations did not further decrease the interaction compared to the R186E single mutation. Moreover, swapping charges between E173 and R186 did not restore RacE-RacE interaction. These data suggest that R186, but not E173, is critical for the RacE homotypic interaction. To identify an amino acid that works together with R186 in homotypic interaction of phospho-GDP-RacE, we tested nearby glutamate residues and found that E180 is important for the homotypic interaction. We purified RacE proteins carrying a mutation, E180R, from Dictyostelium cells and tested their binding activity in vitro. The E180R mutation greatly decreased interaction between phosphomimetic GDP-RacE T25N,S192D, and the E180R,R186E double mutations further blocked the interaction. When interactions were analyzed between phosphomimetic GDP-RacE carrying the E180R,R186E double mutations, interactions were restored to normal levels. In addition to reversing a negative charge of E180 to positively charged arginine in E180R, we also mutated E180 to alanine. Similar to E180R, E180A effectively blocked the interaction between phosphomimetic GDP-RacE. Therefore, the RacE-RacE interaction is mediated by E180-R186 binding. It appears that RacE-RasC and RacE-RacE interactions use a partially overlapping set of residues. Chemoattractant-Induced Formation of RacE-RasC Hetero-oligomers As described above, the interaction between phospho-GDP-RacE and GTP-RasC is essential for mTORC2 activation toward AKT. Given that phospho-GDP-RacE forms oligomers, we tested how the RacE oligomers associate GTP-RasC molecules using SEC. We found that, when phospho-GDP-RacE and GTP-RasC were mixed, they eluted together with the major peak of much higher molecular weight of roughly 180 kDa, compared to that of phospho-GDP-RacE alone or GTP-RasC alone. This hetero-oligomerization requires E157 and R164 in RasC since double mutations, that block its interactions with phospho-GDP-RacE abolish the complex formation. Figure 3. Phospho-GDP-RacE and GTP-RasC Form Hetero-oligomers To ask whether phosphorylation-induced homo-oligomerization of GDP-RacE is necessary for its hetero-oligomerization with GTP-RasC, we analyzed phosphodefective GDP-RacE T25N,S192A and GTP-RasC Q62L in SEC and found no hetero-oligomerization between these two proteins. Also, the E180A mutation in phosphomimetic RacE T25N,S192D that blocks RacE-RacE interaction inhibited both the formation of hetero-oligomerization with GTP-RasC Q62L in SEC and the activation of mTORC2 toward AKT in the in vitro kinase assay. These data suggest that RacE-RasC hetero-oligomerization depends on RacE homo-oligomerization and is necessary for the activation mTORC2 in vitro. RacE-RasC Hetero-oligomerization Drives mTORC2-Mediated AKT Phosphorylation in Cells To determine the role of RacE-RasC hetero-oligomers in cells, we analyzed chemoattractant-induced mTORC2-mediated phosphorylation of two AKT homologs, PkbR1 and PkbA, in Dictyostelium cells. As we described, the chemoattractant induced phosphorylation of PkbR1 and PkbA at the hydrophobic motives by mTORC2. Both phosphorylation events were blocked in RacE-knockout cells, 4B ), as we have reported. The chemoattractant is also known to activate the ERK/MAP pathway via RasC, which involves the activation of Erk2 by phosphorylation. In contrast to AKT phosphorylation, Erk2 phosphorylation was not affected in RacE-knockout cells. 4B ). Therefore, RacE specifically regulates the mTORC2-AKT pathway downstream of GPCRs. Figure 4. RacE-RasC Interaction Is Required for Chemoattractant-Induced, mTORC2-Mediated AKT Phosphorylation in Cells When we expressed RacE mutants that are defective in interactions with RasC or interactions with itself in RacE-knockout cells, these mutants, unlike WT RacE, did not rescue defects in chemoattractant-induced AKT phosphorylation. 4E ). The expression levels of the RacE proteins were similar to each other. Furthermore, phosphorylation of both AKT and ERK requires GTP-RasC and is increased by ectopic expression of GTP-RasC Q62L. We found that mutations that block its interactions with RacE specifically block the effect of GTP-RasC Q62L on AKT phosphorylation but not ERK phosphorylation. These data further suggest that the interaction between GDP-RacE and GTP-RasC is necessary for chemoattractant-stimulated AKT phosphorylation but not ERK phosphorylation in cells. GTP-RacE Is an Inhibitor of mTORC2-Mediated AKT Phosphorylation via Interactions with Phospho-GDP-RacE We have previously shown that a small amount of RacE is in a GTP-bound form, and chemoattractant stimulation further decreases this proportion. To investigate the function of GTP-bound RacE in mTORC2-mediated AKT phosphorylation, we expressed GTP-RacE G20V in RacE-knockout cells and examined chemoattractant-induced AKT phosphorylation. Unlike WT RacE and GDP-RacE T25N, GTP-RacE G20V did not rescue AKT phosphorylation in RacE-knockout cells 5B ). We then expressed these constructs in WT cells and performed the same experiments. WT RacE and GDP-RacE T25N increased chemoattractant-stimulated AKT phosphorylation. 5D ). In contrast, GTP-RacE G20V dramatically decreased it. 5D ). These data suggest that GTP-bound RacE not only is non-functional in AKT phosphorylation but also acts as an inhibitor in this process. Figure 5. GTP-RacE Binds Phospho-GDP-RacE and Inhibits Its Association with GTP-RasC To understand the inhibitory mechanism by GTP-RacE, we analyzed interactions between GTP-RacE and GDP-RacE in our in vitro binding assays. Specifically, we tested all combinations between GTP-RacE, phospho-GTP-RacE, GDP-RacE, and phospho-GDP-RacE. We found that GTP-RacE only associates with phospho-GDP-RacE or GTP-RacE itself. Furthermore, SEC analysis revealed that the interaction of GTP-RacE prevents phospho-GDP-RacE from hetero-oligomerization with GTP-RasC. 5I ). Given that GTP-RacE does not bind GTP-RasC, these results suggest that GTP-RacE negatively regulates the activation of mTORC2-mediated AKT phosphorylation by separating phospho-GDP-RacE from GTP-RasC. Since a phosphomimetic mutation in GTP-RacE blocks the interaction of GTP-RacE with phospho-GDP-RacE, it appears that chemoattractant-stimulated phosphorylation alleviates the inhibitory effect of GTP-RacE. If GTP-RacE inhibits AKT phosphorylation via interactions with phospho-GDP-RacE, mutations that inhibit RacE-RacE interaction in GTP-RacE should counteract its inhibitory effect. To test this prediction, we expressed GTP-RacE G20V,S192A with the mutations that block RacE-RacE interaction in WT cells. The expression levels of the RacE proteins were similar to each other. The mutations strongly mitigated the inhibitory effect of GTP-RacE. 6B ). Furthermore, our in vitro kinase assays showed that GTP-RacE inhibits phospho-GDP-RacE-stimulated, mTORC2-mediated AKT phosphorylation, and this inhibitory effect is relieved when the same mutations are introduced in GTP-RacE. Therefore, GTP-RacE inhibits mTORC2-mediated AKT phosphorylation through binding to phospho-GDP-RacE in cells and in vitro. Figure 6. GTP-RacE Inhibits Chemoattractant-Stimulated AKT Phosphorylation in Cells To examine the role of guanine nucleotides on the localization of RacE in migrating cells, we expressed GFP fused to WT RacE, GDP-RacE T25N, -or GTP-RacE G20V in Dictyostelium cells. Cells were then placed in a microfluid chamber that creates a stable chemoattractant gradient and observed by spinning-disc confocal microscopy. We found that both GFP fused WT RacE and GDP-RacE T25N are uniformly distributed along the plasma membrane. 6G ). In contrast, GTP-RacE G20V was enriched at the plasma membrane in the back of the cells. 6G ). Other mutations, which block phosphorylation, mimic phosphorylation or inhibit RacE-RasC or RacE-RacE interactions did not affect the even distribution of WT and GDP-RacE T25N or the rear enriched distribution of GTP-RacE G20V. GFP-PkbA and GFP-RBD were located at the leading edge of migrating cells in the chemoattractant gradient. These data suggest that chemotactic signaling is spatially regulated at least by three mechanisms. First, the activation of RacE is limited to the leading edge due to the rear localization of inhibitory GTP-RacE. Second, RasC is activated by the leading edge. Third, PkbA is located at the leading edge. We propose that the combination of these regulatory steps restricts the activation of AKT at the leading edge of migrating cells. Human KRas4B Functionally Replace Dictyostelium RasC A phylogenetic analysis suggested that Dictyostelium RasC is related human HRas, KRas, and NRas. To determine which human Ras is a functional counterpart of RasC, we individually expressed oncogenic, GTP-bound forms of human HRas G12V, two isoforms of KRas G12V and NRas G12V, in Dictyostelium cells and tested their effect on AKT phosphorylation. We found that GTP-KRas4B G12V, but not others, increased AKT phosphorylation, similar to GTP-RasC Q62L. 7B ). The expression levels of these Ras proteins were comparable to each other. We then asked whether human GTP-KRas4B binds to Dictyostelium RacE. To achieve this, we purified FLAG-HRas G12V, FLAG-KRas4A G12V, FLAG-KRas4B G12V, and FLAG-NRas G12V and incubated with purified phosphomimetic GDP-RacE T25N,S192D. We found that only FLAG-KRas4B G12V interacts with RacE. When the interaction of KRas4B and RacE was analyzed in SEC, we found that these two proteins assemble into hetero-oligomers, similar to what we found for RasC and RacE. 7E ). Furthermore, we tested whether GTP-KRas4B G12V can replace GTP-RasC Q62L in in vitro AKT phosphorylation assay. Indeed, purified FLAG-KRas4B G12V supported mTORC2-mediated AKT phosphorylation together with phospho-GDP-RacE. This activation was blocked when we used RacE mutants that are defective in phosphorylation site or binding to RasC. These data suggest that human KRas4B is a functional homolog of Dictyostelium RasC in the regulation of mTORC2-mediated AKT phosphorylation through the hetero-oligomerization with phospho-GDP-RacE. Figure 7. Human KRas4B Functionally Replaces Dictyostelium RasC DISCUSSION Here, we show that phospho-GDP-RacE forms hetero-oligomers with GTP-RasC to activate mTORC2 toward AKT in response to the chemotactic stimulation of GPCRs. RacE-RasC interaction strictly requires a specific combination of guanine nucleotide-binding—only GDP-RacE and GTP-RasC form a complex. In addition to the combination of guanine nucleotide-binding, RacE-RasC interaction is further subjected to another layer of regulation through chemoattractant-stimulated S192 phosphorylation of GDP-RacE, which occurs in the vicinity of the molecular interface created by glutamate at 173 and arginine at 186. Based on the crystal structure of RhoA and Ras, the phosphorylation site at serine 192 and the GDP-binding domain are predicted to position on almost opposite sides of RacE. By simultaneously modulating the structure of RacE from both ends, phosphorylation and GDP-binding might adapt the conformation of RacE to enable the new mode of action. As a prerequisite to RacE-RasC interaction, GDP-RacE assembles into homo-oligomers in response to chemoattractant-induced phosphorylation at S192. The RacE-RacE interaction is mediated by the same α helix that mediates RacE-RasC interaction via partially overlapping amino acid residues. To mediate RacE-RacE interactions, glutamate 180 and arginine 186 likely form a salt bridge based on the data in charge swapping experiments. This RacE homo-oligomerization is necessary for RacE to interact with RasC. Therefore, chemoattractant stimulation first enables GDP-RacE to oligomerize and recruits GTP-RasC to assemble RacE-RasC hetero-oligomers that activate mTORC2. Since our previous data showed that phospho-GDP-RacE could interact with mTORC2 itself in the absence of other subunits of mTORC2 or RasC, the assembly of RacE-RasC hetero-oligomers regulates the enzymatic activity of mTORC2, rather than the interaction of RacE with mTORC2. Since the size of mTORC2 is beyond the higher limit of SEC, we could not test how many mTORC2 complexes associate with a RacE-RasC hetero-oligomer. It is possible that each phospho-GDP-RacE recruits one mTORC2 complex. Alternatively, one RacE-RasC hetero-oligomer might hold one mTORC2 since the molecular size of mTORC2 is much larger than those of individual RacE and RasC molecules. In future studies, it will be important to further analyze the structure of the RacE-RasC-mTORC2 supercomplex and determine the number of each protein in the complex. Previous studies have reported that Ras forms a homodimer to activate the MAPK pathway. Multiple models have been proposed that explain the protein-protein binding interface that mediates Ras dimerization. For example, it has been shown that the formation of KRas dimer is mediated by the β sheet. Both RasC and RacE contain equivalent residues in their predicted β sheets. Another proposed mechanism is that aspartate at 154 and arginine at 161 in the α helix from the binding interface. Our data show that the interaction of RacE with either RasC or human KRas4B is mediated by amino acid residues equivalent to those located in the α helix. Supporting direct interactions through negatively charged aspartate/glutamate and positively charged arginine, changing their charges in one of the two residues blocked the interaction, while swapping these charges in the two residues restored the interaction. These charge-swapping manipulations also restored the function of the RacE-RasC complex in mTORC2 activation. Therefore, the assembly of RacE and RasC is essential for the activation of mTORC2. We found specific interactions between Dictyostelium RacE with human KRas4B but not the three other Ras GTPases, HRas, NRas, or KRas4A. The functional conservation between RasC and KRas4B does not appear to result from their sequence homology in the hypervariable regions because these regions show no high homology between RasC and KRas4B. Unphosphoryalted GTP-RacE inhibits the role of phosphor-GDP-RacE in mTORC2 activation by competing with interactions between phospho-GDP-RacE and GTP-RasC. It has been reported that GTP-RacE and GTP-RhoA are located at the rear of the migrating cells. In mammalian cells, RhoA is also located at the front of migrating cells. These different localizations of RhoA have been explained by the intracellular location where myosin-actin contraction occurs in different types of migrating cells. Our current data suggest that rear located GTP-RacE suppresses mTORC2-AKT signaling and allows polymerization of actin only at the leading edge of migrating cells. Supporting our findings, previous studies have shown that, in human cells, GTP-bound RhoA—which is a homolog of Dictyostelium RacE—inhibits AKT phosphorylation and that AKT is preferentially phosphorylated at the leading edge of migrating cells. Thus, our finding places RacE in a unique position as a signaling molecule that provides a missing link between GPCR and mTORC2 by playing two opposite roles at two different intracellular locations to polarize the actin cytoskeleton in migrating cells—the activation at the front and inhibition at the rear. STAR★METHODS RESOURCE AVAILABILITY Lead Contact Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Miho Iijima. Materials Availability All unique reagents generated in this study are available from the Lead Contact with a completed materials transfer agreement. Data and Code Availability This study did not generate any unique datasets or code. EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS Knockout of the RacE gene by homologous recombination using the blasticidin resistance cassette in Dictyostelium discoideum cells was done as previously described. WT Dictyostelium cells were cultured in HL5 medium on a rotary shaker at 200 rpm and 22°C. RacE-KO cells were cultured in HL5 medium on Petri dishes and shaken for 1 day before being used for the experiments. METHOD DETAILS Plasmids Plasmids were introduced to Dictyostelium cells by electroporation, and stable cell lines carrying the plasmids were selected with G418. To induce cell differentiation, exponentially growing cells were washed with development buffer, resuspended at 2 × 10 7 cells/ml, starved for 1 h, and shaken with 100 nM cAMP pulses at 6-min intervals for 4 h. Co-immunoprecipitation Co-immunoprecipitation was performed as previously described with some modifications. Dictyostelium cells were differentiated in DB and incubated with 2 mM caffeine at 22°C for 20 min. Cells were washed in DB, resuspended at 1 0× 10 8 cells/ml, and lysed in an equal volume of ice-cold 2 × lysis buffer on ice for 10 min. Cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 4°C and incubated with anti-RacE antibodies together with agarose beads coupled to protein A at 4°C for 4 h. After washing with 1 × lysis buffer, bound fractions were eluted with 2 × SDS-PAGE sample buffer and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and western blotting using appropriate antibodies. Chemoattractant-induced phosphorylation of PkbA, PkbR1, and Erk2 in cells Differentiated Dictyostelium cells were incubated in DB with 2 mM caffeine for 20 min at 22°C, washed twice with ice-cold DB, and resuspended at 5 × 10 7 cells/ml. Cells were shaken at 200 rpm at 22°C and stimulated with 1 μM cAMP. Aliquots were taken at different time points and lysed in SDS-PAGE sample buffer. Phosphorylation of PkbA and PkbR1 were detected using anti-phospho-RPS6KB1 antibodies because of the conserved amino acid sequences around the phosphorylation sites. Phosphorylation of Erk2 was detected using anti-phospho-p44/42 MAPK antibodies, as previously described. Western blotting Proteins were separated using SDS-PAGE and transferred onto PVDF membranes. The antibodies were GFP, FLAG, actin, Erk2, phospho-p44/42 MAPK antibodies, RacE, phospho-RacE, RasC, PkbA, PkbR1, phospho-RPS6KB1, AKT, and phospho-AKT. Immunocomplexes were visualized using fluorescent-labeled secondary antibodies and detected using a PharosFX Plus molecular imager. Images were analyzed using ImageJ. Protein purification Protein purification was performed as described previously, with some modifications. Dictyostelium cells were transfected with plasmids that express GFP- or FLAG-tagged proteins. Cells were differentiated, treated with DB containing 2 mM caffeine for 20 min at 22°C, and washed twice with ice-cold DB. To purify mTORC2 using FLAG-Tor, 1 × 10 8 cells were lysed in 1 mL of ice-cold CHAPS lysis buffer for 10 min on ice. After clarification by centrifugation, 1 mL of cell lysate was incubated with 15 μl of anti-FLAG agarose beads to immunoprecipitate proteins for 2 h at 4°C with gentle agitation. The beads were washed three times using CHAPS lysis buffer, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C. To purify GFP- or FLAG-tagged forms of RacE, RasC, HRas, KRas4A, KRas4B, and NRas from Dictyostelium cells, 1 × 10 8 of cells that individually express these proteins were lysed in 1 mL of ice-cold NP40 lysis buffer for 10 min on ice. The inclusion of EDTA was critical to prevent the degradation of these proteins during purification. It also helped to increase the homogeneity of purified proteins. Using radioactive guanine nucleotides and thin-layer chromatography, we confirmed that 1 mM EDTA does not affect guanine nucleotide binding to RacE and RasC in our protein purification protocol. After clarification, 1 mL of cell lysate was incubated with 15 μl of GFP-Trap beads or anti-FLAG agarose beads to immunoprecipitate proteins for 2 h at 4°C with gentle agitation. The beads were washed three times in NP40 lysis buffer, twice in high salt wash buffer, and three times in NP40 lysis buffer. The washed beads were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C. Reconstitution of chemoattractant-stimulated mTORC2-mediated AKT phosphorylation The kinase activity of mTORC2 was measured as described previously, with some modifications. FLAG-tagged mTORC2, RacE, RasC, and KRas4B were eluted from anti-FLAG beads by incubation with 1 M arginine at room temperature for 5 min. Amounts of purified proteins were quantified on CBB-stained SDS-PAGE gels using ImageJ software with BSA as a standard. Purified mTORC2 was incubated with 40 ng RacE, RasC, or KRas4B, along with 40 ng unactive human AKT1 in 80 μl of kinase reaction buffer at room temperature for 5 min with gentle mixing. Reactions were stopped by adding 80 μl of 2 × SDS-PAGE sample buffer. AKT phosphorylation was detected by western blotting with anti-phospho-AKT antibodies. In vitro protein-protein interaction assay To analyze interactions between RacE, RasC, HRas, KRas4A, KRas4B, and NRas, purified proteins were high-salt washed with 500 mM NaCl and 50 mM HEPES. To examine the interactions of RacE with RasC, HRas, KRas4A, KRas4B, and NRas, GFP-Trap carrying GFP-RacE was incubated with FLAG-RasC, FLAG-HRas, FLAG-KRas4A, FLAG-KRas4B, or FLAG-NRas proteins in kinase reaction buffer without ATP at room temperature for 15 min. GFP-Trap beads were washed three times in the same buffer, and bound proteins were analyzed by western blotting. Size exclusion chromatography After arginine elution, purified FLAG-tagged proteins were subjected to clarification by centrifugation and filtered through 0.22-μm syringe filters. Proteins were injected into the size exclusion column that had been pre-equilibrated with SEC buffer. The column was run at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min by the BioLogic DuoFlow system. The total volume was 30 ml, and 0.5 mL fractions were collected. Absorbance at 280 nm was continuously measured with a 0.2 s interval. To analyze molecular weights, Gel Filtration Standard was used. QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Unless otherwise noted, all data were quantified based on at least 3 independent experiments and presented as average ± SD. Statistical analysis was performed using one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey: **p < 0.01. ​ KEY RESOURCES TABLE Highlights Chemoattractant induces formation of Rho-Ras hetero-oligomers in migrating cells Rho and Ras interact via a specific pair of charged residues in their α helices Rho-Ras hetero-oligomers stimulate mTORC2 activity toward AKT Rho-Ras hetero-oligomers are inhibited at the rear of migrating cells Supplementary Material 1 Click here to view. 2 Click here to view. 