 Mitogen-activated protein kinase regulation of cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase function has been demonstrated in mammalian cells and suspected to occur in other eukaryotes. Epistasis analysis in the soil amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum suggests the atypical MAPK Erk2 downregulates the function of the cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase RegA to regulate progression of the developmental life cycle. A putative MAPK docking motif located near a predicted MAPK phosphorylation site was characterized for contributions to RegA function and binding to Erk2 because a similar docking motif has been previously characterized in the mammalian PDE4D phosphodiesterase. The overexpression of RegA with alterations to this docking motif restored RegA function to regA – cells based on developmental phenotypes, but low-level expression of RegA D– from the endogenous regA promoter failed to rescue wild-type morphogenesis. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that Erk2 associates with both RegA and RegA D–, suggesting the docking motif is not required for this association. Epistasis analysis between regA and the only other Dictyostelium MAPK, erk1, suggests Erk1 and RegA can function in different pathways but that some erk1 - phenotypes may require cAMP signalling. These results imply that MAPK downregulation of RegA in Dictyostelium is accomplished through a different mechanism than MAPK regulation of cAMP-specific phosphodiesterases in mammalian cells and that the regulation in Dictyostelium does not require a proximal MAPK docking motif. Keywords: phosphodiesterase, MAPK, Dictyostelium, development, signal transduction, Docking site Introduction Many signalling pathways make use of cAMP as a second messenger to regulate cellular activities within the cell. Levels of cAMP are typically modulated through adenylyl cyclase and phosphodiesterase activities and these enzymes are often localized to complexes within cells to facilitate rapid and specific responses. In mammals, eight different cAMP phosphodiesterase genes, each encoding several isoforms, provide a multitude of phosphodiesterases to regulate cAMP signalling in different tissues and subcellular locations, and some of these phosphodiesterases have been the targets of therapeutic inhibitors for the treatment of different clinical states. In addition to different isoforms, the function of some phosphodiesterases can be regulated through the phosphorylation of specific residues by upstream protein kinases, including mitogen-activated protein kinases. The complexity of phosphodiesterase expression and function in mammals presents significant challenges in understanding the function and regulation of specific phosphodiesterases in various signalling pathways. However, simpler eukaryotes have far fewer phosphodiesterases and protein kinases and therefore offer an opportunity to better assess the regulation of specific phosphodiesterases in vivo using genetic approaches. The soil amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum uses cAMP as both an extracellular and an intracellular signalling molecule. Starved cells release and chemotax to extracellular cAMP as a mechanism for individual cells to find neighbouring cells and form a multicellular aggregate. Extracellular cAMP continues to play a role as the aggregate undergoes morphogenesis to form a migratory slug and eventually a fruiting body with a mass of spores on top of a stalk as suggested by the presence of cell surface cAMP receptors during the multicellular stages. Intracellular cAMP also has a role in regulating developmental progression through the activation of a cAMP-specific protein kinase. An important regulator of cAMP levels and PKA is the intracellular cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase RegA. The loss of RegA results in accelerated development and precocious spore formation resulting in distorted fruiting body morphology. This aberrant development resembles the phenotypes associated with the increased PKA function, either from overexpression of the PKA catalytic subunit or from the loss of the inhibitory regulatory subunit. RegA protein levels are highest during aggregation and early mound stage and RegA function has been associated with proper chemotactic movement. Histidine kinase regulation of RegA during the initiation of spore formation has also been characterized and occurs through a phospho-relay mechanism that results in the phosphorylation of the RegA D212 residue. Spore differentiation signals acting through histidine kinases can downregulate RegA function during this stage of development. An earlier genetic study in Dictyostelium has indicated that the aggregation defect of an MAPK mutant erk2 RE can be corrected by disruption of the regA gene, suggesting Erk2 is a negative regulator of RegA. The erk2 RE mutant is incapable of generating sufficient cAMP and the loss of RegA rescues this defect by allowing higher levels of cAMP. A phospho-ablative alteration of the T676 residue of RegA that lies within a conventional MAPK substrate recognition sequence prevented the rescue of cAMP levels, suggesting that Erk2 downregulates RegA through the phosphorylation of this residue. Phospho-ablative and phospho-mimetic alterations at this site are consistent with a negative regulation of RegA function through phosphorylation at this residue. This phosphorylation site occurs in a region near the carboxyl terminus that corresponds to a similar region in which MAPK phosphorylation regulates the mammalian cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase PDE4D. In most isoforms of PDE4 phosphodiesterases this phosphorylation event reduces the function of the phosphodiesterase. Subsequent characterization of PDE4 isoforms also revealed a MAPK docking motif near the targeted phosphorylation site and an alteration of this motif reduced MAPK interaction and negative regulation. The similarity in MAPK regulation of phosphodiesterase function in Dictyostelium and mammals suggests the possibility of conserved regulatory mechanisms of phosphodiesterase function in diverse eukaryotes. The Dictyostelium Erk2 shares sequence similarity to a group of atypical MAPKs that have been conserved in most eukaryotes except for fungi. Erk2 activation occurs in the absence of MekA, the sole conventional MAPK kinase in Dictyostelium and this MAPK-independent regulation is also shared by atypical MAPKs in other eukaryotes. Erk2 is activated in response to chemotactic stimulation, either by folate or by cAMP, and Erk2 function is required for chemotactic movement during foraging and the aggregation phase of multicellular development. A recent phosphoproteomic analysis of Erk2 revealed a strong preference for substrates with sequence S/TPR/K but genetic evidence suggests that this consensus sequence is less restrictive. Mutational analysis of EppA and RegA indicates that MAPK substrate sites without a positively charged residue after the proline position are critical regulatory sites in vivo. In addition to Erk2, the Dictyostelium genome encodes only one other MAPK, Erk1, and this MAPK has greater sequence similar to more typical MAPKs that can be activated by conventional MAPK kinases. Cells lacking Erk1 form small aggregates when starved and these aggregates have accelerated but relatively normal morphogenesis. Overexpression of Erk1 results in normal sized aggregates that are delayed in the transition to form migratory slugs. Erk1 is activated in response to chemotactic stimulation but this activation occurs as a secondary response that requires both Erk2 and MekA function. In this study a putative MAPK docking site was identified in RegA and characterized for its potential role in the docking of Erk2 and the downregulation of RegA function. Developmental phenotypes of regA mutants with alterations in this putative docking site were examined to determine how these alterations impacted RegA function. The interactions between RegA and Erk2 in vivo were also examined through the analysis of immunoprecipitates. In addition to analysing the Erk2–RegA interactions, epistatic relationships between regA and erk1 mutations were analysed to assess if Erk1 might also be a potential regulator of RegA. Methods Strains and culture conditions All Dictyostelium strains were axenic and isogenic except for the loci noted. The parental strain KAx3 and a thymidine auxotroph, JH10, were used for creating regA – strains through a partial knockout of the regA locus with a blasticidin resistance gene as previously described. Cells were grown in axenic HL-5 medium with or without supplementary thymidine. Cells were electroporated and selected in appropriate medium containing either G418 or blasticidin and multiple clonal transformants were isolated. Strains were also grown on bacterial lawns and the developmental phenotypes were assessed in the plaques cleared by the Dictyostelium growth. Levels of RegA were determined with immunoblots probed with antiserum generated against a RegA peptide located near the amino terminus or a RegA peptide located near the carboxyl terminus. Erk2 detection on immunoblots used antiserum against an Erk2 peptide located near the carboxyl terminus. Recombinant DNA methods Alterations of the putative RegA D-motif were created through PCR mutagenesis of the regA ORF. Briefly, the codons for arginines, leucines and isoleucine in the motif were changed to alanine using the oligonucleotides listed in Fig. S1. The mutated regA gene, regA D–, was sequenced to verify changes and then inserted as a Bam HI/ Xba I fragment into the previously described Dictyostelium expression vectors pTXGFP and pDXA-3H. For creating the regA allele knock-in mutants the wild-type regA and regA D– ORFs were inserted as a Bam HI/ Xba I fragment into a pBluescriptSK- vector with a Bam HI/ Sal I fragment of the thyA gene previously inserted into the Bam HI/ Xho I sites of the multiple cloning site region. The knock-in vectors were linearized at a unique Sal I site near the amino terminal end of the regA ORF and transformed into regA – thyA – cells. The single crossover recombination event into the regA – locus was verified by PCR analysis as previously described. The knock-in vectors lacked promoter sequences for regA ORFs and therefore only the knock-in allele adjacent to the endogenous promoter was expressed. Dictyostelium development and phenotype analysis Dictyostelium strains were grown in HL-5 medium shake culture to mid-logarithmic phase and then collected by centrifugation. Cells were washed in phosphate buffer and typically suspended at 3×10 7 cells ml −1 before plating on non-nutrient agar plates for development. Images of developmental morphology were recorded at the times indicated using a Nikon SMZ-U dissecting microscope with a transmitted light source. Immunoprecipitation and Western blot For immunoprecipitation, cells were grown in HL-5 medium shaking cultures until they reached ∼5×10 6 cells ml −1. The cells were harvested, washed and suspended at 5×10 7 cells ml −1 in phosphate buffer. The cells were starved for 6 h in a shaking culture with 100 µM cAMP stimulation every 15 min during the last 3 h to induce cAMP responsiveness. Cells were shaken 15 min after the last pulse of cAMP and then stimulated a final time with 400 µM cAMP. Cells samples were collected at the indicated times by transferring to ice-cold phosphate buffer on ice. Cells were concentrated by centrifugation and cell pellets were frozen at −80 °C. Cell pellets were suspended in 1 % Triton X-100 in immunoprecipitation buffer composed of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 10 µg aprotinin ml −1, 10 µg leupeptin ml −1 and 1 mM PMSF. The cell supernatant obtained after centrifugation was incubated with anti-RegA antiserum at 4 °C overnight with continuous rocking. Protein-A agarose beads were added to the samples and rocked for another 2 h. The beads were pelleted, washed multiple times in immunoprecipitation buffer and wash buffer and then treated with 5× SDS-PAGE gel loading buffer and heated. Proteins in the samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analysis. Immunoblotting and band detection using chemiluminescence was conducted as previously described. Results Putative MAPK docking sites in RegA Earlier studies have indicated that the mammalian MAPK Erk2 can bind PDE4D phosphodiesterases through a docking motif near the reported MAPK phosphorylation site. A similar interaction might be expected for the MAPK regulation of the Dictyostelium phosphodiesterase RegA given that the predicted phosphorylation site, residue T676, is located in the same general region of the phosphodiesterase. To examine the possibility that MAPKs can dock with RegA, a search for putative MAPK docking sites was conducted on RegA. MAPK docking sites typically consist of a K/R X I/LXI/L motif and in some cases an additional FXF motif exists. RegA has two potential D-motifs, but only one motif resides near the MAPK phosphorylation site in the C-terminal region. Alignment of Dictyostelium RegA with mammalian PDE4D indicates the carboxyl-terminal putative D-motif is conserved in its consensus sequence in multiple species, including other dictyostelids. However, the previously characterized D-motif in mammalian PDE4D is approximately 20 residues further toward the carboxyl terminus and not conserved in dictyostelids. An FXF motif was also identified proximal to the D-motif in PDE4D but such a motif is not present in the RegA homologues in dictyostelids. The signature residues of the D-motifs in RegA or mammalian PDE4D do not include any of the residues highly conserved among phosphodiesterases involved with metal or AMP binding, suggesting that these residues are not likely to be involved with catalytic activity. Fig. 1. Alignments of Dictyostelium discoideum RegA putative docking motifs and MAPK phosphorylation sites and flanking residues with other dictyostelids. The extent of the delay correlated with RegA D– or RegA protein levels, consistent with excessive RegA function and decreased cAMP levels as previously described. Attempts to generate clonal transformants with levels of RegA D– or RegA expression similar to wild-type strains using reduced drug selection was not successful, suggesting that overexpression of these genes is primarily attributed to the strong act15 promoter. The antiserum against RegA also detects a non-specific band in the lysates of clonal regA – strain lysates that runs slightly lower than RegA in wild-type lysates. Fig. 2. Overexpression of RegA and RegA D–. Developmental morphology of RegA overexpression strains. Clonal transformants of regA – cells overexpressing wild-type RegA or RegA D– and parental wild-type KAx3 cells were... Expression of RegA D– from the endogenous promoter does not rescue RegA function To assess the role of the putative D-motif under conditions of lower RegA expression, vectors containing promoter-less regA alleles were integrated into the disrupted regA – locus through a single crossover mechanism to allow a single copy of the regA allele to be expressed from the endogenous regA promoter. This strategy has been previously used to assess other regA alleles. Expression of wild-type RegA in the gene knock-in strains resulted in normal fruiting body morphology without a delay in development, suggesting the strain produced sufficient but not excessive levels of RegA. Development was slightly accelerated but not as much accelerated as that associated with regA – cells. Also, regA – cells do not undergo normal fruiting body morphogenesis during culmination but rather produce a stalk with most spores located at the base. Therefore, all subsequent analyses and comparisons of RegA and RegA D– function were conducted in these gene knock-in strains. The development of RegA D– knock-in cells resulted in small aggregates, precocious spore formation and aberrant fruiting body morphology similar to regA – strains. This phenotype suggests that RegA D– does not provide sufficient RegA function when expressed from the endogenous regA promoter. The level of RegA D– and RegA expressed from the endogenous regA promoter were comparable at 4 h of development, suggesting that the absence of RegA function in RegA D– mutants is probably not due to general lack of protein stability. Fig. 3. Integration and expression of regA knock-in alleles. Map of the regA knock-in allele in the disrupted regA locus through a single crossover integration. regA ORF and intron sequences are indicated along with the replacement... Putative D-motif is not essential for Erk2 and RegA interactions The reduction of RegA function of RegA D– -expressing cells was not expected based on the assumption that this putative D-motif facilitates an interaction with a negative regulator such as Erk2. However, if Erk2 or other proteins interacted with this motif then these associations might also coordinate complexes with positive regulators of RegA. To investigate the possibility that Erk2 associates with RegA and also the potential importance of the D-motif, immunoprecipitates of RegA D– and RegA protein complexes from regA D– and regA knock-in strains were assessed for the presence of Erk2. Lysates of cAMP-stimulated cells from different intervals of stimulation were combined for RegA immunoprecipitations because possible interactions between RegA and Erk2 could be transient over the course of the cellular response. Immunoblots of RegA D– - and RegA-expressing cells displayed Erk2-specific bands in whole cell lysates and in both RegA and RegA D– immunoprecipitates, indicating that Erk2 can associate with RegA in vivo, regardless of the D-motif alteration. Unexpectedly, the intensity of the Erk2 bands was significantly higher in the immunoprecipitates of RegA D– compared to RegA, suggesting that the Erk2 association with RegA is increased by the alteration of the D-motif. Levels of Erk2 in whole cell extracts were comparable in both RegA D– - and RegA-expressing cells, suggesting the increased association of Erk2 with RegA D– was not due to increased Erk2 expression. Interestingly, the presence of a slower migrating, possibly an Erk2-specific, band was more apparent in the RegA D– immunoprecipitate and whole cell extract compared to those of the RegA cells. The identity of this protein is unknown but its increased presence in RegA D– cells and immunoprecipitates might be related to the alteration of the D-motif. Fig. 4. Erk2 associated with RegA immunoprecipitates. regA – cells with knock-in alleles expressing RegA D– or wild-type RegA were starved for 6 h and pulsed with cAMP as described in the Methods. Immunoprecipitates of RegA using antiserum... Comparison of Erk1 and RegA developmental phenotypes Based on the co-immunoprecipitation analysis of RegA and Erk2, the D-motif is not essential for Erk2 association with RegA but could potentially be involved with other MAPK interactions. The only other D. discoideum MAPK is Erk1 and potential relationships between Erk1 and RegA function during development have not been investigated. To assess whether Erk1 and RegA might function in the same pathway, the developmental phenotypes of erk1 and regA mutants were analysed and compared. The loss of either regA or erk1 accelerates development but with different morphologies. The erk1 – cells form small aggregates with accelerated tip formation, whereas regA – cells form larger aggregates similar in size to that of wild-type cells. The erk1 – aggregates develop into small fruiting bodies with wild-type morphology but regA – aggregates form aberrant fruiting bodies with many spores located at the base of the stalk. Double erk1 – regA – mutants form smaller aggregates than erk1 – cells and these aggregates develop into small fruiting bodies with the aberrant morphology associated with regA – mutants. This combination of erk1 – and regA – phenotypes in the double mutant suggests RegA and Erk1 can operate in separate developmental signalling pathways. The impact of overexpressing RegA or Erk1 was also examined by using the act15 promoter to drive expression of either gene from an extrachromosomal vector. Overexpression of RegA in erk1 – cells increased aggregate size, suggesting that excessive RegA function can partially mask the small aggregate phenotype associated with erk1 – mutants. Likewise, overexpression of Erk1 delayed the progression of regA – aggregates into slugs. The ability of overexpressed Erk1 or RegA to mask the null phenotype of the other suggests that Erk1- and RegA-mediated pathways can directly or indirectly impact each other. Fig. 5. Developmental morphology of strains lacking or overexpressing RegA and Erk1 on non-nutrient plates. Cells were grown and prepared for development as described in the Methods. Parental KAx3, regA –, erk1 – and erk1 – regA –... Erk1 overexpression does not correct aberrant developmental morphology of Reg D– cells Although RegA and Erk1 can function in separate pathways, this does not necessarily exclude the possibility that these proteins might interact and also facilitate a common pathway. As a MAPK, the Erk1 could possibly interact with the putative carboxyl-terminal D-motif in RegA and the overexpression of Erk1 might potentially compensate for alterations of this motif. Overexpression of Erk1 resulted in a slight delay in the progression of mounds to form tips in both RegA- or RegA D– -expressing cells. With or without overexpession of Erk1, the RegA D– knock-in cells displayed the large mass of cells at the base of the fruiting body, indicating that overexpression of Erk1 cannot correct the aberrant fruiting body morphology associated with the altered motif. Overexpression of Erk1 also did not affect the wild-type morphology of cells expressing the wild-type regA allele. These results suggest that increased Erk1 expression cannot correct for alterations in the RegA D-motif, at least with respect to morphogenesis of the fruiting body structure. Fig. 6. Developmental morphology of RegA and RegA D– cells with Erk1 overexpression. regA – cells with knock-in alleles expressing either RegA or RegA D– and with or without Erk1 overexpression were grown and developed on non-nutrient... Discussion MAPK regulation of phosphodiesterase function is supported by biochemical evidence in mammals and genetic evidence in Dictyostelium and so the possibility of a conserved regulatory mechanism was plausible given that the MAPK phosphorylation occurs near the carboxyl terminus in both cases. Conserved docking motifs on MAPK substrates in many organisms suggest that docking through these sites is a typical mechanism for recognition and phosphorylation of substrates. The presence of a putative docking motif near the predicted phosphorylation site on RegA further supported a docking mechanism for Erk2 regulation of the phosphodiesterase, but the results of this study suggest that this putative docking motif is not required for Erk2 interactions. The developmental phenotypes of cells expressing RegA D– from the endogenous regA promoter are consistent with a loss of RegA function as opposed to the gain of RegA function that might be expected through the impairment of a negative regulation mechanism. Perhaps the alignment shift in the putative docking motif and phosphorylation site in RegA with those found in the mammalian PDE4 phosphodiesterase reflects a significant difference in how MAPKs and phosphodiesterases interact. Unlike the mammalian PDE4 phosphodiesterase, the amoeba RegA phosphodiesterases do not have other putative docking motifs in the carboxyl terminal region. The characterization of RegA immunoprecipitates revealed that Erk2 does associate with RegA in vivo, consistent with Erk2 phosphorylation and negative regulation of RegA. Alteration of the putative D-motif of RegA enhanced rather than destroyed this association, suggesting Erk2 associates with RegA through other docking motifs or some other mechanism. Another putative MAPK docking motif exists on RegA but this motif is located much closer to the amino terminus and lacks a positively charged residue at the second residue position. This second motif is present in other dictyostelids but is absent in the orthologues of other amoeba and mammals. This second motif is much further away from the predicted Erk2 phosphorylation site but the possibility that these two sites could be brought into close proximity through folding of the RegA polypeptide chain cannot be excluded. Alternatively, Erk2 might not recognize a conventional MAPK docking site because Erk2 belongs to a group of atypical MAPKs and it remains to be determined whether atypical MAPKs recognize the same or different docking motifs as do typical MAPKs. Erk2 could also be indirectly associated with RegA through some type of scaffolding mechanism. Mammalian phosphodiesterases are often associated with AKAPs that allow for the regulation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase activity. While AKAPs appear to be specific to animals, Dictyostelium and other organisms might have analogous scaffolding proteins that facilitate phosphodiesterase interactions. Fig. 7. Model of MAPK regulation of RegA. Stimulation of cAMP receptors leads to Erk2 activation and RegA phosphorylation on residue T676. RegA contains two putative MAPK docking motifs, one near the amino terminus, contributes to mammalian phosphodiesterase regulation or whether regulation occurs only through more conventional MAPKs such as the mammalian Erk1 and Erk2 MAPKs. In addition, the analysis of MAPK–phosphodiesterase interactions in mammals was accomplished through the ectopic expression of the phosphodiesterase in cell lines and these cells could potentially have altered signalling mechanisms compared to that of normal tissues. While future studies might provide insight into the apparent differences in Dictyostelium and mammalian phosphodiesterase regulation, the ability of MAPKs to regulate phosphodiesterase function in very diverse organisms suggests that some mechanisms of cAMP signalling may have been conserved. Supplementary Data Supplementary material 1: Click here for additional data file. Funding information This work was supported by grants NIGMS R15 GM097717-01 and Oklahoma Center for the Advancement of Science and Technology HR13-36 to J.A.H. Acknowledgement The authors thank Joshua Moore for technical assistance. Author contributions N.A. contributed the majority of the investigation and J.A.H. and N.A.K. also contributed to the investigation. N.A. and J.A.H. prepared the original draft and all authors contributed to the review and editing. Conflicts of interest The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. Footnotes Abbreviations: AKAP, A-kinase-activated protein; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; PKA, protein kinase A. Two supplementary figures are available with the online version of this article. Edited by: V. J. Cid and P. Schaap Article information Microbiology. 2020 Feb; 166: 129–140. Published online 2019 Nov 15. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000868 PMCID: PMC7273326 PMID: 31730032 Nirakar Adhikari, 1 Nick A. Kuburich, 1, † and Jeffrey A. Hadwiger 1, * Nirakar Adhikari 1​ Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078-3020, USA Find articles by Nirakar Adhikari Nick A. Kuburich 1​ Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078-3020, USA †​ Present address: Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA Find articles by Nick A. Kuburich Jeffrey A. Hadwiger 1​ Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078-3020, USA Find articles by Jeffrey A. Hadwiger 1​ Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078-3020, USA †​ Present address: Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA *Correspondence: Jeffrey A. Hadwiger, ude.etatsko@regiwdah.ffej Received 2019 Jul 11; Accepted 2019 Oct 10. Copyright © 2020 The Authors Articles from Microbiology are provided here courtesy of Microbiology Society 