 The ability of cells to polarize and move toward external stimuli plays a crucial role in development, as well as in normal and pathological physiology. Migrating cells maintain dynamic complementary distributions of Ras activity and of the phospholipid phosphatidylinositol‐3,4‐bisphosphate P2). Here, we show that lagging‐edge component PIP2 also localizes to retracting leading‐edge protrusions and nascent macropinosomes, even in the absence of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5‐trisphosphate. Once internalized, macropinosomes break up into smaller PIP2‐enriched vesicles, which fuse with the plasma membrane at the rear of the cell. Subsequently, the phosphoinositide diffuses toward the front of the cell, where it is degraded. Computational modeling confirms that this cycle gives rise to stable back‐to‐front gradient. These results uncover a surprising “reverse‐fountain flow” of PIP2 that regulates polarity. Keywords: cell migration, excitability, membrane flow, neutrophils, refractory period Subject Categories: Cell Adhesion, Polarity & Cytoskeleton, Membrane & Intracellular Transport Macropinosome‐dependent delivery of the phospholipid PIP2 to the trailing edge of the cell establishes its polarized distribution required for correct migratory behavior. Introduction Chemotaxis or directed cell migration is fundamental for a multitude of physiological and pathophysiological processes including organ formation during development, angiogenesis, wound healing, immune responses, and cancer metastasis. In response to chemical stimulus, migrating cells display functionally distinct leading and lagging edges by relocating proteins or their activities selectively to the poles. Some events such as Ras and PI3K activation, or PIP3 accumulation are selectively activated or localized at the leading edge and are referred to as “front” events. Others, like Myosin II and PTEN distributions behave in a complementary fashion and are referred to as “back” events. These distributions of front and back molecules or activities are a crucial first step in establishing polarity and guiding cell migration, and are maintained even in the absence of a chemoattractant gradient. There exist different physiological situations such as macropinocytosis that parallel cell migration where such complementary distributions of molecules are conserved. Both macropinocytosis and migration require extensions of actin‐driven protrusions. During macropinocytosis in Dictyostelium ameba, the extending edges of the forming cups are decorated with front components, such as activated Ras and PIP3, whereas back components like PTEN, Myosin II, PIP2, and GAP proteins localize to the base. The conserved arrangement of these molecules in the macropinocytic cups and along the cell perimeter of migrating cells suggests a relationship between these two processes. PIP2 is reported to be important in both macropinocytosis and cell migration. In macropinocytosis, transient and sequential emergence of PIP3 and PIP2 is necessary. In migrating Dictyostelium cells and zebrafish neutrophils, PIP2 is distributed in a back‐to‐front gradient. There is a mutual inhibition between PIP2 and Ras activities: When Ras is activated in the front, PIP2 goes down; conversely, depletion of PIP2 leads to elevated Ras activity. This mutual inhibitory feedback loop ensures that the back of the cell is silent, and the front is active. The resemblance between the back‐to‐front gradient across the cell and across the macropinocytic cups led us to hypothesize that PIP2‐decorated macropinosomes could be a crucial component linking macropinocytosis and cell migration. Here, we demonstrate that there is an ongoing flow of vesicular PIP2 through the cell and a compensatory forward flow along the membrane, which establishes a back‐to‐front gradient of this phosphoinositide. Previous models have suggested that such vesicular and plasma membrane flows are important for cell migration, although the directions were reversed. Our findings show that PIP2 is internalized on macropinosomes and transported on microtubules into the cytosol. These anterior macropinosomes break up into several smaller PIP2‐enriched vesicles, which dock and fuse at the rear of the migrating cell. This surprising reverse‐fountain flow of PIP2 and its role in establishing the back‐to‐front gradient may be essential for polarity in specific modes of cell migration. Results PIP2 at the back diffuses toward the front In migrating Dictyostelium ameba, PIP2, observed using a tandem PH‐domain biosensor tPH‐CynA, is distributed to the back and is complementary to F‐actin and active Ras. To investigate the dynamic distribution of PIP2 at the back, we fused a green‐to‐red photoconvertible fluorescence Kikume Green‐Red with tPH‐CynA and expressed it in the cells. Using the Zeiss 780 bleaching mode with a 405 nm laser, photoconversion caused a decrease in green fluorescence and a simultaneous increase in red fluorescence. We photoconverted tPH‐CynA‐KiKGR in a small region of the membrane at the back of the cell and tracked the green and red channels. Photoconverted tPH‐CynA diffused symmetrically along the membrane toward the front by 50 s. The signal decreased by less than 10% in the first 60 s following photoconversion, indicating there is little exchange of membrane and cytosolic PIP2 biosensor. The lateral diffusion of the photoconverted tPH‐CynA on the membrane was found to be 2.05 μm 2 /s by comparing the experimental profiles with the simulated profiles from a stochastic simulation for a wide range of diffusion constants. At the side of the cell, the distribution of photoconverted PIP2 biosensor spread asymmetrically, skewed toward the back of the cell and the total fluorescence decreased gradually during 145 s, the increase in the skewness was 52% in 60 s. We reasoned that PIP2 diffuses bi‐directionally on the membrane on the side of the cell, but it is degraded faster toward the front. Taken together, these observations suggest that there is a source of PIP2 at the rear of the cell and that PIP2 is degraded as it diffuses toward the front. Figure 1 Small PIP2 vesicles supply PIP2 to the back of migrating Dictyostelium cells Small PIP2 vesicles supply PIP2 to the back of migrating Dictyostelium cells To determine the nature of the source of PIP2 at the back, we conducted fluorescence recovery after photobleaching. As a control we used chemoattractant receptor cAR1, which is uniformly distributed on the plasma membrane of cells. We photobleached a small portion of the periphery at the back of the cell and carefully monitored the fluorescence recovery. As expected, for cAR1, the recovery proceeds in a vectoral fashion from the adjacent unbleached areas of the membrane, since the receptor diffuses in the plane of the membrane. In contrast, for tPH‐CynA there was an even fluorescence recovery in the middle and boundaries of the bleached zone. Since the biosensor stably marks PIP2, this shows that there is a cytosolic source of PIP2. We next carefully examined the dynamic behavior of PIP2 at the back using two similar biosensors with different affinities and tags, tPH‐CynA‐KikGR and PH‐CynA‐HALO. With both biosensors, we observed small PIP2‐containing vesicles docking in the back region. To confirm this result, we photoconverted the intracellular pool of small vesicles close to the membrane at the back of the cell. We found that PIP2‐containing small intracellular vesicles moved close to the membrane, and appeared to dock with it, whereupon PIP2 diffused away quickly. We propose that small vesicles fuse with membrane and diffuse fast, but we allow the possibility that vesicles dock at the back and then slide along the membrane to the front. PIP2 trails F‐actin and PIP3 on the leading‐edge macropinosomes To understand the origins of these vesicles, we sought the first appearance of enriched PIP2. There was a low amount of PIP2 on the membrane at the front of the cells, which disappeared from newly formed actin‐rich protrusions. PIP2 then appeared de novo as the leading‐edge protrusions retracted or evolved into nascent macropinosomes. We directly compared the localization of PIP2 with newly polymerized F‐actin. Time‐lapse two‐color images showed that F‐actin appeared on the tips of forming macropinosomes in the regions where PIP2 had disappeared, then gradually dissipated as the structures closed. Simultaneously, PIP2 appeared and remained on the fully formed macropinosomes. The changes in intensity and distribution of these two biosensors on the forming macropinosomes were shown. Quantification of relative intensities of F‐actin and PIP2 on macropinosomes at different time points showed that PIP2 lags F‐actin and lasts longer. Figure 2 PIP2 trails F‐actin and PIP3 on the leading‐edge macropinosomes Next, we compared the dynamic localization of PIP2 with PIP3, detected by the biosensor PH‐Crac. PIP3 resembles the pattern of F‐actin, increasing and then decreasing during the formation of macropinosomes. Again, dynamic distributions of tPH‐CynA showed a complementary pattern only appearing on the forming macropinosomes. This distribution of PIP2 was further demonstrated by another established biosensor PH‐TAPP1, which localized to macropinosomes only as PIP3 is subsiding. These data showed that lagging‐edge component PIP2 localized to retracting protrusions and nascent macropinosomes in a distinct pattern compared with F‐actin and PIP3. To determine the prevalence of PIP2‐enriched vesicles in membrane trafficking, we applied the lipophilic dye, FM4‐64. It fluoresces only when it is incorporated in the plasma membrane and, once internalized, it becomes trapped in intracellular vesicles. Thus, FM4‐64 labeling is a useful tool to visualize the membranes of pre‐macropinosomes. When FM4‐64 was added during a live cell imaging sequence, we observed increasing plasma membrane labeling within 100 s. By 110 s, the signal internalizes to label intracellular compartments or macropinosomes, which were labeled by PIP2. Taken together, PIP2 is detectable on majority of the dye‐labeled macropinosomes at the leading edge of the cells. PIP2 appears in absence of PIP3 We next assessed the relative contribution of PIP3 degradation to PIP2 levels on the vesicles and plasma membrane with PI3K inhibitors and in PI3K1 − 2 − cells. In wild‐type cells, we investigated PIP2 dynamics before and after addition of PI3K inhibitor, wortmannin. Surprisingly, PIP2 remained on the plasma membrane at the back of the cell after wortmannin treatment while PIP3 was depleted. Kymograph showed that over time PIP3 disappeared and line scan quantification demonstrated that dynamic distribution of PIP2 is similar before and after PI3K inhibition. To verify this result, we first treated cells with latrunculin A to eliminate the cell shape changes and then treated cells with the well‐established PI3K inhibitor LY2924002. Again, PIP2 remained on the membrane, and, in fact, its level was even higher. To confirm this observation, we treated PI3K1 − 2 − cells with latrunculin A and found that even though there is no detectable PIP3 on the membrane, PIP2 levels are nearly maintained. Furthermore, PI3K1 − 2 − cells expressing tPH‐CynA‐KiKGR and LimE‐RFP showed that localization of PIP2 on macropinosomes was also maintained. Taken together, these observations suggest that PIP2 dynamics can be regulated in the absence of PIP3, and this regulation is conserved in diverse cell types. Figure 3 PIP2 appears in absence of PIP3 PIP2 macropinosomes are transported along microtubules and break apart To determine the relationship between PIP2‐enriched vesicles and the microtubule network, we fixed cells expressing the PIP2 biosensor, tPH‐CynA‐KikGR, stained them with an anti‐α‐tubulin antibody, and performed z‐stack confocal microscopy. In untreated wild‐type AX3 cells, the microtubular network was intact and PIP2‐enriched vesicles appeared to be associated with microtubules. Figure 4 Macropinocytic vesicle processing is necessary for PIP2 enrichment at the back of migrating cells Treatment of the wild‐type AX3 cells with 20 µM Nocodazole for 5 min caused a substantial disassembly of the microtubule network. Simultaneously, more PIP2‐enriched vesicles were seen, which were no longer associated with the microtubules and were clustered around the closure of the macropinocytic cups. The LimE channel demonstrated that macropinocytic cups continued to form, but the increase in the number of vesicles in the tPH‐CynA channel was due to a slower disappearance. The macropinosomes were trapped along the membrane and were unable to be internalized in 50 s. The number of vesicles viewed per minute, and the vesicle lifetime increased upon Nocodazole treatment. Disassembly of microtubule network with Nocodazole in another wild‐type strain, AX2, also resulted in more PIP2‐enriched vesicles near the membrane. We investigated whether inhibition of processing of PIP2‐enriched macropinocytic vesicles by genetic perturbation would abrogate its accumulation at the back of a migrating Dictyostelium cell. To test this hypothesis, we used a RacH‐ Dictyostelium strain whose vesicle trafficking is disrupted due to defective acidification of early endosomes. This impairs macropinocytosis and chemotaxis As shown in Fig 4G, whereas a back‐to‐front gradient in PIP2 membrane association was apparent in wild‐type Dictyostelium AX2 cells, in the RacH‐ cells “back” regions were weaker and there were more cytosolic PIP2‐enriched vesicles. Line scans of pixel intensity across wild‐type or mutant cells confirmed greater PIP2 accumulation at the back of wild‐type cells. Next, we quantified the lifetimes of the PIP2‐enriched vesicles, their numbers per unit of time, surface areas, and membrane‐cytosol ratio. In RacH‐ cells, the vesicles were almost twice as long‐lived as those in wild‐type AX2 cells. The vesicles in the mutant were also 40% greater in number and 63% larger. Moreover, the plasma membrane‐to‐cytosol ratio of PIP2 was 2.30 ± 0.67 in wild‐type AX2 cells but 0.88 ± 0.76 in RacH‐ cells. Assuming that the degradation rate of PIP2 is the same in the mutant and wild‐type, this result suggests that at least 50% of the PIP2 on the membrane depends on vesicular trafficking. Under live‐cell 3D super‐resolution imaging, we further found the macropinosomes are transported into the cytosol where they appear to break apart into smaller “satellite” vesicles and disappear. In Nocodazole treated or RacH‐ cells, macropinosomes remained on the perimeter and were not processed into the smaller vesicles. Taken together, these results suggest that PIP2‐enriched macropinosomes are transported along microtubules into the cytosol where they are likely to be processed into smaller vesicles and disperse. Figure 5 A link between PIP2 on front macropinosomes and the back‐to‐front gradient of PIP2 A link between PIP2 on front macropinosomes and the back‐to‐front gradient of PIP2 Our observations on the “satellite” vesicles suggest these might be the same as the docking vesicles at the back. To gain insight into the connection between PIP2 on the front macropinosomes and the back‐to‐front gradient of plasma membrane, we photoconverted the PIP2 biosensor, tPH‐CynA‐KiKGR, on late‐macropinosomes at the leading edge of the cells and tracked the signal. Figure 5B shows an example of photoconversion of a front macropinosome which eventually resulted in increased signal at the back of the cell. Another example is shown in Appendix Fig S5 where the cell changes direction after photoconversion and the delivery to the back is quicker. We quantified the relative percentage of green and red signal upon photoconversion. An average 4.97% of green fluorescence was converted to red while 51.43% of the generated red fluorescence ended up at the back, indicating that vesicles labeled with PIP2 biosensor travel all the way to the back of membrane before the biosensor dissociates. The data argue against the alternative possibility that the biosensor dissociates from the macropinosomes and rebinds to smaller vesicles which go to the back. Observation of docking and fusing events in single cells are limited by the small cell boundary. Electrofused “giant” cells provide a more accessible system for characterizing these dynamics. Giant cells have multiple “front” regions, which include F‐actin, ruffles, and macropinosomes, and “back” regions which lack these events. In these cells, we observed large and small PIP2 vesicles arising in multiple front regions and others docking at the nearby back regions. This is consistent with docking activities observed in single cells. We developed a stochastic mathematical model to explore the effect of different vesicle fusion parameters on the creation and maintenance of a stable back region in a cell. We found that for creation of a stable back, the directed insertion of the satellite vesicles into the regions of highest PIP2 levels on the membrane was an important condition. Other important parameters were the mean arrival time of the PIP2 vesicles, and the rate of PIP2 diffusion and decay. Increase in the mean arrival time resulted discontinuity in the back profile unless the decay rate was reduced appropriately. Figure 6A and B shows the results of increasing the mean arrival time of the PIP2 vesicles and decreasing the PIP2 decay rates. These changes created a broader back without causing a large change in the overall amount. A broader distribution of PIP2 at the back would imply a larger fraction of the cell is inactive, which would make the cell more polarized. Consistently, our experimental results showed that the decay rate in more polarized cells was indeed fourfold lower than that in less polarized cells, and the extent of cell membrane covered by PIP2 is smaller in less polarized cells compared with more polarized cells. The mean relative width of the back regions and decay rate obtained from the simulated kymographs was consistent with experimental results. Figure 6 A link between PIP2 on front macropinosomes and the back‐to‐front gradient of PIP2 To access how much the vesicular trafficking contributes to the overall production of PIP2, we measured turnover before and after latrunculin A treatment. Latrunculin A acutely blocks macropinosome formation. After latrunculin A treatment, there was a 30% decrease in tPH‐CynA on the membrane and a photoconversion experiment showed that the degradation rate of PIP2 decreased threefold. Together these data suggest that the vesicular trafficking is responsible for more than 50% of the levels of PIP2, which is consistent with the estimate made above when vesicular trafficking is blocked by RacH‐ mutant cells. Dynamics of PIP2 in human neutrophils As PIP2 is distributed to the back of migrating Dictyostelium, complementary to F‐actin and active Ras, we sought to investigate its spatio‐temporal distribution in migrating human leukemia neutrophil‐like HL‐60 cells. In Dictyostelium cells, the two biosensors for PIP2, tPH‐CynA and PH‐TAPP1, display slightly different patterns, despite the fact that they are identical on lipid strips and have preference to PIP2. Li and Edwards et al have previously established in Dictyostelium that tPH‐CynA and PH‐TAPP1 colocalize to the base of macropinocytic cups and back of the cell membrane. However, while tPH‐CynA labeled both structures strongly, the labeling of the back by PH‐TAPP1 was relatively weaker. In fixed cells with depleted cytosolic signal, the presence of PH‐TAPP1 as a sharp band on the membrane at the back was detectable and colocalized with tPH‐CynA. Whereas tPH‐CynA did not express in HL‐60 cells, the distribution of PH‐TAPP1 was similar in HL‐60 cells and Dictyostelium. We used cPHX3‐TAPP1‐GFP, recently developed in the Hammond lab, as the biosensor for PIP2 in HL‐60 cells. We generated a stable HL‐60 cell line expressing both RFP‐LifeAct and cPHX3 TAPP1 ‐GFP. Under live‐cell imaging, PIP2 accumulated on the membrane, in a broadband at the front and a thin faint line at the back of migrating neutrophils. We further examined the distribution of PIP2 in fixed HL‐60 cells which have depleted cytosolic signal. Under these conditions, the presence of PIP2 as a sharp band on the membrane at the back is clear. Consistently, PIP2 was found at the leading and trailing edges in zebrafish neutrophils. Figure EV1 Dynamic localization of PIP2 in neutrophils Next, we looked for PIP2‐enriched vesicles using the cPHX3 TAPP1 ‐GFP biosensor in HL‐60 cells. We observed an intracellular pool of PIP2‐enriched vesicles clustered toward the back of the neutrophils. Some of these vesicles appeared very close to the membrane at the back and then disappear, suggesting that they might be fusing at the back of the membrane. Discussion Our studies can be summarized in the model shown in Fig 6E–G. Our previous study demonstrated the mutual inhibition between Ras activity and PIP2 establishes polarity even in immobilized latrunculin A‐treated cells in the presence of a chemoattractant gradient or caffeine. We now propose an additional mechanism involving a specific vesicle recycling path which sharpens the back‐to‐front gradient in migrating Dictyostelium cells. PIP2 disappears from protrusions at the leading edges of macropinocytic cups, and then accumulates on the macropinosomes at the end of the internalization process. The macropinosomes are processed into smaller satellite PIP2‐tagged vesicles which then dock at the back. The PIP2 molecules incorporated at the back diffuse along the membrane toward the front, where they are degraded. In more polarized cells, owing to a slower arrival time of PIP2 vesicles and a slower decay rate of PIP2 on the membrane, the PIP2 signal at the back broadens and extends further to the front. Our results suggest that a similar mechanism could exist in polarized migrating mammalian cells. Excitable network hypothesis and the formation of macropinocytic cups This model is consistent with the excitable network hypothesis, which has been proposed to explain the behaviors of migrating cells. According to this hypothesis, propagating waves have an active region where front molecules are high and back molecules are low. This region is followed by a refractory region, where front molecules are very low and back components strongly accumulate. Here, our findings suggest macropinosomes are formed by a spreading wave whose trailing edge forms the base of the macropinocytic cups. This suggests that the base of the macropinocytic cups would be in a refractory state, which is heavily decorated by the back molecule PIP2. If PIP2 is delivered to the back of the cell as we propose, it would shut off this region and further polarize the cell. Many other signaling molecules such as PTEN, Myosin II, IQGAP1 and 2, cortexillin I and II, RasGAP2 and RapGAP3 localize to the back of the cells. Among those molecules, PTEN, RG2, RG3, and Myosin II are also reported to localize to the base of the cups or retracting protrusions. In addition, RG2 and RG3 bind to PIP2 in vitro. Our results raise the possibility that the cells might be bringing the refractory state carrying many of those molecules from front to back. Regulation of vesicle recycling controls polarity In the reverse‐fountain flow model, we were proposing that vesicular trafficking plays an important role in polarity. Yet, the vesicle recycling mechanism we described is more obvious in less polarized cells. How can we explain this apparent discrepancy? Highly polarized cells are generally characterized by their typical elongated morphology, which is a result of having a larger proportion of the cell with elevated backmarkers. In fact, our simulations showed that the relatively longer arrival time of the vesicles and the slower decay rate increased the back region. Subsequently, experiment measurements did show a slower decay rate in highly polarized cells. Thus, both experimental data and simulation results are consistent in supporting the reverse‐fountain flow model. PIP2 is a distinct signaling component during cell migration Our observations are consistent with an emerging view that PIP2 is a signaling molecule on its own right, regulating cellular events. Numerous studies have shown PIP2 localize to the leading/lagging edge during cell migration, early endosomes, and lysosomes during clathrin‐mediated endocytosis, and back of macropinocytic cups and early macropinosomes. This PIP2 localization dynamics regulate all of these processes and there appears to be a consistent pattern of PIP2 localization involved in protrusion formation during cell migration and other aforementioned cellular events. In some studies of cell motility and cytoskeletal events, PIP2 acts as a negative regulator. Huttenlocher’s group reported that Src‐homology 2‐containing inositol 5′ phosphatase limits the motility of neutrophils and their recruitment to wounds in live zebrafish. Observations by Wu showed that PIP2 defines the refractory period of the oscillation in cortical waves in mast cells. Our lab reported that PIP2 negatively regulates cell motility by inhibiting Ras activity, even in the absence of PIP3. Our results depart from the canonical view that PIP2 is only a byproduct of PIP3 hydrolysis. We demonstrated in mammalian neutrophils and in Dictyostelium cells that the level of PIP2 was maintained on the plasma membrane under PI3K inhibition. Additionally, in PI3K1 − 2 − Dictyostelium cells, PIP2 still accumulated on the membrane at the back of the cells and the macropinosomes. This suggests that a fraction of PIP2 must come from a source other than PIP3 and there is regulation of enzymes that generate PIP2 from PI3P or PI4P. As there are multiple phosphoinositide kinases in Dictyostelium that have not been characterized, it is possible that one of these corresponds to a novel PI3K. Endocytic trafficking of PIP2 as a universal means of establishing polarity Our current findings reveal that the PIP2 decorated macropinosomes and its connection with PIP2 gradient at the rear of the plasma membrane in regulating polarity during cell migration. Consistently, there are reports suggesting recycling of PIP2‐tagged vesicles and other endocytic events play an important role in polarity of epithelial cells. A study by the Bryant group recently described the function of PIP2 in apical domain morphogenesis in MDCK cysts. Apical PIP2 is supplied by the endosomal pool, rather than conversion from basolateral PIP3 by SHIP1 and is a determinant of apical membrane identity. These observations reinforce the parallels between basolateral and apical surfaces of epithelial cells and front and back of migrating cells. Another parallel could be the establishment of polarity during cytokinesis, where PIP2 is found elevated in the cleavage furrow. The potential role of vesicular trafficking in cytokinesis has not been investigated. Reverse‐fountain flow model of PIP2 During migration, the additional membrane required to enable the expending protrusions could come from unfolding of invaginations of the membrane or from vesicular trafficking. Multiple different studies have suggested that cells migrate following a fountain flow model: Membrane precursor vesicles fuse with the anterior cell membrane at the protrusions, both the dorsal and ventral membranes flow toward the rear, and membrane is internalized at the rear. In support of the fountain flow models, it has been shown that blocking of vesicular trafficking is required for movement and that particles sticking on the outside of the cells as well as photobleached membrane patches flow from the front to the back. In our reverse‐fountain flow model, PIP2‐enriched vesicles are taken from macropinosomes at the anterior protrusion and eventually fuse to the membrane at the rear. Furthermore, plasma membrane PIP2 at the rear diffuses toward the front. While this reverse‐fountain flow model of PIP2 sheds light on the role of this phospholipid in regulating polarity during cell migration, further study is needed to determine the direction of flow of other membrane components. One study showed that photoactivation of cAR1 did move toward the front, which support the reverse‐fountain flow model. In addition, vesicles containing adenylyl cyclase fuse with the back of Dictyostelium cells and vesicles carrying growth factor receptor fuse at the back of cells. A recent study by Moreau et al showed that migrating immature dendritic cells form macropinosomes at their leading edge which traverse the cytoplasm and ultimately release their fluid content at the back. This agrees with our model. Membrane folding, fountain flow model, or reverse‐fountain flow models may operate in specific cells during different migratory modes. Materials and Methods Reagents and Tools Table Reagent/Resource Reference or Source Identifier or catalog number Experimental models Chemically Competent Escherichia coli Thermo Fisher C404010 Wild‐type Dictyostelium discoideum cells of AX3 Devreotes Lab N/A Wild‐type Dictyostelium discoideum cells of AX2 Devreotes Lab N/A Neutrophil‐like HL‐60 cells Orion Weiner lab N/A RacH‐ strain Miho Iijima lab N/A Recombinant DNA LimEΔcoil‐RFP Devreotes Lab N/A PH‐Crac‐RFP Devreotes Lab N/A tPH‐CynA‐KikGR Devreotes Lab N/A cPH‐TAPP1‐RFP Devreotes Lab N/A cPHx3 TAPP1 ‐GFP in pHR_SFFV This study N/A PH CynA ‐HALO This study N/A CAR1‐KikGR Masahiro Ueda lab N/A pHR_SFFV Addgene Cat # 79121 RFP‐LifeAct Desiderio Lab N/A Antibodies Mouse anti α‐Tubulin monoclonal antibody Sigma‐Aldrich Cat #T9026 Oligonucleotides and other sequence‐based reagents PCR primers of HALO‐tagged PH CynA This study In Materials and Methods Chemicals, enzymes, and other reagents RPMI 1640 Medium, HEPES Thermo Fisher Scientific # 22400089 Heat‐inactivated fetal bovine serum Gibco # 16140071 Penicillin–Streptomycin Sigma # P0781‐100ML Fibronectin Millipore Sigma # F2006 Eight‐well coverslip chamber slide Lab‐Tek, Thermo Scientific. #155411 FM4‐64 dye Thermo Fisher Scientific # T3166 CELLSTAR T25 Flask Greiner # 82051‐074 DMSO Thermo Fisher Scientific #D128‐1 Polybrene Sigma # TR‐1003‐G Hygromycin B Thermo Fisher Scientific # 10687010 HEPES Thermo Fisher Scientific # 22400089 Lipofectamine ® 3000 Invitrogen #L3000008 Software Fiji MATLAB GraphPad Prism 5.0. Other LSM780‐FCS/Quasar confocal microscope Zeiss N/A Open in a separate window Methods and Protocols Cell culture and differentiation Wild‐type Dictyostelium discoideum cells of AX3 and AX2 strains were used in this study. These strains are established lab cell lines because they can form fruiting bodies upon starvation and their morphology and behavior can be easily examined during chemotactic assays. RacH‐ strain, generated in AX2 background, was provided by Dr. Miho Iijima and generated as described previously. All of these strains were cultured axenically in HL5 medium at 22°C, either in suspension for obtaining high cell densities for cell differentiation or on tissue culture dishes for cell line maintenance. Cells expressing LimEΔcoil‐RFP, PH‐Crac‐RFP, cPHx3‐TAPP1‐GFP, tPH‐CynA‐KikGR, PH CynA ‐HALO, or CAR1‐KikGR constructs were generated by electroporation of the appropriate plasmids in wild‐type or mutant cells. Transformed cells were selected and maintained in HL5 medium containing 20 μg/ml G418, 50 μg/ml hygromycin B, or both. For microscopy, cells were plated in DB buffer to reduce HL5 medium‐associated autofluorescence and photosensitivity of growing cells. This enabled prolonged and frequent imaging of cells. Neutrophil‐like HL‐60 cells, used in this study, were procured from Dr. Orion Weiner. Cells were grown in RPMI 1640 medium containing HEPES and heat‐inactivated fetal bovine serum. Cultures were maintained at a density of 0.1–1.0 million cells/ml at 37°C/5% CO 2. Differentiated HL‐60s were obtained by adding 1.5% DMSO to actively growing cells followed by incubation for an additional 5–6 days. Human embryonic kidney 293 cells were used to generate lentivirus to perform lentivirus transduction in HL‐60 cells. HEK293T cells were grown in DMEM containing 10% heat‐inactivated fetal bovine serum and maintained at 37°C/5% CO 2. Plasmid construction cPHx3 TAPP1 ‐GFP and pPamCherry1‐C1‐TAPP1‐cPHx3 were provided by Gerald R.V. Hammond and Brady D. Goulden. It was subsequently cloned into pDM358 vector or SFFV vector. RFP‐LifeAct was obtained from Stephen Desiderio Lab and was subsequently cloned into SFFV vector. LimEΔcoil‐RFP, cPH‐TAPP1‐RFP, PH‐Crac‐RFP, and tPH‐CynA‐KikGR constructs were created in previous studies. C‐terminal HALO‐tagged PH CynA construct was generated by cloning the PH CynA ORF from tPH‐CynA‐KikGRk‐KF2 construct using the primers 5′ Fwd; TATAAGATCTAAAAAAATGAAATCCTCAAATGGTGTCGGTTGTAC and 3′ Rev; TATAACTAGTTGAAATTGGTTTTGGCGGAAGAGGAG into BglII/SpeI sites of pHK12neo plasmid. Lentivirus transduction of HL‐60 cells HEK293T cells were seeded into six‐well plates and grown until 80% confluent. For each well, 5 μg cPHx3 TAPP1 ‐GFP in SFFV vector, 1.25 μg VSVG, and 3.5 μg cytomegalovirus 8.91 vector were mixed and prepared for transfection using Lipofectamine ® 3000 following manufacturer’s instructions. After transfection, cells were grown for an additional 1–3 days, after which virus‐containing supernatants were harvested. 50–200 μl virus was mixed with 1 million HL‐60 cells in growth medium supplemented with polybrene, and incubated overnight. HL‐60 cells expressing cPHx3 TAPP1 ‐GFP or RFP‐LifeAct were selected by FACS after 5 days. Microscopy Growth‐phase Dictyostelium or differentiated HL‐60 cells were placed on uncoated or fibronectin‐coated eight‐well coverslip chamber slide. Confocal imaging was performed with the help of a Zeiss LSM780 single‐point laser‐scanning microscope. Time‐lapse images were obtained with DIC, GFP, or RFP illumination at 3‐ to 25‐s intervals for 20–180 min. Confocal microscopy with FM4‐64. Dictyostelium cells were pretreated with 0.1 M sorbitol in PB to reduce formation of contractile vacuoles, which tend to get extensively labeled with FM4‐64 dye. 2 μM FM4‐64 was added to cells during the live cell imaging. Confocal microscopy with Photoconversion. Cells expressing tPH‐CynA‐KikGR were visualized using a 488 nm Argon laser and a 40× objective. For photoconversion of KikGR, a 405 nm diode laser was used with 1 × 5 iterations. Furthermore, a region of interest was moved to the center of the viewing field, and the field diaphragm was closed to its smallest opening to make a photoconvertible spot using a 541‐nm laser for red fluorescence excitation. Imaging of both photoconverted and unconverted KikGR was done using 488‐nm Ag laser for green fluorescence and 541‐nm laser for red fluorescence in multi‐track mode. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching. To minimize the contribution of diffusion from above and below the bleach box, the box was expanded to include a portion of the top and bottom membranes. A section of the cell periphery in zoom was exposed to two iterations of saturating 488‐nm laser light causing a partial bleach. PH CynA ‐HALO labeling and imaging using HaloTag ® TMR Ligand. PH‐CynA‐Halo expressing Dictyostelium cells were harvested, washed in DB, and incubated with 3 µM TMR‐conjugated HaloTag ligand for 30 min at RT. Excess stain was washed away using DB, and cells were imaged using the Zeiss LSM780 confocal microscope. Cell fixation. Growth‐stage Dictyostelium cells were allowed to attach to cover‐glass for 30 min to 2 h in an eight‐well chamber slide. Cells were incubated with freshly made fixative for 10 min at room temperature, and subsequently quenched in 1 mg/ml sodium borohydride for 3 min. Cells were then washed twice with TBS and visualized using the Zeiss LSM780 confocal microscope. In each experiment, images from different samples were taken consecutively using identical settings. Cell fusion by electroporation Growth‐phase tPH‐CynA‐KikGR expressing Dictyostelium cells were grown in suspension, harvested, washed, and resuspended in SB at a density of 15 million cells/ml. 10 ml of cells was rolled gently for 20–45 min. 800 μl of rolled cells was transferred to a 4‐mm‐gap electroporation cuvette. Electroporation was carried out with the following settings: 1,000 V, 3 μF for once, and 1,000 V, 1 μF for three times, with 1–2 s between pulses. 50 μl of cells was then transferred to the center of a well in an 8‐well chamber and was allowed to adhere for 10 min. 450 μl of SB was added to the well and was pipetted gently to resuspend the cells evenly. Unadhered cells were removed by washing with 450 μl of fresh SB, after which the attached cells were incubated for 1 h for recovery before imaging. Computational study In this present study, we modeled the cell membrane as a 1D spatial domain of length 40 μm with periodic boundary condition. The arrival of the satellite vesicles on the membrane was modeled as a discrete Poisson process with a variable mean arrival time— for the vegetative cell: λ veg = 10 s, for the developed cell: λ dev = 40 s. We assumed two separate pools of PIP2 molecules: PIP2 on the docked vesicle and on the membrane. For the purpose of modeling, we simplified the process of vesicle fusion as follows: At a randomly chosen time instant t a, n molecules of U per unit length appeared on the membrane centered around a docking site, x d. The docking site, x d, is randomly selected sampled either from a probability distribution with the cumulative density function, F V = ∑ k = 0 l v k n v where v k is the value of V at spatial index k or from a discrete uniform distribution. During the docking time interval, Δ t dock = t a, t a + t dock, U remained unchanged. After Δ t dock, U converted to V with a linear conversion rate expression k ‐ u V. V diffuses freely on the membrane with diffusion constant, D V. V is also subjected to a degradation with reaction rate expression d x, V where d x, V = k 1 + k 2 1 k 3 + V 2 The first part of the decay function denotes a spatially independent basal decay rate, and the second part represents the effect of spatially variable decay rate as observed experimentally. The stochastic simulations of the model were performed using URDME approach using custom code written in MATLAB 2019b. The simulation domain was considered as a 1D domain of length 40 μm with spatial grid resolution of 0.1 μm. The completely unpolarized cell membrane = ) was taken as the initial condition. The code and the simulation data for Fig 6 A,B are in Code EV1. The nominal values of the parameters along with the respective standard deviations are listed in Appendix Table S1. For the estimation of the diffusion constant in Fig 1D, a simple diffusion model was simulated using the URDME as explained above using the converted red fluorescence profile at 0 s as the initial condition. The optimum diffusion coefficient was obtained by minimizing the following cost function: ∑ k V exp ‐ V sim 2 where t k =. Quantification and statistical analysis Image analysis All images were processed using Fiji and MATLAB. The mean intensity of the membrane portion and cytosol portion was measured, and the ratio was calculated using ImageJ as described previously. Cells were segmented by a multistep process using commands from the Image Processing Toolbox in MATLAB. Colors were assigned linearly in the same fashion across all kymographs, with blue indicating the lowest intensity and red the highest intensity. Biosensor patches were defined regions of fluorescent intensity that are twofold over background. Statistical analysis Mean values and standard deviations/standard error of the mean were calculated and used to assess differences between two groups by GraphPad Prism. P ‐values ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant, throughout this study. Images presented in figures are representative of more than three independent experiments. Author contributions XL performed experiments in Figs 1, ​,2, 2, ​,3, 3, ​,4, 4, ​,5, 5, ​,6 6 and Fig EV1, and Appendix Figs S1–S3, S5, S7, and S8 ; DSP performed experiments in Fig 4G–M, Appendix Fig S4 and generated constructs/strains for Fig 1K ; DB and PAI conducted computational simulations and quantification in Fig 6A–D, Appendix Figs S1 and S6. XL, DSP, DB, PAI, and PND analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. Supporting information Appendix Click here for additional data file. Expanded View Figures PDF Click here for additional data file. Movie EV1 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV2 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV3 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV4 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV5 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV6 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV7 Click here for additional data file. Movie EV8 Click here for additional data file. Code EV1 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Appendix Click here for additional data file. Review Process File Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 1 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 2 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 3 Click here for additional data file. Source Data for Figure 4 Click here for additional data file. Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank all members of the Devreotes and Iglesias labs for helpful suggestions for this work. We thank the Johns Hopkins University Microscope Facility for confocal microscopy. We thank Dr. Carolyn Machamer, Dr. Geraldine Seydoux, Dr. Erin Goley, Dr. Shigeki Watanabe, and Dr. Doug Robinson for helpful suggestions. We thank Jane Borleis for providing PI3K1 − 2 − cells. We thank Dr. Masahiro Ueda lab for PTEN‐Halo and CAR1‐KikGR constructs. We thank Dr. Stephen Desiderio Lab for RFP‐LifeAct construct. We thank Dr. Gerald R.V. Hammond and Brady D. Goulden for providing cPHx3 TAPP1 construct. We thank Dr. Miho Iijima for generating and providing RacH‐ cells. We thank Dr. Orion Weiner lab for providing HL‐60 cell line. This work was supported by This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant R35 GM118177, AFOSR MURI FA95501610052, DARPA HR0011‐16‐C‐0139, as well as NIH Grant S10 OD016374. Notes The EMBO Journal 40 : e105094. Contributor Information Xiaoguang Li, Email: ude.uhj@28ilx. Peter N Devreotes, Email: ude.imhj@dnp. Data availability This study includes no data deposited in external repositories. Article information EMBO J. 2021 Feb 15; 40: e105094. Published online 2021 Feb 15. doi: 10.15252/embj.2020105094 PMCID: PMC7883298 PMID: 33586225 Xiaoguang Li, 1, 2 Dhiman Sankar Pal, 1 Debojyoti Biswas, 3 Pablo A Iglesias, 1, 3 and Peter N Devreotes 1 Xiaoguang Li 1 Department of Cell Biology and Center for Cell Dynamics, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA 2 Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA Find articles by Xiaoguang Li Dhiman Sankar Pal 1 Department of Cell Biology and Center for Cell Dynamics, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA Find articles by Dhiman Sankar Pal Debojyoti Biswas 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Whiting School of Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA Find articles by Debojyoti Biswas Pablo A Iglesias 1 Department of Cell Biology and Center for Cell Dynamics, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Whiting School of Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA Find articles by Pablo A Iglesias Peter N Devreotes 1 Department of Cell Biology and Center for Cell Dynamics, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA Find articles by Peter N Devreotes 1 Department of Cell Biology and Center for Cell Dynamics, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA 2 Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Whiting School of Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA Xiaoguang Li, Email: ude.uhj@28ilx. Contributor Information. Corresponding author. * Corresponding author. Tel: +1 443 857 5103; E‐mail: ude.uhj@28ilx, Corresponding author. Tel: +1 410 955 3225; E‐mail: ude.imhj@dnp, Received 2020 Mar 25; Revised 2020 Nov 6; Accepted 2020 Nov 18. Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license This is an open access article under the terms of the License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. Articles from The EMBO Journal are provided here courtesy of The European Molecular Biology Organization 