 The behaviour of Dictyostelium discoideum depends on nutrients 1. When sufficient food is present these amoebae exist in a unicellular state, but upon starvation they aggregate into a multicellular organism 2, 3. This biology makes D. discoideum an ideal model for investigating how fundamental metabolism commands cell differentiation and function. Here we show that reactive oxygen species—generated as a consequence of nutrient limitation—lead to the sequestration of cysteine in the antioxidant glutathione. This sequestration limits the use of the sulfur atom of cysteine in processes that contribute to mitochondrial metabolism and cellular proliferation, such as protein translation and the activity of enzymes that contain an iron–sulfur cluster. The regulated sequestration of sulfur maintains D. discoideum in a nonproliferating state that paves the way for multicellular development. This mechanism of signalling through reactive oxygen species highlights oxygen and sulfur as simple signalling molecules that dictate cell fate in an early eukaryote, with implications for responses to nutrient fluctuations in multicellular eukaryotes. Subject terms: Mitochondria, Mitochondria Depriving unicellular Dictyostelium discoideum of nutrients generates reactive oxygen species that sequester cysteine within glutathione, which maintains this amoeba in a nonproliferating state that promotes aggregation into a multicellular organism. Main The eukaryote D. discoideum bridges the unicellular-to-multicellular transition, which represents a key evolutionary step. Unicellular D. discoideum consume bacteria and yeast 1 ; upon nutrient restriction this species aggregates into a multicellular organism, differentiating and forming a spore that regerminates in conditions favourable to growth 2. cAMP 3 and superoxide 4 drive this aggregation. Superoxide and other reactive oxygen species are common signalling molecules 5 that influence function by oxidatively modifying proteins and modulating transcription factors 6, 7. However, excess ROS cause oxidative injury, cell death 8 and pathology 9. Numerous antioxidants control ROS, including superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione 10. GSH—which consists of glycine, glutamate and cysteine—has roles beyond its antioxidant function 11, and GSH and redox status regulate normal and malignant cell proliferation 12, 13. Here we reveal a function of ROS in increasing demand for GSH, and thus prioritizing cysteine for GSH synthesis, during nutrient restriction. This limits the sulfur supply from cysteine and thus shuts down mitochondrial metabolism and proliferation, which prompts multicellular development. Starvation alters mitochondrial activity Total nutrient restriction induces aggregation of unicellular D. discoideum into a multicellular organism, 1a ), via stages with distinct morphologies. 1b ). Starved D. discoideum remodelled their transcriptome, 1c ), and single-cell RNA-sequencing revealed discrete populations from 0.5 h of starvation. Metabolic pathways—particularly amino acid metabolism—were highly regulated, which implicates metabolic rewiring in the starvation response. 1d ). Our transcriptomic data agreed well with previous RNA-seq data from D. discoideum that were induced to develop by cAMP 14, 15, as starved D. discoideum increased expression of genes associated with cAMP signalling, and pre-spore and pre-stalk cells. Fig. 1 Starving D. discoideum decrease their mitochondrial metabolism. Extended Data Fig. 1 Starving D. discoideum decrease expression of genes that encode mitochondrial proteins. Starved D. discoideum decreased mitochondrial respiration, reduced their oxygen consumption rate and maintained this lower rate, compared to vegetative, nutrient-replete cells. 2a ). The initial decrease in respiration was not due to defective function of electron transport chain complexes, as the OCR was similar between mitochondria from vegetative and starved cells when individual complexes were provided with saturating substrates, after up to 4 h of starvation. Prolonged starvation compromised the activities of mitochondrial respiratory chain subunits I, II and IV. At advanced starvation, most oxygen consumption was nonmitochondrial: amoebae barely responded to mitochondrial drugs 1h ) and had a decreased ability to reduce 2,3- bis --2 H -tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide, 1i ), which indicates dampened mitochondrial metabolism. Mitochondrial membrane potential rapidly increased initially, and then decreased, 1j ), consistent with lower activity of ETC complexes. MitoTracker Red staining also decreased after 10 h. 1k ). Starving D. discoideum specifically decreased ATP synthase of the oxidative phosphorylation machinery, and left CII and CIII unaffected. Total intracellular ATP declined after 8 h. 2f ). These findings may reflect mitochondrial remodelling into a prespore-specific vacuole, which forms the cell wall of the spore 16. Extended Data Fig. 2 Activity of the ETC complex is intact during early aggregation. Supporting a role for autophagy in starving D. discoideum, ribosomal genes decreased after 8 h 3a ) as was previously observed 14. Driving autophagy using rapamycin accelerated aggregation upon starvation, 3b ), and inhibition of autophagy blocked aggregation but not degradation of CV. The activity of the 26S proteasome increased 3f ) and degraded CV, as shown by the fact that MG132 inhibition of proteasomal activity preserved CV. 3g ). The cytosolic 26S proteasome has also been shown to degrade the intramitochondrial protein UCP2 in mammalian cells 18. Proteasome inhibition did not restore OCR to rates in starved cells, 3h ), which clarified that CV degradation does not drive decreased respiration but may reinforce dampened mitochondrial activity. Extended Data Fig. 3 Starving Dictyostelium decrease anabolic and increase catabolic processes. Decreased respiration drives aggregation Starvation halts the proliferation of D. discoideum, 1n ), which instead undergo multicellular development. We asked whether the extensive mitochondrial inhibition in starved Dictyostelium drives aggregation and multicellularity. Inhibiting CI or CV 1o ) accelerated aggregation, which indicated that decreased mitochondrial metabolism underlies this response. This aggregation is independent of glycolysis, as it was unaffected by the glycolysis inhibitors 2-deoxyglucose or koningic acid. Extended Data Fig. 4 Manipulation of glycolysis, or carbon or nitrogen supply, has no effect on D. discoideum aggregation. Amino acids rescue mitochondrial changes We investigated which metabolites were important for this starvation response. Certain amino acids cycled in waves with 2-h periods, 2a ), which is quicker than the population doubling time. 1n ). Cysteine did not cycle but was instead consumed throughout early aggregation, and decreased over time. 2b ). Sugars and steroids remained constant, or increased. 2c ). A variety of systems—including yeast 19, 20 and skeletal muscle 21 —exhibit metabolic oscillations, but the specific, rapid, dynamic regulation of amino acids during D. discoideum starvation indicated that they have a special role in this process. Provision of an essential amino acid mixture completely reversed aggregation induced by starvation, 2d ), whereas non-essential amino acids delayed aggregation. 4d ). This was not due to carbon or nitrogen restoration, as neither glucose nor ammonia inhibited aggregation. Previous work has similarly shown that amino acid starvation initiates D. discoideum development, and that EAAs inhibit aggregation 22. EAAs antagonized expression of carA and cprB 2e ) and overcame the proliferative 2f ) and mitochondrial defects that accompany starvation, leading to increased CV, 2g ), OCR 2h ) and MitoTracker Red staining. Fig. 2 Replacement of amino acids, and of cysteine in particular, rescues aggregation of starving D. discoideum. Extended Data Fig. 5 Starving D. discoideum take up cystine. Cysteine opposes aggregation Although no single amino acid inhibited aggregation completely, only cysteine delayed aggregation. 2j ). N -Acetyl-cysteine, a membrane-permeable form of cysteine, completely abrogated aggregation induced by starvation, 2k ), possibly because it was assimilated more quickly than other forms of cysteine. Cysteine blocked starvation-induced expression of carA and cprB, 2l ), and restored MitoTracker Red staining. 2m ). Starving D. discoideum specifically require cysteine. Cystine also antagonized aggregation. 5a ). Starved D. discoideum took up more of a cystine–fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugate than did vegetative cells. 5b ). We also cultured cells in cysteine-depleted vegetative medium for 3 h before starvation, to reduce competition for uptake between cystine–FITC and unconjugated cysteine in vegetative medium. Cysteine-depleted and cysteine-replete vegetative cells exhibited similar levels of cystine–FITC uptake, which indicates that—even after depletion—vegetative cells have no extra cysteine demand. Cysteine-depleted starved cells took up even more cystine–FITC than did starved cells that had not been depleted of cysteine, 5b ), which indicates a specific cysteine requirement during starvation. The xCT cystine-glutamate transporter mediated at least some of this acquisition, as two xCT inhibitors reduced uptake of cystine–FITC. Amino acids are used for GSH We traced 13 C 15 N-labelled EAAs or 13 C-glucose into starving D. discoideum to investigate how EAAs oppose aggregation. Pathways using labelled EAAs are probably important in this process, as EAAs rescue aggregation whereas glucose does not. Only two pathways—Warburg metabolism and GSH metabolism—were significantly enriched in terms of the number of metabolites that incorporated EAA-derived 13 C and 15 N in starved cells. 3a ). Although vegetative cells had more total oxidized glutathione when supplied with 13 C 15 N-EAAs, 3b ), a greater proportion of GSSG came from labelled EAAs in starved cells. 3c ). Starved cells also incorporated EAA-derived 13 C and 15 N into GSSG to a greater extent than did vegetative cells. 3d ). Together, this suggests a critical role for GSH in starvation. GSH and GSSG increased in starved cells that were given unlabelled EAAs, as did the GSH precursors cysteine, glutamate and glycine, 6a ), which further demonstrates the use of EAAs in GSH synthesis. Several EAA-derived metabolites that contribute to GSH or cysteine synthesis were differentially labelled in starved versus vegetative cells, indicating altered activity of these pathways. 6b ). 13 C from glucose was not incorporated into GSSG to any great extent in starving or vegetative cells. Fig. 3 Starving D. discoideum use essential amino acids to fulfil increased demand for GSH. Extended Data Fig. 6 13 C 15 N-labelled EAAs are used for GSH synthesis in starving D. discoideum. ROS increases GSH demand Starving D. discoideum decreased reduced GSH and raised GSSG, which increased total glutathione. 7c ). Starvation also increased the GSSG/GSH ratio 7d ) and GSH/GSSG oxidation, 7e ), which indicates an imbalanced redox state. Supporting previous findings that ROS may be an early pro-aggregation signal 4, starving D. discoideum increased cellular and mitochondrial ROS within 0.5 h. As a consequence, GSH synthesis and oxidation increased, to detoxify ROS. Extended Data Fig. 7 GSH oxidation is increased in starving D. discoideum. Given the increased Δ Ψ m and mitoROS, we investigated alternative oxidase in aggregation induced by starvation. AOX diverts electrons from the CoQ pool, which limits electron transport to CIII and thereby decreases Δ Ψ m, mitoROS and ATP synthesis. Inhibiting AOX with benzohydroxamic acid blocked aggregation induced by starvation. 8a ). This pro-aggregation effect of AOX is unlikely to be due to Δ Ψ m modulation, because BHAM did not affect Δ Ψ m, mitoROS or cellular ROS. Instead, inhibiting AOX may increase electron flux to CIII, which maintains ETC activity and antagonizes aggregation. Indeed, BHAM increased mitochondrial activity in starved D. discoideum, as shown by XTT reduction. Extended Data Fig. 8 AOX inhibition antagonizes aggregation independently of ROS. GSH mimics EAA supplementation If starving D. discoideum use EAAs for GSH production, the addition of GSH should mimic supplementation with EAAs. As with EAAs, GSH reversed starvation-induced aggregation, mitochondrial defects and transcriptomic changes in Dictyostelium. 7f ). GSH maintained unicellularity, 3i ), abolished developmental gene expression, and restored OCR, 3l ), CV 3m ) and MitoTracker Red staining. 3n ). These data indicate that EAA limitation initiates ROS production, which then promotes aggregation. EAAs and GSH both abolish these ROS. Cysteine is prioritized for GSH Cysteine can become conditionally essential in nutrient-restricted contexts 24, 25. In a highly oxidative, starved setting, cysteine may be prioritized for GSH synthesis, which limits its use for other processes. Excess cysteine may oppose D. discoideum aggregation by restoring cysteine metabolism beyond GSH synthesis. Uniquely among amino acids, cysteine supplies sulfur for FeS-cluster synthesis, vitamin synthesis, molybdenum cofactor synthesis and transfer RNA thiolation 26 – 28. Methionine must first be metabolized to cysteine through several steps to contribute sulfur to these processes 29. Methionine decreased during starvation, 7g ), but did not oppose aggregation—perhaps because its trans -sulfuration to cysteine is too slow, or because it is prioritized for other pathways 30. FeS clusters are critical functional groups in metabolic enzymes 31, and their chemical versatility may have supported early life 32. FeS clusters enable electron transfer by ETC proteins 33, and their disruption causes mitochondrial dysfunction, metabolic reprogramming 31 and pathology 33. tRNA thiolation facilitates translation 27, which drives proliferation, and new proteins incorporate cysteine itself. Thus, limited cysteine and sulfur metabolism has marked functional consequences. To investigate whether cysteine is funnelled into GSH upon starvation, we examined GSH in starved D. discoideum supplemented with cysteine, with and without buthionine sulfoximine. BSO inhibits γ-glutamyl synthetase, which conjugates cysteine to glutamate in the first step of GSH synthesis. BSO decreased GSH, 4a ), confirming inhibition of GSH synthesis. Cysteine increased GSH and total glutathione after 30 min of starvation; these effects were maintained after up to 8 h of starvation, indicating that starving D. discoideum use cysteine for GSH. Cysteine did not greatly affect GSSG content, 9c ), but reversed the starvation-induced increase in the GSSG/GSH ratio, 9d ), probably because cysteine increased GSH. BSO blocked this ability of cysteine to increase GSH, 4b ), which shows that starving D. discoideum direct cysteine into GSH using γGCS. BSO alone inhibited aggregation, possibly because it preserved endogenous cysteine to support sulfur- and cysteine-dependent processes other than GSH synthesis. BSO and cysteine additively blocked multicellular development, as the combination decreased carA expression 4d ) and delayed aggregation 4e ) more than did either agent alone. These results suggest that cysteine opposes D. discoideum aggregation not by supporting GSH synthesis, but instead by restoring other cysteine-dependent processes in starving cells. Fig. 4 Cysteine delays D. discoideum aggregation by restoring sulfur metabolism. Extended Data Fig. 9 Cysteine is used to make GSH in starved D. discoideum. Starvation limits sulfur metabolism We next investigated whether sulfur limitation was the signal that drove multicellular development, and whether cysteine antagonized development by supplying sulfur. We hypothesized that if starving D. discoideum pull cysteine into GSH synthesis, other sulfur-dependent processes should consequently decrease. Starved D. discoideum decreased their expression of genes involved in cysteine-derived sulfur metabolism, including tRNA thiolation, molybdenum cofactor production and FeS-cluster synthesis. 4f ). Proteomics analysis revealed that sulfur metabolism was significantly decreased in starving D. discoideum, with sulfate adenylyl transferase being one of the most decreased proteins. The only significantly increased pathway was proteasome-related, consistent with increased proteasome activity upon starvation 3f ) and with previous studies in cAMP-pulsed D. discoideum 34. Extended Data Fig. 10 Cysteine restores sulfur-dependent processes in starving D. discoideum. We then examined a range of sulfur-dependent processes. Protein synthesis incorporates cysteine into new proteins, proteins of the translation elongator complex are sulfur-dependent 35 and tRNA thiolation facilitates translation 27. Starvation caused an initial and transient increase in protein synthesis, possibly to produce proteins for motility, aggregation and the differentiation of stalk and spore cells. 4g ). After 8 h, protein synthesis dropped to levels similar to those observed with the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide. This may result from decreased tRNA thiolation or activity of proteins of the translation elongator complex ), 4f )), and from a reduced availability of cysteine for protein synthesis. Cysteine and GSH restored translation in 8-h starved cells : 4g ): GSH may further restore translation by providing cysteine, glutamate and glycine, in addition to its antioxidant effects. Enzymes containing FeS clusters depend on sulfur for their activity. For example, aconitase needs its FeS cluster to metabolize citrate to isocitrate in the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Dictyostelium discoideum decreased the activity of mitochondrial aconitase after 4 h of starvation, which was even more pronounced after 8 h. It is the enzyme activity of aconitase that is regulated, as absolute levels of the enzyme are unchanged. Supporting this, although levels of mitochondrial aconitase protein decreased after 8 h, cysteine restored enzyme activity and not expression. GSH also restored the activity of mitochondrial aconitase. 4h ). These data indicate that sulfur restriction may modulate the activity of FeS-cluster-containing enzymes. Iron starvation dissociates FeS clusters from mammalian cytosolic aconitase, decreasing its metabolism of citrate to isocitrate but maintaining its levels to perform its alternative activity of mRNA stabilization 36. Similarly, sulfur limitation may dissociate FeS clusters from FeS-cluster-containing enzymes to decrease activity. To bolster these findings, we examined ETC CII, another FeS-dependent enzyme. Succinate-driven CII activity decreased after 8 h of starvation, and was rescued by cysteine. Cysteine did not restore CII activity to levels in vegetative cells, but did significantly increase its activity compared to starved cells —probably because sulfur from supplemented cysteine is used to recover several sulfur-dependent processes. For example, cysteine also rescued the glutamate- and malate-fuelled activity of CI, another FeS-dependent enzyme. Mitochondrial superoxide can degrade the FeS cluster of mitochondrial aconitase. Cysteine, unlike GSH, did not decrease starvation-induced mitochondrial or cellular ROS. GSH directly detoxifies ROS, whereas cysteine must first be processed to GSH to mediate such potent antioxidant activity. This suggests that cysteine rescues the activity of mitochondrial aconitase by restoring sulfur. These results reinforce the idea that ROS induce GSH and pull cysteine into GSH synthesis. This limits sulfur metabolism to decrease translation and proliferation, thus promoting multicellularity during starvation. Supplemented GSH opposes this both by directly abolishing the initial ROS signal and preserving endogenous cysteine to maintain sulfur-dependent metabolism, explaining the strong reversal of starvation-induced aggregation by GSH supplementation. Cysteine supplementation antagonizes the multicellular development of D. discoideum not by reducing ROS, but instead by feeding in downstream of this signal to restore sulfur and rescuing several sulfur metabolic processes. Sulfur metabolism determines cell fate If cysteine opposes multicellular development by maintaining sulfur metabolism, limiting sulfur liberation from cysteine should abolish the ability of cysteine to rescue aggregation. Nitrogen fixation 1 cysteine desulfurase 26 removes sulfur from cysteine for processes that include FeS-cluster synthesis 37 and tRNA thiolation 38. nfs1 -targeting small interfering RNA 4k ) inhibited the ability of cysteine to antagonize aggregation. Knockdown of nfs1 decreased MitoTracker Red staining in starved D. discoideum, consistent with accelerated aggregation in these cells. Starvation-induced carA expression was lower in nfs1 -silenced cells compared to control cells, and we suggest that this is because they have already passed the peak of carA expression due to accelerated development. Cysteine did not decrease starvation-induced expression of carA in cells that lack NFS1, and was less effective at antagonizing cprB expression. This is reflected in the aggregation process. Starved, nfs1 -silenced D. discoideum accelerated aggregation compared to control cells, and cysteine could not antagonize aggregation in nfs1 -silenced cells. 4n ). These data indicate that sulfur liberation from cysteine by NFS1 is responsible for cysteine antagonism of D. discoideum aggregation. We present a model in which rapid ROS production by starving D. discoideum increases demand for the antioxidant GSH. These ROS, which increase during nutrient restriction 39 – 41, prioritize cysteine for GSH synthesis, which limits the use of the sulfur from cysteine for other metabolic processes. Such sulfur restriction decreases mitochondrial metabolism and protein synthesis, inhibiting proliferation and promoting aggregation and multicellular development during starvation. Thus, we reveal a mechanism by which a sulfur-dependent metabolic switch dictates cell function. Numerous cell types rewire their metabolism to alter function 42 and sulfur use may be important in these settings, particularly in proliferative cells or in immune cells entering nutrient-restrictive environments. Some cancer cells preserve sulfur metabolism, with NFS1 being highly expressed in lung adenocarcinoma to maintain FeS clusters to promote cell survival 43. Cysteine-restricted tumour cells increase methionine trans -sulfuration to cysteine to support growth 44, and starving cancer cells of cysteine or cystine enhances checkpoint-blockade efficacy and antitumour immunity 45. Although ROS have numerous roles and increase during starvation 39, research currently focuses on oxidative modifications and redox balance, whereas here we show an entirely different ROS signalling mechanism. MitoROS control haematopoietic stem cell differentiation and proliferation 46, and are essential for keratinocyte differentiation 47, and GSH/GSSG status acts as a switch between differentiation and proliferation 48 ; however, sulfur metabolism has not been examined in this context. Investigating how metabolic processes influence cell function in early life forms may provide new insights into more complex nutrient utilization pathways in mammalian cells. Our work reveals a ROS signalling mechanism that controls a sulfur-dependent metabolic switch to dictate cell fate and multicellular development. Methods No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized, and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment. Dictyostelium culture Dictyostelium discoideum strain Ax4 was purchased from the Dictybase stock centre. Vegetatively growing cells were axenically maintained in shaking culture in HL5 nutrient medium. Starvation and consequent aggregation were induced by washing D. discoideum four times in development buffer and plating at a density of 2 × 10 6 cells per ml in development buffer on tissue-culture-treated plates, without shaking. As a control, vegetatively growing cells were plated at a density of 2 × 10 6 cells per ml in HL5, or LoFlo for flow cytometric experiments, on tissue-culture-treated plates, without shaking. Drug and metabolite treatments All drugs and supplemented metabolites were added at initiation of starvation, unless otherwise stated. BHAM, oligomycin, FCCP, rotenone, succinate, ascorbate, TMPD, glutamate, malate, antimycin A, ADP, l -cysteine, cystine, N -acetyl cysteine, reduced GSH, 2-deoxyglucose, koningic acid, glucose, NH 3, NH 4 Cl, 3-methyladenine, MG132, l -buthionine sulfoximine and erastin were all from Sigma. Bafilomycin was from Cell Signaling. Rapamycin was from LC Laboratories. Sulfasalazine was from Tocris Bioscience. MitoParaquat was from Abcam. We diluted 10× essential amino acids from 50× MEM amino acids solution, for final concentrations of 6 mM l -arginine hydrochloride, 1 mM l -cystine, 2 mM l -histidine hydrochloride-H 2 O, 4 mM l -isoleucine, 4 mM l -leucine, 4 mM l -lysine hydrochloride, 1 mM l -methionine, 2 mM l -phenylalanine, 4 mM l -tryptophan, 2 mM l -tyrosine and 4 mM l -valine. Proliferation by cell counting Two hundred thousand cells per condition were plated in 100 μl HL5 or development buffer in a 96-well tissue-culture-treated plate. At the time of counting, cells and medium were collected and diluted 1:3 with PBS. Ten μl of 123count eBeads counting beads of known concentration were added to each sample. Three thousand beads were counted per sample, and cell number was calculated according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA-seq Total RNA was isolated using the RNEasy kit and quantified using a Qubit 2.0. Libraries were prepared using the TruSeq stranded mRNA kit and sequenced in a HISeq 3000 by the Deep-sequencing Facility at the Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics. Sequenced libraries were processed with deepTools 49, using STAR 50, for trimming and mapping, and featureCounts 51 to quantify mapped reads. Reads were mapped to the dicty 2.7 genome assembly. Raw mapped reads were processed in R with DESeq2 52 to generate normalized read counts to visualize as heat maps using Morpheus and determine differentially expressed genes with greater than 2 fold change and lower than 0.1 adjusted P value, which were analysed for pathway enrichment using STRING. Single-cell RNA-seq Single-cell RNA-seq was performed using a 10X Genomics Chromium Controller. Single cells were processed with GemCode Single Cell Platform using GemCode Gel Beads, Chip and Library Kits following the manufacturer’s protocol. An estimated 28,000 cells were sequenced from an initial 7,000 cells added. Libraries were sequenced on HiSeq 3000. Samples were demultiplexed and aligned using Cell Ranger 2.2 to genome build release 2-12, then processed and analysed in R using Seurat v.3 and uniform manifold approximation and projection as a dimensionality reduction approach. Seahorse analysis Two hundred thousand cells per well were plated on a Seahorse XFp 8-well plate in 40 μl HL5 or development buffer and allowed to adhere. Then, 110 μl of the appropriate medium was added to the wells for a final volume of 150 μl. OCR was measured using the Seahorse XFp maintained at 22 °C. The AOX inhibitor BHAM, CV inhibitor oligomycin, mitochondrial membrane ionophore FCCP, CI inhibitor rotenone and CIII inhibitor antimycin A were injected as indicated. SDR measurement of oxygen tension Dictyostelium discoideum were plated on a 24-well OxoDish OD24 at a density of 2 × 10 6 cells per ml in either HL5 or development buffer, and oxygen tension in the cell culture medium was measured using the SDR SensorDish Reader. XTT assay Dictyostelium discoideum were plated at a density of 2 × 10 6 cells per ml in HL5 and were allowed to adhere for 1 h. The medium was then carefully removed and replaced with development buffer or fresh HL5. At the end of the time course, samples were analysed using the CyQUANT XTT Cell Viability Assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Superoxide dismutase was included with each condition to remove superoxide as a confounding factor. ATP assay Dictyostelium discoideum were plated at a density of 2 × 10 6 cells per ml in HL5 and were allowed to adhere for 1 h. The medium was then carefully removed and replaced with development buffer or fresh HL5. At the end of the time course, samples were analysed using the ATP determination kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Flow cytometry Dictyostelium discoideum were cultured in shaking culture in low fluorescence axenic LoFlo medium overnight before the experiment, and were then treated as desired, using LoFlo medium in place of HL5 medium. Two hundred thousand cells per condition were plated in 100 μl LoFlo medium in a 96-well tissue culture-treated plate, and allowed to adhere for 1 h, ensuring consistent adherence between samples. The culture medium was then carefully removed and changed to the medium of interest, or replaced with fresh LoFlo medium, and cells were incubated for the indicated times. Thus, starved cells always had counterpart control cells that had been cultured in a full complement of nutrients for the same time, and these whole populations could be accurately compared. Then, 30 min before the end of the treatment, cells were collected, disaggregated and stained in PBS for 30 min. This was done to diminish any residual autofluorescence in LoFlo medium, to stop any binding of peptone or yeast extract proteins binding to cell stains, and to ensure that differences in flow cytometric results were not due to staining in different base media of different fluorescence. Cells were washed using 1× Perm/Wash Buffer and resuspended in PBS. If a fixation step was needed, cells were fixed for 20 min at 4 °C in Fixation/Permeabilization solution, washed using 1× Perm/Wash Buffer and resuspended in PBS. Cells were collected using the Fortessa or LSR II flow cytometers, with the software FACSDiva. An example gating strategy for identifying live, single vegetative or starved D. discoideum cells is shown in Supplementary Fig. 2. Analysis was performed using FlowJo software. Dyes used were MitoTracker Red, Live/Dead Aqua, Live/Dead Blue, Live/Dead Near-IR, MitoSOX and CellROX, anti-ATP5A–FITC, JC-1 and BioTracker Cystine–FITC Live Cell Dye. Western blotting Two million cells per condition were plated in 1 ml HL5 of the appropriate medium, with or without indicated drugs or nutrients, in a 12-well tissue-culture-treated plate. At the end of the stimulation, supernatant was removed and cells were directly lysed in 1× cell lysis buffer containing 1 mM PMSF. Protein was quantified using a BSA assay. Then, 1× loading dye and 1 mM DTT were added to samples, which were then heated at 95 °C for 5 min. Samples were run on pre-cast 4% to 12% bis-tris protein gels. Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes using the iBLOT 2 system, and blocked with 5% w/v milk and 0.1% v/v Tween-20 in Tris-buffered saline for 1 h at room temperature. Membranes were incubated with primary antibodies in 5% w/v BSA in TBS-T overnight at 4 °C, washed 3 times with TBS-T, and incubated with the appropriate horseradish-peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody in 5% w/v BSA in TBS-T for 1 h at room temperature. After 3 further washes with TBS-T, membranes were incubated for 5 min with SuperSignal West Pico or Femto Chemiluminescent Substrate. Bands were visualized on Biomax MR film using a developer. OXPHOS complexes were probed with the Total OXPHOS Rodent WB Antibody Cocktail. The 12G10 anti-α-tubulin-s antibody for D. discoideum was from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank at the University of Iowa. The mitochondrial aconitase antibody was from Abcam. Metabolomic profiling Discovery metabolomics by GC–MS Discovery metabolomics by GC–MS was carried out using an Agilent 7890 gas chromatograph in-line with an Agilent 5977 single quadrupole mass spectrometer. Dry samples were derivatized with N -methyl- N --trifluoroacetamide. Gas chromatography separation was on a HP-DB5 column with a temperature gradient from 80 °C to 320 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in full scan mode with a mass range of 50 to 500 m / z. Data processing was performed using an R script developed in-house. Features were annotated by matching of retention times to standard compounds and matching of fragmentation spectra to the Human Metabolomics Database. Metabolite quantification by LC–MS Cells were centrifuged for 2 min at 500 g at 4 °C. The pellet was washed with ice-cold PBS and centrifuged for 2 min at 500 g at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded. Samples were extracted in 750 μl 50:30:20 v/v/v methanol/acetonitrile/water, and samples were centrifuged for 10 min at maximum speed at 4 °C. The supernatant was stored at −80 °C. Targeted metabolite quantification by LC–MS was carried out using an Agilent 1290 Infinity II UHPLC in-line with an Agilent 6495 QQQ-MS operating in multiple reaction monitoring mode. MRM settings were optimized separately for all compounds using pure standards. Liquid chromatography separation was on a Phenomenex Luna propylamine column using a solvent gradient of 100% buffer B to 90% buffer A. Flow rate was from 1,000 to 750 μl min −1. Autosampler temperature was 5 °C and injection volume was 2 μl. Data processing was performed by an R script developed in-house. Metabolite tracing analysis Five million vegetative or starved cells were cultured in the presence or absence of 13 C 15 N-essential amino acids, unlabelled amino acids, 13 C-glucose or unlabelled glucose for 6 h. Samples were extracted in 750 μl 50:30:20 v/v/v methanol/acetonitrile/water, as for metabolite quantification. Label tracing by LC–MS was carried out using an Agilent 1290 Infinity II UHPLC in-line with a Bruker impact II QTOF-MS operating in negative ion mode. Scan range was from 20 to 1,000 Da. Mass calibration was performed at the beginning of each run. Liquid chromatography separation was performed as for targeted metabolite quantification. X13CMS software 53 was used to compare incorporation of stable heavy-isotope-labelled nitrogen or carbon derived from 15 N, 13 C amino acids or 13 C glucose into polar metabolites between starved and non-starved cells. Metabolites with significantly different total pool sizes or per cent isotope incorporation from either 13 C or 15 N were identified by accurate mass using the HMDB. For pathway analysis, metabolites assigned a Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes identifier in the HMDB were searched using the KEGG Mapper-Search Pathway tool. Metabolites of interest from the top 2 most significantly changed pathways were further analysed by targeted analysis, in which metabolites were quantified using AssayR 54 and identified by matching accurate mass and retention time to standards. Quantitative PCR analysis Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy mini kit and quantified using a Qubit 2.0. cDNA was prepared using 20–100 ng μl −1 total RNA by a reverse-transcription PCR using a High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Quantitative PCR was performed on cDNA using SYBR Green probes, on an Applied Biosystems 7000 sequence detection system, using iTaq Universal SYBR Green Supermix. Fold changes in expression were calculated by the ΔΔ C t method, using ig7 as an endogenous control for mRNA expression. Fold changes are expressed normalized to vegetatively growing cells at 0 h cultivation. Proteomics Sample preparation Protein sample preparation was carried out using 10 × 10 6 cells using an iST 8X kit, according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. All samples used for data-dependent acquisition and data-independent acquisition analyses were spiked with index retention time kit peptides, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Construction of DIA spectral library Spectral libraries were generated by Spectronaut version 10.0 using MaxQuant results as an input 55. Fifteen shotgun runs were acquired using a Q Exactive Plus instrument, and data were searched using MaxQuant. The spectral library was constructed using an FDR cut-off of 1% and a minimum and maximum of 3 and 6 fragment ions, respectively, and protein grouping was performed according to MaxQuant search results. Mass spectrometric acquisition The general nanoLC–MS setup was similar to that previously described 55, with minor modifications. A Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer and an Easy nanoLC-1200 were used for both DDA and DIA experiments. For the chromatographic separation of peptides, 4 μg peptide digest was analysed at 50 °C on a 50-cm in-house packed fused-silica emitter microcolumn packed with 1.9-μm reverse-phase ReproSilPur C18-AQ beads. Peptides were separated by a 4-h linear gradient of 5–80% at a constant flow rate of 300 nl min −1. For top 12 DDA acquisition, the ‘fast’ method from a previous publication 56, was adopted, and DIA acquisition included a single MS1 survey scan at 35,000 resolution followed by 21 DIA windows 55. Data analysis DDA mass spectrometry raw files were analysed by MaxQuant software, and peak lists were searched against the D. discoideum UniProt FASTA database concatenated with an in-house contaminant protein database by the Andromeda search engine embedded in MaxQuant 57, 58. The MS2-based label-free quantification was carried out by analysing DIA raw data using Biognosys Spectronaut software using default parameters as previously described 55, with minor modifications. In brief, the decoy method was set to ‘mutated’, data extraction and extraction window were set to ‘dynamic’ with correction factor 1, identification was set to ‘normal-distribution p-value estimator’ with q -value cut-off of 0.1, and the profiling strategy was set to ‘iRT profiling’ with q -value cut-off of 0.01. Ultimately, protein quantity was set to ‘Average precursor quantity’ and smallest quantitative unit was set to ‘Precursor ion’. For statistical testing and identification of deregulated proteins in all approaches, a two-sample Student’s t -test was used to identify differentially expressed proteins filtered to 1% FDR. Assay for activity of mitochondrial aconitase Twenty million cells per condition were plated in 10 ml HL5, development buffer, development buffer + cysteine or development buffer + GSH, in a 10-cm tissue-culture-treated dish. The supernatant was removed and cells were collected in ice-cold PBS, and homogenized in 150 μl assay buffer. Samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C, and the pellet was dissolved in 50 μl and sonicated for 20 s. The supernatant was collected, and mitochondrial aconitase activity was assayed using the BioVision aconitase activity colorimetric assay kit, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein synthesis assay Dictyostelium discoideum were cultured in shaking culture in low fluorescence axenic LoFlo medium overnight before the experiment. Two hundred thousand cells per condition were plated in 100 μl LoFlo medium in a 96-well tissue-culture-treated plate, and allowed to adhere for 1 h. The culture medium was then carefully removed and changed to the medium of interest, or replaced with fresh LoFlo medium, and cells were incubated for the indicated times. Protein synthesis was assayed using the Click-iT Plus OPP Alexa Fluor 647 protein synthesis assay kit, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, 30 min before the end of the treatment, cells were collected, disaggregated and cultured with 20 μM Click-iT OPP and Live/Dead Blue in PBS for 30 min. Cells were washed using 1× Perm/Wash Buffer and fixed for 20 min at 4 °C in Fixation/Permeabilization solution. Cells washed using 1× Perm/Wash Buffer and incubated with 100 μl of the Click-iT Plus OPP reaction cocktail, prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions, for 30 min. Cells were rinsed with Click-iT Reaction Rinse Buffer, and were collected using the Fortessa flow cytometer. Analysis was performed using FlowJo software. siRNA knockdown In brief, 1 μl DharmaFect-1 per well of a 24-well plate was mixed with 49 μl development buffer, and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. In a separate tube, 1 μl nfs1 -targeting or scrambled siRNA was made to a total volume of 50 μl with developing buffer and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Tubes containing DharmaFect-1 and siRNA mixes were mixed and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. Then, 100 μl of this mixture was added to each well of a 24-well plate. One million vegetatively growing D. discoideum per well were resuspended in 400 μl of antibiotic-free HL5 medium and added to the 100 μl transfection mixture already in the well of the 24-well plate, for a total volume per well of 500 μl. Cells were incubated overnight before medium was changed to antibiotic-free HL5, development buffer or development buffer supplemented with cysteine, and further analysis was performed. For cells that were to be analysed by flow cytometry, LoFlo medium was used in place of HL5 at all steps. Mitochondrial isolation Mitochondria were isolation according to a previously described protocol 59. One hundred million cells per condition were plated in 50 ml of the appropriate medium in two 15-cm tissue-culture-treated plates. Dictyostelium were washed from the plate using HL5, development buffer or development buffer + cysteine, and centrifuged at 600 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded, and cell pellets were resuspended in cold PBS before a further centrifugation at 600 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded and the cell pellet was suspended in 2 ml ice-cold IB cells -1. Cells were homogenized at 2,000 rpm using a Teflon pestle and pre-cooled glassware. One hundred strokes were sufficient to disrupt the majority of the cells. The homogenate was centrifuged at 600 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was centrifuged again at 600 g for 5 min at 4 °C, and the pellet, containing unbroken cells and nuclei, was discarded. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 7,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant from this step, containing lysosomes and microsomes, was discarded and the pellet was resuspended in 1 ml ice-cold IB cells -2. This mitochondrial suspension was centrifuged at 7,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded and the mitochondrial pellet was resuspended in 1 ml ice-cold IB cells -2 and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Mitochondrial protein concentration was determined by Qubit and mitochondria were resuspended in mitochondrial resuspension buffer at a concentration of 10 μg ml −1. Seahorse analysis of isolated mitochondria Forty μg of mitochondria were loaded per well of a Seahorse XFp plate in 40 μl of mitochondrial assay buffer 60 containing 10 mM malate, 10 mM glutamate, 4 mM ADP and 1,500 μM BHAM. The plate was centrifuged at 2,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. Then, 110 μl MAS containing malate, glutamate, ADP and BHAM was added to each well. Rotenone, succinate, antimycin A or a combination of ascorbate and TMPD were injected as indicated. GSH and GSSG quantification GSH and total glutathione were quantified using the GSH-Glo glutathione assay, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Two hundred thousand cells per condition were plated in 100 μl HL5 medium in a 96-well tissue-culture-treated plate, and allowed to adhere for 1 h. The culture medium was then carefully removed and changed to the medium of interest, or replaced with fresh HL5 medium, and cells were incubated for the indicated times To detect GSH, the culture medium was removed, 50 μl of 1× GSH-Glo reagent was added to each well, and the plate was incubated at room temperature for 30 min. To detect total glutathione, the reducing agent TCEP was added to 1× GSH-Glo reagent at a concentration of 1 mM, to reduce GSSG to GSH. Fifty μl of reconstituted luciferin detection reagent was added to each well, and the plate was incubated in the dark for 15 min. Ninety μl of each sample was transferred to a white, opaque luminometer plate and luminescence was measured using a TriStar plate reader. GSH and total glutathione concentrations were calculated from a GSH standard curve, and GSSG levels were calculated by subtracting GSH from total glutathione. The redox potential of the GSSG–GSH couple was calculated according to the Nernst equation. Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed using Prism 7 software. Results are mean ± s.e.m. unless indicated otherwise; n represents independent biological replicates. Comparisons for two groups were calculated using unpaired two-tailed Student’s t -tests. MetaboAnalyst 4.0 was used for Small Molecule Pathway Database over-representation analysis of the incorporation of 13 C 15 N-EEAs in starved D. discoideum. 3a ). Statistical significance was calculated using a hypergeometric test, followed by the Holm–Bonferroni method to calculate adjusted P values. Exact P values are indicated in the figures. For proteomics pathway analysis, proteins that were altered with a Q value significance of <0.01 were subject to KEGG pathway analysis using STRING. Reporting summary Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper. Online content Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available at 10.1038/s41586-021-03270-3. Supplementary information Supplementary Information This file contains Supplementary Figs 1-2 and Supplementary Table 2. Reporting Summary Supplementary Table 1 Proteomics analysis of Starved Dictyostelium. Acknowledgements We thank E. J. Pearce for critical input to this study. E.L.P. is funded by the Max Planck Society. T.B. is funded by grants of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Research Training Group 278002225/RTG2202 and SFB1218 project identifier 269925409. Extended data figures and tables Source data Source Data Fig. 1 Source Data Fig. 2 Source Data Fig. 3 Source Data Fig. 4 Source Data Extended Data Fig. 2 Source Data Extended Data Fig. 3 Source Data Extended Data Fig. 5 Source Data Extended Data Fig. 6 Source Data Extended Data Fig. 7 Source Data Extended Data Fig. 8 Source Data Extended Data Fig. 9 Source Data Extended Data Fig. 10 Author contributions B.K. conceived, designed and performed most experiments, and analysed and interpreted data. E.L.P. conceived, designed and supervised the research programme, provided conceptual input, and analysed and interpreted the data. G.E.C. performed experiments, analysed data and provided conceptual input. J.E.-H. and J.M.B. provided conceptual input about, and performed, metabolomics experiments, and analysed metabolomics data. D.E.S. analysed and provided visual representations of bulk and single-cell RNA-seq data. C.P. and T.B. designed and performed FeS cluster, NFS1 and sulfur metabolism analyses, and analysed data. G.M. and Y.M. optimized and performed proteomics analysis, and analysed data. M.A.S. provided conceptual input and performed experiments relating to nfs1 silencing in D. discoideum. L.J.F. and J.D.C. performed experiments. B.K. and E.L.P. wrote the manuscript. Funding Open access funding provided by Max Planck Society. Data availability All data that support the findings of this study are available within the Article and its Supplementary Information. Full scans of blots are provided in Supplementary Fig. 1. RNA-seq data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus as the superseries } GSE164011. This superseries contains RNA-seq datasets with accession number } GSE164009, and a single-cell RNA-seq dataset with accession number } GSE164010. The Dictyostelium discoideum genome assembly 2.7 was used for RNA-seq analysis. The Human Metabolome Database was used for analysis of metabolite tracing data. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE 61 partner repository, with the dataset identifier PXD023404. Source data are provided with this paper. Code availability LC–MS and GC–MS metabolomics data were analysed using R code developed in-house, which is publicly available at. Competing interests E.L.P. is an SAB member of ImmunoMet Therapeutics and a founder of Rheos Medicines. Footnotes Peer review information Nature thanks Navdeep Chandel, Michael Murphy and Adolfo Saiardi for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Extended data is available for this paper at 10.1038/s41586-021-03270-3. Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41586-021-03270-3. Article information Nature. 2021; 591: 471–476. Published online 2021 Feb 24. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03270-3 PMCID: PMC7969356 PMID: 33627869 Beth Kelly, 1 Gustavo E. Carrizo, 1 Joy Edwards-Hicks, 1 David E. Sanin, 1 Michal A. Stanczak, 1 Chantal Priesnitz, 2, 3 Lea J. Flachsmann, 1 Jonathan D. Curtis, 1 Gerhard Mittler, 1 Yaarub Musa, 1 Thomas Becker, 4 Joerg M. Buescher, 1 and Erika L. Pearce 1, 5 Beth Kelly 1 Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany Find articles by Beth Kelly Gustavo E. Carrizo 1 Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany Find articles by Gustavo E. Carrizo Joy Edwards-Hicks 1 Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany Find articles by Joy Edwards-Hicks David E. Sanin 1 Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany Find articles by David E. Sanin Michal A. Stanczak 1 Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany Find articles by Michal A. Stanczak Chantal Priesnitz 2 Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, ZMBZ, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany 3 Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany Find articles by Chantal Priesnitz Lea J. Flachsmann 1 Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany Find articles by Lea J. Flachsmann Jonathan D. Curtis 1 Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany Find articles by Jonathan D. Curtis Gerhard Mittler 1 Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany Find articles by Gerhard Mittler Yaarub Musa 1 Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany Find articles by Yaarub Musa Thomas Becker 4 Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany Find articles by Thomas Becker Joerg M. Buescher 1 Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany Find articles by Joerg M. Buescher Erika L. Pearce 1 Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany 5 Present Address: The Bloomberg–Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy at Johns Hopkins, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD USA Find articles by Erika L. Pearce 1 Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany 2 Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, ZMBZ, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany 3 Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany 4 Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany 5 Present Address: The Bloomberg–Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy at Johns Hopkins, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD USA Erika L. Pearce, Email: ude.imhj@6ecraepe. Corresponding author. Received 2020 Mar 18; Accepted 2021 Jan 20. Copyright © The Author 2021 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit. Articles from Nature are provided here courtesy of Nature Publishing Group 