 Translationally controlled tumor protein is a multifunctional protein implicated in various types of cellular processes involving growth and development of an organism. Here, we identified tctp gene in Dictyostelium discoideum and unraveled its function. The sequence analysis of D. discoideum TCTP showed its conservation among eukaryotes. Transcript of Dd TCTP was highly expressed at the initial time points of development and protein is localized both in the cytoplasm and nucleus. Disruption of tctp was achieved by BSR cassette using double homologous recombination method. Abrogation of tctp resulted in reduced cell proliferation but increased cell size. Additionally, development was delayed by 4 h wherein small-sized aggregates and fruiting bodies were produced by tctp – cells while larger aggregates and fruiting bodies were produced by tctp OE cells concordant with the fact that TCTP regulates prestalk/prespore ratio and cell-type differentiation. tctp – cells produced round spores with reduced viability and stalk cells are arranged in septate pattern as compared to polyhedral manner of wild type. Abrogation of tctp resulted in aberrant localization of cell type specific markers and show low proclivity toward prespore/spore region, in presence of wild type cells. Keywords: Dictyostelium, development, growth, RT-PCR, TCTP, chimera Introduction Translationally controlled tumor protein is implicated in various biological activities such as cell growth, cytoskeleton regulation, cell cycle, protein synthesis, apoptosis, development, and cancer. TCTP has a critical role in tumorigenesis, which is now recognized as a therapeutic target for various cancers such as prostate, lungs and breast cancers. TCTP is a ubiquitously expressed highly conserved protein present in eukaryotic system from plant to yeast and protozoans to all invertebrates and vertebrates and involved in various kinds of biotic and abiotic stresses. It is crucial for development of an organism as the knockout in mice is lethal where the fetus dies in the uterus due to inhibition of cell proliferation and increased cellular apoptosis. The embryo suffers reduction in cell number and increased apoptosis at embryonic stage 5.5 and dies around stage E9.5–10.5. TCTP mutant mice show defect in neuronal and glial differentiation during CNS development. Also, knockdown of TCTP in Drosophila results in reduced cell number and organ size causing the larvae to die by first-instar stage. High abundance of TCTP transcript is found in retinal ganglion cell and adult axons indicate TCTP regulates the growth of retinal ganglion cell axons. It is associated with the survival machinery of axons and has role in the development of vertebrate neural circuit. In Drosophila, RNA interference of TCTP causes a reduction in size of eye and wing which are due to decrease of both cell number and size. It also helps in the development of brain, wing and endocycling cells of salivary glands of Drosophila by maintaining the genome stability of mitotic cells. In plant or Arabidopsis, downregulation of TCTP results smaller leaf and flower size, reduced root growth, and leads to delayed development. TCTP also controls the cytoskeleton, such as microfilament and microtubule by interacting with actin and tubulin proteins. Hence, TCTP plays a critical role in cell proliferation in a cell or tissue-type specific manner. Dictyostelium discoideum encompasses the unicellular and multicellular life forms that makes it tractable for the study of genetic changes occurring at the intersection of uni- and multicellular life. It has been used for the study of chemotaxis, cell biology, and developmental biology. In metazoans, multicellularity results by the repeated cell division of the “zygote” but in case of Dictyostelium multicellularity arises due to the aggregation of spatially segregated cells. Dictyostelium feeds on bacteria and divides mitotically to remain as unicellular organism but enters into multicellularity at the onset of starvation. Following starvation, some of the cells start secreting cAMP and in response to this signal other cells start moving toward cAMP gradient. These cells communicate with each other and form aggregation territories comprising of approximately 10 5 amoebae which undergo various morphogenetic movements to form slugs comprising anterior 1/ 4 region of prestalk cells and the remaining posterior region of prespore cells and then fruiting bodies that made up of dead vacuolated stalk cells and viable spores. In this paper, we have identified and characterized Dictyostelium TCTP that show conservation to human and yeast TCTP. Disruption of Ddtctp was achieved using Blasticidin cassette to unravel its function in growth and development of this organism. The tctp OE and tctp – cells showed reduced cell proliferation. Disruption of tctp exhibited increased cells mass, cell size and reduced pinocytosis. Both, tctp OE and tctp – cells displayed delay in development resulting in fruiting body formation at 28 h, respectively. Additionally, tctp OE cells formed large-sized aggregates and fruiting bodies with a larger stalk and a small sorus. On the contrary, tctp – cells formed small-sized aggregates and fruiting bodies. tctp – fruiting bodies formed round spores in contrast to elliptical spores of wild type and exhibited only ∼25% viability. In chimeras of Ax2 and tctp – cells, mutant cells showed more propensity toward prestalk/stalk region and its derived structures and contributed less in chimeric spore formation. Materials and Methods Cell Growth, Development and Transformation Dictyostelium cells were grown axenically and development was performed as described. Log phase cultures were inoculated into fresh media at a density of 5 × 10 5 cells/mL and cell proliferation was monitored over 5 days using hemocytometer. For development, log phase cultures were harvested, washed and developed at a density of 5 × 10 7 cells/mL, followed by synchronization at 4°C for 4–6 h and further incubated at 22°C to proceed in development. The timings and pattern of development was noted and photographed under Nikon SMZ-1500 stereomicroscope. Analyses were performed using NIS-ELEMENTS AR v. 4.0. Preparation of tctp Overexpressing and tctp Knockout Strains Tctp overexpressing strain was made as described earlier. The knockout of tctp gene was created by disrupting the tctp gene with BSR cassette, followed by homologous recombination in the genome of D. discoideum. The 5’ and 3’ homology regions were PCR amplified using gene-specific primer pairs and cloned at the flanking sides of BSR cassette, followed by linearization of the construct. The linearized product was transformed into Ax2 cells by electroporation and transformants were selected at 10 μg/mL Blasticidin-S. RNA Detection by RT-PCR Analysis RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis were performed as described. Briefly, Dictyostelium cells were developed and samples were collected at various time points, washed and lysed in TRI reagent. cDNA was synthesized and PCR amplification was performed. The gene-specific primer pairs used for RT-PCR reactions were mentioned in Supplementary Table S2. Pinocytosis Assay Pinocytosis assay was performed as described. Briefly, log phase cultures of Ax2 and tctp – cells were harvested, re-suspended in fresh media at a density of 3 × 10 6 cells/mL and kept under shaken conditions for 20 min. Furthermore, FITC dextran was added and kept in dark under shaken conditions. 1 mL cell suspension was taken at different time points, washed with 1xKK 2 + 5 mM sodium azide, and further by 1xKK 2. Cells were lysed and fluorescence was measured at excitation 470 nm and emission at 520 nm. Samples were normalized with protein content to exclude any difference due to cell size. Cell Dry Weight Analysis Cell dry weight measurement was done according to Maurya et al.. Log phase cultures were harvested, washed and pellet having 5 × 10 7 cells were vacuum dried at 55°C for 1 h and cell weight was scored by subtracting empty tube weight. Cell Size Analysis by Flow Cytometer Cell size analyses were performed as described. Briefly, approximately 1 × 10 7 cells were harvested, washed with 1xKK 2 buffer, resuspended in 1.5 mL buffer followed by fixation. Just prior to analysis 1 × 10 6 cells were washed, treated with RNaseA and incubated at 37°C for 30 min followed by addition of propidium iodide and incubated at RT. Sample was loaded on BD FACS Calibur flow cytometer and cell size analysis was performed using Cell Quest software. Spore Viability Assays Spore viability assay was performed according to the procedure as described. Approximately, 1 × 10 8 cells were harvested, washed and developed on 1.5% non-nutrient agar. Spores from mature fruiting bodies were collected, washed and aliquots of 100 spores were mixed with the suspension of Klebsiella aerogenes and allowed to grow for 5 days under moist conditions. Calcofluor Staining of Stalk and Spores of Ax2 and tctp – Fruiting Bodies Cells were developed at a density of 5 × 10 7 cells/mL on nitrocellulose membrane, already placed on agar till the formation of fruiting bodies, followed by treatment with calcofluor white at 0.01% wt/vol for 10 min. The staining solution was removed and images were captured using fluorescence microscope. Development of Chimeras RFP marked Ax2 and GFP marked tctp – cells were mixed in various proportions and developed as described above. The development of chimeras was monitored under fluorescence microscope and photographed. For scoring contribution of Ax2 and tctp – cells in chimeric spore formation, individual spore-heads were picked on a glass-slide and photographed, both under brightfield and fluorescence using Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope. Red and green fluorescent spores were counted and graph was plotted. A minimum of 10–15 fruiting bodies developed from each ratio mixture per individual experiment were counted. β- Galactosidase Staining β-galactosidase staining was performed according to the method described by Escalante and Sastre with minor modifications. Log phase cells were developed at a cell density of 5 × 10 7 cells/mL on dialysis membrane placed on non-nutrient agar plates. Various developmental structures were collected, fixed with methanol for 30 min followed by washing and permeabilization with NP40 for 1 h at room temperature. Further, structures were washed 2–3 times and staining with X-gal was performed. The reaction was stopped when evident staining appeared by washing with Z buffer. Images were captured under the Nikon AZ100 microscope. Image Processing and Statistical Analyses Image processing and mound size analyses were performed using NIS ELEMENTS ARv.4.0. The statistical analyses were performed with mean, standard deviation, and standard error and values were plotted in graph using GraphPad Prism. Student t -test was used where p -values; ∗∗∗ p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01 and ∗ p < 0.05 were established as significant. Results Identification and Characterization of Dd TCTP To investigate the similarity between Dd TCTP and TCTPs from other species, we performed multiple sequence alignment of protein sequences through MUSCLE program. The protein sequence of Dd TCTP is ∼171 amino acids. Amino acid sequence alignment of TCTP from social amoeba and other species was performed. We aligned the TCTP protein sequences from seven species that cover lower to higher animals, plant and fungi. Conserved residues showed identity between social amoeba, plants, fungi and lower as well as higher animals. A constructed phylogenetic tree suggested that Dd TCTP was closely related to the other members of dictyostelids and protozoa such as Theileria annulata, Dictyostelium fasciculatum, and Plasmodium falciparum with high bootstrap values. Dd TCTP was also closer to fungi. The homology between Dd TCTP and S. pombe was 46% while with human it showed 42%. FIGURE 1 Identification and characterization of Dd TCTP. Protein sequence alignment of Dd TCTP and other species. Sequences used in this study are: Dictyostelium discoideum, Arabidopsis thaliana. tctp mRNA was expressed throughout development, predominantly expressed at initial time points then showed reduced expression between 8 and 20 h followed by increased expression till 24 h. Generation of tctp Knockout in Dictyostelium discoideum To explore the functions of TCTP, its deletion mutant was generated by disrupting the tctp gene with BSR cassette through homologous recombination method in the genome of D. discoideum. Approximately, 400 independent clones were screened for positional integration, confirmed by PCR and one out of the two positive clones was used for further experiments. FIGURE 2 Generation of tctp deletion mutant. Schematic representation of tctp disruption using BSR cassette employing double homologous recombination method. Linearized product. Wild type and tctp OE cells divides at every 12.3 ± 0.2 and 18 ± 0.6 h and attained stationary phase at ∼10.8 × 10 6 cells/mL and ∼7.2 × 10 6 cell/mL, respectively, while cell proliferation of tctp – cells was very slow with a longer lag phase and reached the stationary phase and at a much lower density of 4.7 × 10 6 cell/mL. The doubling time for tctp – cells was 26 ± 2.5 h. Growth of Dictyostelium was accomplished with either increase in cell proliferation or increase in size of the cells. Cell growth and proliferation are regulated independently in the organism. Cell proliferation rate is increase in number while cell growth is increase in size of cell due to the increased molecular mass in the cell. To determine the role of Dd TCTP in regulating growth, we estimated the cell mass and observed that Ax2, tctp OE, and tctp – cells have an average cell mass of 9 ± 0.08, 8.1 ± 0.2, and 11.4 ± 0.5 mg, respectively. Increased cell mass of tctp – cells was attributed to the enhanced cell size revealed by FACS analysis. The size of the tctp – cells was also observed by microscopy and found significantly more than wild type cells. Furthermore, the reason behind increased cell size was checked via nuclear staining using DAPI and found that there was increase in number of nuclei per cell in case of tctp – cells as compared to wild type cells. Together, we conclude that tctp – cells display reduced proliferation but enhanced cell growth due to increased number of nuclei. Next, we wanted to check the effect of TCTP knockout on pinocytosis. Pinocytosis also known as macropinocytosis is the uptake of liquid media by axenic strain of Dictyostelium cells grown in laboratory. Pinocytosis is a crucial process in the growth of Dictyostelium Ax2 cells, as it is the only mode of taking the nutrients. Vegetative stage of Ax2 cells grow and divide by actively pinocytosing the external nutrients. It can be measured through the rate of uptake of fluid phase marker, fluorescent dextran. The pinocytosis rate of tctp – cells was significantly reduced at all time points as measured by decrease in intracellular FITC content in the tctp – cells. Therefore, decreased proliferation could be attributed to defect in nutrient uptake as well. FIGURE 3 Abrogation of TCTP rendered enhanced cell growth but reduced cell proliferation. Cell proliferation rate of Ax2, tctp OE, and tctp – cells was measured every 12 h.. Cell dry weight analyses... Deletion of tctp Cause Developmental Delay and Aorist Fruiting Bodies Formation To delineate the role of TCTP in multicellular developmental program of Dictyostelium, wild type, tctp OE, and tctp – cells were plated at a density of 5 × 10 7 cells/mL on non-nutrient agar and allowed to develop at 22°C following synchronization. Ax2 cells completed its developmental life cycle by 24 h forming aggregation streams by 6 h, aggregates by 12 h, slugs by 16 h, and fruiting bodies by 24 h whereas the formation of aggregates was delayed by 4 h in tctp OE and tctp – strains. The tctp OE and tctp – cells formed mound at 16 h, slugs at 20 h and fruiting body at 28 h. Additionally, the number of aggregates were significantly reduced in tctp OE and tctp – strains as compared to Ax2 but the size of aggregates was 3-fold more in case of tctp OE whereas tctp – showed comparatively smaller aggregates than Ax2. tctp OE cells formed long and slender slugs as compared to wild type whereas tctp – slugs was similar to wild type slugs. Then, we analyzed the fruiting body morphology of wild type, tctp OE and tctp – strains and found that tctp OE cells formed fruiting body with long, thin stalk and small sorus while tctp – cells developed into fruiting body with a small and thick stalk and a large sorus as compared to wild type fruiting bodies. Moreover, in case of tctp OE and tctp – fruiting bodies stalk cells are arranged in a septate pattern as compared to the polyhedral manner in wild type cells. Further, cellulose deposition in fruiting bodies of these strains were checked by calcofluor staining and found less cellulose deposition in the septum of tctp – stalk. The spores formed by tctp OE cells were elliptical similar to Ax2 but tctp – spores were round in shape. cotA and cotB codes for major spore coat proteins, SP96 and SP70, respectively, that are necessary for the integrity of the spore coat. Altered levels of any of these coat proteins are responsible for defect in shape and size of spores formed. Since the shape of tctp – spore was largely altered, thus we checked the expression of spore coat genes cotA and cotB at the mRNA level by semi-quantitative RT-PCR in different stages of development. We observed the expression of cotA remained unaffected, while the transcript of cotB was down regulated in tctp – strain as compared to wild type. Collectively, the above results suggest that TCTP is required for timely development and appropriate formation of aggregates and fruiting bodies. FIGURE 4 Overexpression/deletion of tctp impaired development of D. discoideum. Comparative developmental profiles of Ax2, tctp OE, and tctp – strains developed at equal cell density and incubated at 22°C for development. White, red, and yellow arrows... FIGURE 5 TCTP regulates size of aggregates and fruiting bodies. Numbers and size of aggregates formed during development of Ax2, tctp OE, and tctp – strains. Image showing a single fruiting body. Stalk and... Aberrant fruiting body formation by mutant cells led us to ask whether spores formed by mutant cells were viable or not therefore, spore viability assay was performed. Wild type and tctp OE cells produced spores with average spore viability of 85.1 ± 1.7 and 65.3 ± 5.5%, respectively, whereas tctp – cells produced 27.7 ± 1.2% viable spores. Therefore, TCTP is essential for maintaining the viability of Dictyostelium spores. mRNA Expression Analysis of Early Developmentally Regulated Genes Initial development of Dictyostelium is mainly regulated by proteins involved in aggregation such as acaA, carA, cell adhesion molecules csA, and cadA. acaA and carA are major components for cAMP signal relay. Since, we observed delay in initiation of streaming we checked the mRNA expression of acaA and carA in Ax2, tctp OE, and tctp – strains. The transcript level of acaA remain unaffected while tctp OE showed reduced expression at 8 h. The mRNA expression of carA was significantly down regulated in tctp OE at 8 h and tctp – at 8, 12, and 16 h. Furthermore, we checked the mRNA expression of cell adhesion molecules csA and cadA that are required for aggregate formation in early development. cadA expression remained unchanged and csA level was significantly reduced in tctp OE cells resulting in larger aggregate formation. The cadA mRNA was down regulated and csA expression was up regulated at 12 h contributing to decrease cell-cell adhesion and stream break up in tctp – aggregates. The above data suggest that reduced acaA and/or carA may be responsible for the delay in development and altered cadA and/or csA expression contribute to altered aggregates formation in tctp OE and tctp – strains. Disruption of tctp Alters Spatial Cell Type Patterning Aberrant fruiting body formation by mutant cells incited us to study its role in cell type differentiation and patterning. The spatial distribution of prespore/prestalk cells in multicellular structures developed by wild type and tctp – cells was analyzed using lacZ reporter fused to promoter of prestalk/prespore specific marker genes such as ecmAO, ecmB, and pspA. The ecmAO/lacZ staining in wild type slugs was observed in the anterior region of slugs and in ALCs of posterior region while in tctp – mound it was found in anterior region but absent in ALCs of posterior region of slug. In tctp – early culminant and culminant, ecmAO/lacZ staining was absent in the lower cup, basal disk, and the stalk tube. In wild type, the ecmB/lacZ staining was observed in the central core region of prestalk cells of migrating slugs and distributed in the basal disk, upper and lower cups of fruiting bodies formed. In tctp – cells, ecmB/lacZ expression is precocious as found at mound stage when compared with the wild type. The ecmB/lacZ staining in tctp – early and late culminant was found similar to wild type. The pspA/lacZ staining was found in the prespore/spore region of the multicellular structures developed but the pspA/lacZ staining region was reduced in tctp – slugs, early and late culminant. Thus, we suggest that TCTP plays an important role in the distribution of cell types in multicellular structures. FIGURE 6 Spatial distribution of prestalk/prespore cells using cell type specific marker genes in Ax2 and tctp – cells. Wild type and tctp – cells expressing lacZ under the prestalk specific promoter ecmAO, ecmB,... tctp – Cells Exhibit More Tendency Toward Prestalk/Stalk Region To trace the fate of tctp – cells in a chimera, cell types mixing experiments were performed in which Ax2 and tctp – mixed in varying ratios of 9:1, 3:1, 1:1, and 1:3 and allowed to co-develop. Chimeras are the mixture of cells from two or more genetically different backgrounds. The differential presence of wild type and/or mutant cells in development and differentiation can be clearly observed by chimera study. Here, we wanted to observe the differential preference of mutant cells in presence of wild type cells. During early development, Ax2 and tctp – cells contribute equally in formation of aggregation centers of various chimeras. As the development proceed further, in chimera of 10% tctp – and 90% wild type cells, we observed that tctp – cells occupied the prestalk/stalk region while the Ax2 cells occupied the prespore/spore region. During slug formation, tctp – cells majorly occupied the anterior prestalk region, rear-guard and ALCs. At early culminant stage, tctp – cells occupied the anterior prestalk region, ALCs, and basal disk. At culminant, it majorly contributed to anterior tip region, upper and lower stalk portion and basal disk. This trend was observed as the percentage of tctp – cells increased further as it also occupied entire stalk and basal disk region. Next, the contribution of tctp – cells in spore formation was assessed and it exhibited decreased contribution in the prespore/spore region as compared to wild type cells. The contribution of tctp – cells in chimeras of varying proportion, i.e., 10, 25, 50, 75, and 90% of tctp – cells with Ax2 cells resulted in chimeric spore formation in which tctp – cells contributed only to 1.95 ± 0.35, 11 ± 1, 15 ± 1, 15.5 ± 0.5, and 49 ± 9%. Our results suggested that in chimeras with wild type cells, tctp – cells differentiated into prestalk/stalk cells preferentially, further suggesting that TCTP is a crucial component controlling the equilibrium between prestalk and prespore cell-types. FIGURE 7 tctp – cells exclusively occupied prestalk/stalk region in chimeras. RFP-tagged Ax2 cells and GFP tagged tctp – cells were mixed in varying proportions... FIGURE 8 Percentage spore count of Ax2 and tctp – cells in chimeric fruiting bodies. GFP tagged tctp – cells were mixed in various proportion as given above with RFP-tagged wild type cells and cell suspensions were allowed to co-develop. About... Discussion Translationally controlled tumor protein is ubiquitously expressed, highly conserved protein present in various type of cells and tissues implicating its essential role in normal cells. This conservation is also observed in the protozoans, such as Plasmodium, Toxoplasma, and Dictyostelium. It is involved in regulation of cell cycle, development, cytoskeleton, autophagy, and apoptosis. It plays a vital role in the growth and development of an organism by regulating the main physiological events. However, the biologic function of this protein in social amoeba such as Dictyostelium has never been investigated. Sequence analysis suggested that the key residues are conserved throughout the evolution. Previous reports demonstrated that Glutamate12 present in the loop region of Drosophila TCTP is an important residue for Rheb function that activates TOR but it is contradictory that TCTP has role in mTORC1 signaling pathway. Conservation of Glu12 in Dd TCTP thus open the possibility of Rheb function in lower eukaryotes. Phylogenetic studies suggested that Dd TCTP is highly conserved protein in eukaryotes. Residues important for microtubules and Ca 2+ binding are also conserved in different species studied. In contrary, Ser46 and Ser64 residues which phosphorylated by the Plk are not conserved in lower eukaryotes and found only in mammalian TCTP. Higher expression of Dd TCTP mRNA was observed in vegetative or initial stages, suggested that Dd TCTP may have a role in cell proliferation and cell division. As the complete knockout of tctp gene was lethal it limited the understanding of its functions. Here, we have studied the functions of TCTP during growth and development of D. discoideum with the help of making overexpressor and knockout strains. Overexpression and disruption of tctp in Dictyostelium displayed reduced cell proliferation. Previous studies also suggested that overexpression of TCTP resulted in inhibition of cell proliferation in cell lines. It has tubulin binding properties and found in association with tubulin or microtubules in cell cycle phases, its overexpression causes rearrangement of microtubules and stability. Disruption of tctp exhibited increased cell-size, which could be due to multi-nucleation. The size of organs or organism depends on the number and size of the cells that constitute them. Overexpression and disruption of tctp resulted in delayed aggregation stream formation and decelerated acaA and carA expression implying that an optimum level of TCTP is essential for normal early gene expression and early development. There are several genes whose timely expression and accurate level is important for regulation of early and late development such as overexpression or disruption of srsA exhibited delayed aggregation and reduced expression of acaA and carA along with aberrant fruiting body formation suggesting its role in the regulation of development. The genes acaA and cAR require to mediate the cAMP signaling during early development such as aggregation. During aggregation, Dictyostelium cells secretes and sense cAMP. ACA is a membrane protein which convert ATP to cAMP and cAMP get transported outside of the cells. Then cAMP bind with surrounding cells through cAR. Lacking of acaA and carA genes result abolish aggregation and delay in early development. tctp OE cells form less but large-sized aggregates while tctp ? cells form less but small-sized aggregates suggesting its involvement in regulation of aggregate size. Previously, various genes of Dictyostelium were reported in regulating aggregate size such as ctnA, srsA, and ampk. tctp OE cells form long slugs and fruiting bodies with long stalks and small sori that has elliptical spores whereas tctp – cells developed into fruiting bodies with small stalks and large sori having round spores as compared to wild type suggesting its role in terminal differentiation. The round spores formed by tctp – fruiting bodies could be due to decreased expression of spore coat protein, cotB that has been previously known to maintain integrity of spore. Overexpression of tctp resulted in long fruiting bodies while deletion of it resulted in small fruiting bodies suggesting the function of TCTP in cell type differentiation and patterning for maintenance and establishment of proper proportioning and patterning. Interestingly, spatial distribution of prespore/prestalk cell type specific markers were aberrant and mis-localized in the multicellular structures formed by tctp ? cells as compared to Ax2. The aberrant localization of ecmAO /lacZ in tctp – alluding its role in cell type patterning. Our results showed that TCTP is involved in cell type patterning and regulates the ratio of prestalk/prespore cells in multicellular structures formed. A number of genes have been shown to play a role in cell type proportioning and spatial patterning in Dictyostelium. In Mekk α null cells, there was a two-fold increase in pstO compartment and concomitant decrease in prespore region. Disruption of homeobox containing gene, warai led to doubling of pstO compartment. Overexpression of rZIP led to reduce prespore and enhanced prestalk expression. Furthermore, cell lineage study with the help of chimeric mixtures of Ax2 and tctp – in different proportions showed occupancy of both Ax2 and tctp – cells in different regions of multicellular structures developed. Chimeras are mixture of cells from two or more genetically different backgrounds. Our results clearly show the tendency of tctp null cells to form prestalk cells in presence of wild type. It occupied the prestalk regions like rear-guard cells, the anterior-like cells, lower cup, basal disk, and stalk regions. When the percentage of the null cells was increased in the chimeras, tctp ? cells could contribute to spore cells though the spore forming tendency by the null cells was very low. The spore count from various chimeric mixtures substantiated our results that tctp ? cells has less proclivity in spore formation in presence of wild type cells. The deletion of tctp allowed the cells to occupy the dying cell population suggesting that it may be required to regulate the spore differentiation. Thus, TCTP may contribute toward both spore and stalk cell differentiation but the question arises, how TCTP regulate spore/stalk differentiation in this organism? Whether TCTP is directly involved in regulating differentiation and patterning or it regulates expression of other genes involved in this process so, further studies are needed to be explored to clarify its exact role in cell type differentiation and patterning. Conclusion Our study suggests that TCTP regulates the cell size and cell proliferation in Dictyostelium. It is required for timely development and correct aggregation formation. Further, it is involved in maintaining prespore/prestalk or spore/stalk ratio and cell type differentiation and patterning. Data Availability Statement All datasets presented in this study are included in the article/ Supplementary Material. Author Contributions RK, RM, and SS conceived and designed the study, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. RK and RM performed the experiments. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript. Conflict of Interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Footnotes Funding. Partial funding from DST-PURSE, UGC-Networking, DRSI, and FIST-II are acknowledged. RK and RM acknowledge the Indian Council of Medical Research and the University Grant Commission, respectively, for research fellowships. The central instrument facility for imaging facilities and FACS analysis. Supplementary Material The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: Click here for additional data file. Article information Front Cell Dev Biol. 2020; 8: 742. Published online 2020 Aug 7. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.00742 PMCID: PMC7426469 PMID: 32850852 Rakesh Kumar, † ‡ Ranjana Maurya, † ‡ and Shweta Saran * † Cell and Developmental Biology Lab, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India Edited by: Chun Liang, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong Reviewed by: Andrew Burgess, Anzac Research Institute, Australia; Yibo Luo, The University of Toledo, United States *Correspondence: Shweta Saran, ni.ca.unj.liam@narass ; moc.liamtoh@naras_atewhs † ORCID: Rakesh Kumar, orcid.org/0000-0002-1272-7560 ; Ranjana Maurya, orcid.org/0000-0002-3339-1429 ; Shweta Saran, orcid.org/0000-0002-0238-498X ‡ These authors have contributed equally to this work This article was submitted to Cell Growth and Division, a section of the journal Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology Received 2020 Apr 17; Accepted 2020 Jul 16. Copyright © 2020 Kumar, Maurya and Saran. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License. The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author and the copyright owner are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. Articles from Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology are provided here courtesy of Frontiers Media SA 