 Aggregative multicellularity has evolved multiple times in diverse groups of eukaryotes, exemplified by the well-studied development of dictyostelid social amoebas, for example, Dictyostelium discoideum. However, it is still poorly understood why multicellularity emerged in these amoebas while the majority of other members of Amoebozoa are unicellular. Previously, a novel type of noncoding RNA, Class I RNAs, was identified in D. discoideum and shown to be important for normal multicellular development. Here, we investigated Class I RNA evolution and its connection to multicellular development. We identified a large number of new Class I RNA genes by constructing a covariance model combined with a scoring system based on conserved upstream sequences. Multiple genes were predicted in representatives of each major group of Dictyostelia and expression analysis confirmed that our search approach identifies expressed Class I RNA genes with high accuracy and sensitivity and that the RNAs are developmentally regulated. Further studies showed that Class I RNAs are ubiquitous in Dictyostelia and share highly conserved structure and sequence motifs. In addition, Class I RNA genes appear to be unique to dictyostelid social amoebas because they could not be identified in outgroup genomes, including their closest known relatives. Our results show that Class I RNA is an ancient class of ncRNAs, likely to have been present in the last common ancestor of Dictyostelia dating back at least 600 million years. Based on previous functional analyses and the presented evolutionary investigation, we hypothesize that Class I RNAs were involved in evolution of multicellularity in Dictyostelia. The role of RNA goes far beyond being an intermediate transmitter of information between DNA and protein in its role as messenger RNA. This has been appreciated for a long time for some noncoding RNAs, such as transfer RNAs, ribosomal RNAs, small nuclear RNAs, and small nucleolar RNAs. Today, we know that ncRNAs are involved in regulating most cellular processes, and the advent of high-throughput sequencing technologies have facilitated the identification of numerous different classes of ncRNAs. These regulatory RNAs vary greatly in size from 21–24 nt, for example, micro RNAs and small interfering RNAs, to several thousands of nucleotides, such as long noncoding RNAs. Several classes of ncRNAs are ubiquitously present in all domains of life, but others are specific to certain evolutionary linages, contributing to their specific characteristics. This can be exemplified by Metazoa, in which an increase in the number of ncRNAs, for example, miRNAs, is associated with increased organismal complexity and is believed to have been essential for the evolution of metazoan multicellularity. Multicellularity in plants and animals is achieved by clonal division and development originating from a single cell. This is in contrast to aggregative multicellularity, were cells stream together to form multicellular structures upon specific environmental changes. Aggregative multicellularity has evolved independently multiple times and is found both among eukaryotes and prokaryotes. The complexity of the aggregative multicellular life stages varies for different organisms, but they all share the transition from unicellularity to coordinated development upon environmental stress, such as starvation, which eventually leads to formation of fruiting bodies containing cysts or spores. Probably the most well-studied aggregative multicellularity is the development of the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum belonging to the group Dictyostelia within the supergroup Amoebozoa. Dictyostelia is a monophyletic group estimated to date back at least 600 million years, which is similar to the age of Metazoa. Dictyostelia is currently divided into four major groups in which all members share the ability to transition from uni- to multicellularity upon starvation. However, the complexity of the development and the morphology of the fruiting bodies varies between different dictyostelids, in which the highest level of multicellular complexity is found among Group 4 species, which includes D. discoideum. Recently a new taxonomy was proposed for many dictyostelids. As this new taxonomy has not yet been fully adopted by the research community, we choose to use the previous designations throughout this study. Well-annotated genome sequences are available for representative species of all four major groups of Dictyostelia, and multiple draft genome sequences are available for additional dictyostelids. This has allowed for comparative genomics, which has provided information about protein-coding genes that are important for the diversification of Dictyostelia from other amoebozoans. Comparison between genomes has also given insight into the genes required for the evolution of the distinct morphological characteristics, which define each group. However, evolution of complex traits such as multicellularity in Dictyostelia as well as other eukaryotic groups, cannot solely be explained by the appearance of novel genes but also relies on an increased ability to regulate preexisting genes and their products so that they can function in novel genetic networks. This is also supported by the major transcriptional reprogramming during multicellular development in D. discoideum. D. discoideum harbors several classes of developmentally regulated ncRNAs with regulatory potential, for example, microRNAs, long noncoding RNAs, and long antisense RNAs. In addition, a large part of the ncRNA repertoire of D. discoideum is constituted by Class I RNAs, originally identified in full-length cDNA libraries. So far, Class I RNAs have only been experimentally validated in D. discoideum, but they have also been computationally predicted in Dictyostelium purpureum. Both species belong to the same evolutionary group of Dictyostelia, that is, Group 4. In D. discoideum, Class I RNAs are 42–65 nt long and are expressed at high levels from a large number of genes. Members of Class I RNAs are characterized by a short stem structure, connecting the 5′ and 3′ ends, and a conserved 11-nt sequence motif adjacent to the 5′ part of the stem. The remainder of the RNA is variable both in sequence and structure. Class I RNAs mainly localize to the cytoplasm, where one of the RNAs has been shown to associate with four different proteins of which at least one, the RNA recognition motif containing protein Rnp1A, directly binds to the Class I RNA. Furthermore, the Class I RNAs appear to be involved in regulating multicellular development. This is based on the observations that Class I RNAs are developmentally regulated and that cells in which a single Class I RNA gene has been knocked out show aberrant early development. Figure 1. Search strategy and classification of Class I RNAs. Schematic representation of previously described D. discoideum Class I RNAs. Schematic phylogeny showing the location of Amoebozoa, a sister group to Obazoa, led us to hypothesize that this class of ncRNA may be a general effector for early development in all members of dictyostelid social amoebas. To investigate this, we used the complete and well-annotated genome sequences for representatives of each major group of Dictyostelia, that is, D. discoideum, D. purpureum, Dictyostelium lacteum, Polysphondylium pallidum, Acytostelium subglobosum, and Dictyostelium fasciculatum. Class I RNAs cannot be reliably detected by sequence searches alone owing to the high sequence variability. Therefore, we constructed a covariance model with Infernal in which both sequence and secondary structure information of 34 D. discoideum Class I RNAs were taken into account. The initial CM search of the six Dictyostelia genomes, followed by manual inspection of the results, indicated the presence of Class I RNAs in all major groups of Dictyostelia. These candidates scored ≥25 in the CM search and had the potential to form a short stem similar to the D. discoideum Class I RNAs. To improve the CM, these candidates were added to the CM followed by new genome searches. This process was repeated until no new candidates fulfilling the criteria were identified, after which a final search with increased sensitivity was performed. In total, 126 loci distributed over all major groups of Dictyostelia were identified, including 36 of the 40 published D. discoideum Class I RNAs and all the 26 previously predicted D. purpureum Class I loci. Refining the search for Class I RNA genes using conserved promoter elements Many D. discoideum ncRNA genes have an upstream putative promoter element, DUSE, which in most cases is situated ∼60 nt from the transcriptional start site. However, for D. discoideum Class I RNAs, DUSE is often found further upstream. In these cases, a TGTG box is located ∼60 nt downstream from DUSE, and the distance from the start of the mature RNA varies. Whether the TGTG box is an additional promotor element or the TSS of a precursor transcript is currently not known. DUSE appears to be conserved within Group 4 of Dictyostelia, because it was also identified ∼60 nt upstream of the predicted D. purpureum Class I RNAs. To investigate the presence of conserved upstream motifs in the rest of Dictyostelia, we searched for motifs within 150 nt upstream of all the 126 Class I RNA gene candidates identified in the CM search. By this approach, DUSE-like motifs could be identified ∼60 nt upstream of the predicted start for the majority of the Class I RNA gene candidates in all organisms. In contrast, the TGTG box was only found in a subset of the upstream sequences, all of which belonged to D. discoideum Class I RNA genes. Because both sequence and distance of DUSE appeared to be conserved in all major groups of Dictyostelia, we used this information to create a scoring system, called Class I classifier, anticipating accurate prediction of expressed Class I RNA genes. First the score produced by the CM search was used, and all candidates with a score ≥ 15 were included to capture more divergent Class I RNA genes. Next, we scored the presence and location of DUSE and TGTG box within 150 nt upstream of the candidates identified in the CM search based on the motif identification program FIMO. Lack of DUSE and/or noncanonical distance from predicted TSS or TGTG box was penalized with negative scores. Taken together, a total score of 32 could be achieved if a high-scoring DUSE was identified at the predicted distance upstream of a candidate Class I RNA gene with the lowest allowed Infernal score. Based on this, all candidates scoring 32 or higher were classified as Class I RNA loci. Using this approach, we predicted 18–39 Class I RNAs for each of the six dictyostelids investigated. Class I RNAs of predicted sizes are expressed at high levels in all four groups of Dictyostelia Based on the Class I classifier, we predicted Class I RNA genes in all dictyostelids included in the CM build. But are all these genes really expressed and how accurate are the size predictions? From our previous studies, we know that Class I RNAs in D. discoideum are expressed at high levels at vegetative growth and are readily detected by northern blot. Hence, we used the same approach to validate a subset of randomly chosen candidates with a classifier score ≥ 32 in D. purpureum, D. lacteum, P. pallidum, A. subglobosum, and D. fasciculatum. RNA was prepared from vegetative growing amoebas, and specific Class I RNAs were analyzed by northern blot. For D. purpureum, we probed for DpuR-7, predicted to be 54 nt long, resulting in a strong signal. In addition, we designed two probes predicted to recognize six different 85-nt-long RNAs and the majority of Class I RNAs, respectively. As expected, probing for DpuR-X resulted in one band; for DpuR-Y, we could detect several distinct bands within the expected size range. In D. fasciculatum, we probed for one Class I RNA predicted to be 62 nt long while at least two candidates were probed for in the other organisms, that is, D. lacteum : DlaR-1 and DlaR-5 ; P. pallidum : PpaR-1/2 and PpaR-9 ; and A. subglobosum : AsuR-13/14 and AsuR-10. Distinct bands were detected for each Class I RNA candidate and the sizes matched the predictions well although the northern results often indicated that the RNAs were a few nucleotides longer than predicted. The larger bands observed for AsuR-13/14 and PpaR-9 are likely cross hybridizations to longer Class I RNAs. Taken together, the results confirm that Class I RNAs are conserved and expressed in all four groups of Dictyostelia social amoebas. Figure 2. Expression of predicted Class I RNA genes. Northern blot validation of different Class I RNAs from D. purpureum, D. lacteum, D. fasciculatum, A. subglobosum, and P. pallidum. The number after the species-specific... Classifier accurately predicts expressed Class I RNAs in all major groups of Dictyostelia Next, we performed RNA-seq on D. discoideum, D. lacteum, P. pallidum, and D. fasciculatum representing each major group of Dictyostelia. RNA was prepared from growing cells as well as two multicellular life stages, that is, mound and slug/finger stages, to increase our chances to also detect Class I RNAs that are only expressed at specific life stages. Expression was evaluated based on the read count and coverage over all loci identified in the CM search as exemplified in Supplemental Figure S2. RNA-seq confirmed expression for almost all Class I RNA candidates identified by the classifier both during vegetative growth and development. The expression data also allowed us to investigate sensitivity and specificity of our computational search approaches. For this, we calculated receiver operating characteristic curves to evaluate the classifier performance and investigate if it improves Class I RNA identification compared to CM search alone. ROC curves were generated for D. discoideum, D. lacteum, P. pallidum, and D. fasciculatum individually as well as for the pooled data based on the RNA-seq validation and either CM search score or classifier score. Evaluation of the two search approaches show an increase in both sensitivity and accuracy of prediction for the classifier, that is, when the promoter presence and distance were included in the classification of Class I RNA gene candidates. To summarize, the classifier reliably detects expressed Class I RNAs in all the tested dictyostelids with almost no false positives. Conserved features of Dictyostelia Class I RNA The wealth of newly identified Class I RNA genes in six evolutionarily separated dictyostelids allowed us to construct a general/unifying picture of Class I RNAs. This will also be of importance when searching for Class I RNA genes in other species to track down the birth of this class of ncRNAs in evolution. Class I transcription is dependent on DUSE Both the sequence of DUSE and its upstream location is highly conserved in all of the analyzed amoebas. In Groups 1 and 4 dictyostelids, DUSE contains three consecutive C residues, whereas two consecutive Cs are found in the majority of the DUSE of A. subglobosum and D. lacteum and in all P. pallidum DUSE. The RNA-seq data strongly indicate that this putative promoter element is essential for transcription because it is found in front of all expressed Class I RNA genes. Further strengthening its importance is the observation that high-scoring Class I RNAs lacking DUSE at the correct upstream location are not expressed. The TGTG box, situated 60 nt downstream from the DUSE and upstream of the predicted TSS, is only found in D. discoideum, suggesting that this is a rather late addition in the evolution of Class I RNA genes. Figure 3. Conserved characteristics of Class I RNAs. Sequence logo representing species-specific alignments of conserved features of Class I RNA loci. DUSE indicates the putative promoter element, and the 5′ and 3′ stem sequences of the conserved... 5′ and 3′ ends of Class I RNAs are conserved The RNA-seq analyses showed that the D. discoideum Class I RNAs started at the predicted G residue, but the majority of Groups 1–3 Class I RNAs started 1–2 nt upstream of the conserved G. When we compared all loci, we noticed that the 2 nt preceding the completely conserved G residue, are highly conserved A-residues in all six species investigated. The difference in 5′ ends of the mature Class I RNAs indicates that either transcription initiation or 5′ processing of Class I RNAs differ between Group 4 species and species belonging to the other groups of Dictyostelia. Also, the very 3′ end of Class I RNAs is highly similar with an almost perfectly conserved CTGT sequence in the genomic loci. The coverage from the RNA-seq data indicates that these 4 nt are transcribed so that the CUGU sequence is included in the mature Class I RNA, where the C residue always has base-pairing potential with the conserved 5′ G residue. The RNA-seq coverage agrees with the slightly longer than predicted lengths of Class I RNAs observed by northern blot. Class I RNA GC content, size, sequence motif, and stem structure are conserved throughout Dictyostelia Comparison of all identified Class I RNAs showed that both Class I RNA length and GC content are highly conserved. The stable GC content of Class I RNAs is remarkable considering the variation in overall genome GC content for these six dictyostelids. In spite of these conserved features and specific sequence motifs discussed above and later, the overall sequence variability of Class I RNAs is extensive both within and between species. Only a few examples of loci with identical sequences are found within D. discoideum, D. purpureum, and P. pallidum, respectively. No Class I genes with identical sequences were found between these six analyzed species. In contrast to the overall variable sequences, the 11 nt sequence motif identified among the D. discoideum Class I RNAs is highly conserved both within and between all six dictyostelids. The motif is nearly perfectly conserved within Group 4, whereas some positions of the motif are variable in Groups 1–3. However, T, C, C, A, and A at position 3, 6, 9, 10, and 11 are almost identical between all the Class I RNA genes regardless of species. Other nucleotides are well conserved in most of the evolutionary groups but not all. The sequence motif does not seem to extensively engage in base-pairing because computational prediction indicates that the conserved motif is less structured compared to the full-length RNA in most of the organisms. However, the first 5′ nucleotide of the motif is often part of the stem structure, but the base-pairing potential for the remainder of the sequence drops in a pattern similar for all six dictyostelids. Another distinct feature common to all D. discoideum Class I RNAs is the short stem structure, connecting the 5′ and 3′ ends of the RNA. This stem is predicted to be present in all Class I RNAs in all six species. However, in contrast to the conserved sequence motif, the nucleotide sequence of the stem structure has changed substantially during Dictyostelia evolution. Nevertheless, the base-pairing potential is retained, indicating that it is the structure rather than sequence that is crucial for function. This is further supported by the high number of compensatory mutations found in the predicted stem of Class I RNAs within each species. In spite of the sequence variation in the stems, the 5′-most G is completely conserved within all Class I RNAs from all six dictyostelids representing each evolutionary group of Dictyostelia. The predicted base-paired structure of the stem and the unstructured feature of the conserved sequence motif correspond well with previous in vitro probing results of one Class I RNA, DdR-21, from D. discoideum. Taken together, Class I GC content, length, stem structure, and 11-nt motif are highly conserved in all evolutionary groups of Dictyostelia, indicating that these parts are essential for Class I RNA function. Class I RNAs are developmentally regulated and highly conserved throughout Dictyostelia We knew from our previous work that D. discoideum Class I RNAs are developmentally regulated and that cells in which the gene for the Class I RNA DdR-21 has been disrupted are disturbed in early development, leading to more and smaller fruiting bodies compared to wild-type cells. To investigate if the developmental regulation is conserved also in other dictyostelids, we performed principal component analysis of Class I expression in D. discoideum, P. pallidum, and D. fasciculatum based on the RNA-seq data. D. lacteum was not included in this analysis because only one replicate per time point was available. The PCA plots show developmental regulation of Class I RNAs in all three amoebas as the different life stages are clearly separated. Taken together, this suggests a role for Class I RNAs in regulating multicellular development in Dictyostelia. If the prediction that Class I RNAs are involved in and important for multicellular development holds true, these ncRNAs should be present in all dictyostelids. To analyze this, we used the Class I classifier to investigate the presence of Class I RNA genes in 10 additional social amoebas genome sequences. Class I RNA genes were detected in all species, 9–31 genes in each genome, of which the great majority passed manual curation based on the ability to form a short stem connecting the 5′ and 3′ end. It should be noted that these are draft genome sequences of varying degree of completeness. Comparison of all curated loci reinforced the previously identified conserved Class I features, that is, the high sequence conservation of the terminal residues and the 11-nt motif as well as the short stem where structure but not sequence is preserved. In addition, presence of DUSE ∼60 nt upstream of the majority of the identified Class I RNA genes strongly suggests that expressed Class I RNAs exist in all members of Dictyostelia. The TGTG box, previously only found upstream of D. discoideum Class I RNA loci, was identified in four additional genomes all belonging to Group 4 or the P. violaceum complex, strengthening the hypothesis that this motif emerged rather late in Class I evolution. In addition, both Class I RNA lengths and GC content are conserved also when considering all species. Taken together, this proves the existence and emphasizes the importance of Class I RNA genes throughout the evolution of Dictyostelia social amoebas. We have named all curated Class I RNA genes according to the naming convention previously defined for D. discoideum Class I RNA genes. Figure 4. Class I RNAs are ubiquitous in and restricted to dictyostelid social amoebas. Class I RNA loci were searched for in the genomes of 16 different Dictyostelia. The number of hits identified by the classifier is indicated... Genomic distribution of Class I RNA genes In D. discoideum, all Class I RNA genes are located in intergenic regions and frequently found in clusters of two or more genes. The intergenic location also applies to the other dictyostelid species and clusters of at least two Class I RNA genes are present in all analyzed Dictyostelia genomes, except for D. citrinum. The absence of Class I RNA gene clusters in D. citrinum is likely a consequence of the quality of the genome assembly, which is also reflected in the low number of identified Class I RNA genes. Although many Class I RNA genes cluster together, they rarely have identical sequences. Only a few species-specific identical Class I RNAs were found in D. polycephalum, P. violaceum, D. purpureum, P. pallidum, and D. discoideum, where in the latter two the identical genes are located in clusters. Hence, copies of identical Class I RNA genes are present within different dictyostelid, but are there also Class I RNAs that are identical between two different species? The only examples found were two Class I RNA loci shared between the Group 4 species D. discoideum and D. firmibasis. To explore the origin of Class I RNAs further, we used the most well-annotated genomes to search for shared synteny by identifying orthologous genes in the 10-kb region flanking each Class I RNA locus. Using this approach, we did not identify any strong evidence for shared synteny for Class I RNA genes between the different groups of Dictyostelia. Next, we investigated if shared synteny could be detected within Group 4 only by performing the same search using the genomes of D. discoideum, D. purpureum, and D. firmibasis. Almost half of the Class I RNAs in D. firmibasis appear to share synteny with D. discoideum Class I RNAs, supported by several protein gene orthologs, but no well-supported examples were found for D. purpureum. For the identical Class I RNA genes in D. discoideum and D. firmibasis, shared synteny was detected for DfiR-4 and DdR-47. Shared synteny between the other two identical Class I RNAs, DfiR-12 and DdR-50, could not be properly assessed because of the lack of available genome sequence surrounding DfiR-12. Class I RNAs are unique to dictyostelid social amoebas The omnipresence of Class I RNAs within Dictyostelia, their developmental regulation, as well as the aberrant development of D. discoideum cells lacking DdR-21 led us to hypothesize that this class of ncRNAs might be involved in the evolution of Dictyostelia aggregative multicellularity. To investigate this further, we searched for Class I RNA genes in genomes of unicellular amoebas and amoebas able to form unicellular fruiting bodies. Furthermore, we explored representative genomes of other major eukaryotic groups, that is, Archaeplastida and Opisthokonta. We also chose to include the proteobacteria Myxococcus xanthus because these bacteria show aggregative multicellularity, which in many aspects are analogous to Dictyostelia multicellularity. We searched these genomes using the same successful approaches as for Dictyostelia, that is, using the Class I classifier, based on promoter characteristics combined with RNA structure and sequence, as well as CM search alone. Only a few candidates were identified with the Class I classifier. This was anticipated because we did not expect the DUSE sequence or its distance to the TSS to be conserved outside Dictyostelia. The Infernal search resulted in a slightly higher number of Class I RNA gene candidates. However, manual inspection revealed that the candidates are unlikely to represent true Class I RNA genes because they were few in numbers and did not share characteristics, such as conserved 5′ and 3′ ends and presence of conserved sequence motif. Taken together, no Class I RNA genes were identified outside Dictyostelia, suggesting that this class of ncRNAs is unique to dictyostelid social amoebas and important for their aggregative multicellularity. Conserved Class I RNA interacting protein Class I RNAs are conserved throughout the evolution of Dictyostelia but does this also apply to proteins associated with this class of ncRNA? We previously identified four Class I RNA interacting proteins in D. discoideum. One of these, Rnp1A, harbors two RNA recognition motifs and binds directly to the Class I RNA DdR-21. Orthologs for rnp1A were found in all Dictyostelia genomes investigated except for D. citrinum, likely owing to the quality of the genome assembly. Furthermore, mRNA-seq data from D. discoideum as well as D. lacteum, P. pallidum, and D. fasciculatum showed that rnp1A gene expression during early development is regulated in a way similar to that of Class I RNAs in D. discoideum. The majority of the orthologs are predicted to encode an approximately 300 amino acids long protein in which the N- and C-terminal sequences contain RRMs, but the central part of the protein is less conserved. We do not know how Class I RNA and Rnp1A functionally interact; despite several efforts by us and others, all attempts to generate a rnp1A knockout strain in D. discoideum have been unsuccessful, indicating that Rnp1A is essential. Discussion The development of high-throughput sequencing techniques has led to the discovery of numerous ncRNAs. In particular, it has facilitated the identification of small and long ncRNAs. However, “midsized” ncRNA have largely been overlooked partly because of the size selection commonly carried out before sequencing to enrich for small RNAs and to avoid abundant RNAs such as rRNAs and tRNAs or fragments thereof. Here, we used genome analyses in combination with expression validation to prove the existence of a class of midsized ncRNAs, Class I RNAs, in a large number of dictyostelid social amoeba. Our analysis indicates that Class I RNAs were present in the last common ancestor of Dictyostelia, dating back at least 600 million years, and we hypothesize that they were involved in the transition from unicellular to multicellular life. Class I RNAs play an important role in D. discoideum, as suggested by, for example, the large number of highly expressed genes and the requirement for the Class I RNA DdR-21 for normal multicellular development. This class of ncRNAs was initially discovered by sequencing cDNA libraries of full-length RNA sized 50–150 nt. Later, different bioinformatic approaches were used to predict Class I RNA genes. Fragrep, a tool that predicts ncRNAs based on sequence motifs separated by a variable region, identified 45 Class I RNA candidate genes in D. discoideum, of which 34 had been previously experimentally validated. Another method, which searched for enriched 8-mers in the genome sequence downstream from the putative promoter element DUSE, predicted 26 Class I RNA genes in another Group 4 dictyostelid, D. purpureum. To investigate if Class I RNAs are present in all dictyostelids as well as in other organisms outside Dictyostelia, we first constructed a Class I RNA covariance model, which uses conserved sequence and structure motifs to predict Class I RNA genes. To increase the specificity and sensitivity, we created a classifier that evaluates the candidates identified with the covariance model based on the presence of DUSE at the correct distance from TSS or from the TGTG box. With this approach, we predicted a large number of Class I RNA genes in all available genomes of Dictyostelia. Northern blot and RNAs-seq analyses of selected dictyostelids confirmed expression of the great majority of the predicted Class I RNA genes. The high number of novel Class I RNA loci identified in Dictyostelia enabled comparative studies, which provides information on their key features. The short stem connecting the 5′ and 3′ ends of mature Class I RNA is conserved. Furthermore, the sequence variability of the stem between organisms but also the high number of compensatory mutations within each species strongly suggest that it is the structure rather than sequence that is important for function. Flanking the stem structure are highly conserved nucleotides constituting the start, AAG, and end, CUGU, of the Class I RNAs. In contrast to other dictyostelids, Class I RNAs in D. discoideum almost always start with the G residue. Another conserved feature is the ∼11-nt motif present adjacent to the 5′ part of the stem structure. Although some of the nucleotides in this motif vary within and in between organisms, several residues are nearly perfectly conserved. The putative promoter motif, DUSE, situated ∼60 nt upstream of the start of transcription is highly conserved. Based on studies of spliceosomal RNAs in D. discoideum, we previously showed that DUSE is associated with genes transcribed by both RNA polymerase II and III. However, the Class I RNA genes may be transcribed by Pol III because the canonical Pol III termination signal is present downstream from many Class I RNAs. Taken together, we conclude that Class I RNAs were present in the last common ancestor of Dictyostelia. Our data also strongly suggest that the putative promoter element DUSE was present 60 nt upstream of the ancestral Class I RNA gene and that the element was required for expression of the gene. We also conclude that the ancient Class I RNA was characterized by a short stem structure and an 11-nt sequence motif, where at least five of the positions were identical to the corresponding nucleotides in extant Class I RNAs. Owing to the high sequence and structure variability of the region between the 11-nt motif and the start of the 3′ stem in identified Class I RNAs, we cannot resolve this part of the ancestral sequence. However, the total length of the mature RNA was probably ∼60 nt long. Figure 5. Ancestral Class I RNA and conserved key features. Schematic representation of the ancestral Class I RNA transcript. The putative promoter element DUSE and its distance to the Class I RNA gene is indicated below the Class I RNA structure. Strongly... Next, we asked if Class I RNAs are specific to Dictyostelia or if these ncRNAs are present also in other organisms. We applied our search approaches on different genomes from a battery of evolutionary diverse organisms representing species with strict unicellular lifestyles as well as those that go through different kinds of multicellular development. We did not find any Class I RNA genes in these organisms, not even in the closest unicellular relatives Physarum polycephalum, Protostelium mycophagum, or Protostelium fungivorum. This suggests that these ncRNAs are restricted to dictyostelid social amoebas, were present in the last common ancestor of Dictyostelia, and may have played a role in the transition from unicellular life to aggregative multicellularity. This is further supported by the developmental regulation of Class I RNAs, and that at least one member, DdR-21, is required for normal development. In D. discoideum, transition from unicellular growth to multicellular development is associated with large transcriptional reprogramming of protein-coding genes, and different cell types can be separated based on the transcriptional signatures of individual cells. Furthermore, the majority of the protein-coding genes that are essential for multicellular development in D. discoideum are also present in strictly unicellular amoebas. Hence, temporal and spatial regulation of the expression of these genes has played a major role in the evolution of multicellular development. Maybe Class I RNAs can rewire gene expression of genes present in unicellular organisms to create new networks adapted for development. This could be orchestrated by Class I RNA binding directly to target mRNAs to regulate gene expression. Another possibility would be that Class I RNAs regulate development by binding to proteins that directly or indirectly control development, maybe by acting as a molecular sponge, where specific proteins are sequestered by Class I RNAs. This could buffer the action of these proteins. Perhaps the observed down-regulation of Class I RNAs during development lead to an increase in free active proteins important for multicellular development. Rnp1A would be a candidate for this kind of regulation because Rnp1A directly interacts with Class I RNAs, at least with the tested DdR-21, in D. discoideum. As expected for a protein important for multicellular development of social amoebas, orthologs of the rnp1A gene could be identified in all analyzed dictyostelids with genome assemblies of good quality. Putative rnp1A orthologs were identified when genomes of organisms outside Dictyostelia were included in the search. The tendency to differentially regulate genes to create new functions is seen also in metazoan evolution, where an increase in regulatory miRNAs is correlated with increased organismal complexity. D. discoideum is one of the few organisms outside animals and land plants where miRNAs have been identified. Whether miRNAs, similar to Class I RNAs, are present in other dictyostelids is currently being investigated. In Dictyostelia, the most complex multicellularity is found within Group 4, which is exemplified by regulated proportions of specialized cell types and a migrating slug stage. In analogy to miRNA expansion in complex animals, the number of expressed Class I RNA genes is correlated with Dictyostelia complexity, in which Group 4 has the largest number of Class I RNA genes. In addition, RNA-seq data indicate that Class I RNAs are expressed at higher levels in Group 4, further strengthening that Class I RNAs are involved in increased organismal complexity. This enhanced expression appears to be connected to the TGTG box between DUSE and the TSS. So far, the TGTG box has only been identified in Class I RNA loci in species belonging to Group 4 and P. violaceum complex. Thus, this motif is likely a rather late addition in the evolution of Class I RNAs. It is currently not known if the second motif is actually a promoter element or the TSS of a longer precursor that is processed to the mature RNA. In either case, the TGTG box is associated with Class I RNA genes in social amoebas with higher levels of complexity as compared to other dictyostelids and appears to add another layer of regulation to Class I RNA expression. The emergence of the TGTG box somewhere after the split of Groups 3 and 4 and its connection to increased phenotypic complexity seen in Group 4 dictyostelids is somewhat analogous to changes in cis -regulatory elements, such as enhancers, and morphological evolution in animals. Although some motifs are highly conserved within all Class I RNAs, conservation of complete Class I RNA genes are rare. Only a few examples of identical loci within the same genome are found in a handful of dictyostelids and only two identical Class I RNAs shared by two different species were identified, that is, the Group 4 dictyostelids D. discoideum and D. firmibasis. In D. discoideum and P. pallidum, many Class I RNA genes are situated in larger clusters, and it is within these clusters where the species-specific identical Class I RNA genes are found, perhaps indicating expansion of Class I RNA genes by duplication. The snRNA genes in D. discoideum are organized in a similar way in that closely related genes often are found in pairs situated very close together. However, in general the Class I RNA genes are spread out in the genomes of the different dictyostelids. Hence, the low occurrence of shared synteny, low overall sequence conservation, and different number of loci in different organisms suggest that the expansion of Class I RNAs mainly occurred after speciation. In conclusion, we have identified Class I RNAs in 16 different dictyostelids and validated their expression in representatives of each major group of Dictyostelia dating back approximately 600 million years. Despite the large evolutionary distances, Class I RNA genes share upstream motifs, and the mature RNAs have several characteristics in common, that is, short stem, conserved sequence motif, and highly conserved 5′ and 3′ ends. In addition, the D. discoideum Class I RNA interacting protein Rnp1A is conserved throughout Dictyostelia. Although Class I RNAs are present in all dictyostelids investigated, no evidence was found for this class of RNAs in any other organism, including the closest sequenced true unicellular relatives P. polycephalum, P. mycophagum, and P. fungivorum. Taken together, experimental data show that Class I RNAs are developmentally regulated, and we previously showed that depletion of Class I RNA DdR-21 leads to aberrant early multicellular development. These observations, together with the finding that Class I RNA genes are present in all dictyostelids investigated, possibly implies that this class of RNA was involved in the evolution of multicellularity in Dictyostelia. Methods RNA isolation and northern blot The following strains were used for northern blot validation of Class I expression: D. discoideum AX2, D. purpureum WS321, P. pallidum PN500, D. lacteum Konijn, D. fasciculatum SH3, A. subglobosum LB1. All strains, except D. discoideum, were kindly provided by Dr. Maria Romeralo and Professor Sandra Baldauf. Total RNA was extracted with TRIzol from cells grown in association with Klebsiella aerogenes on non-nutrient agar. Northern blots were performed as previously described. Briefly, 10 µg total RNA was separated on 8% PAGE/7 M Urea and electroblotted to Hybond N+ nylon membranes. After UV cross-linking, immobilized RNA was hybridized with 32 P-labeled oligonucleotides in Church buffer overnight at 42°C. Signals were analyzed with a Personal Molecular Imager normally after a few hours’ exposure. Membranes analyzed more than once were stripped with 0.1 × SSC/1% SDS buffer for 1 h at 95°C and controlled for residual signal before reprobing. Oligonucleotide sequences are provided in Supplemental Table S6. RNA-seq validation Strain growth and RNA extraction for RNA-seq have been described previously. For each strain, RNA was prepared from growing cells and two multicellular developmental stages: aggregates and tipped aggregates/fingers. TruSeq small RNA Sample Preparation kit was used to prepare sequencing libraries from 1 µg total RNA. The library preparation was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol in which cDNA representing 18–70 nt RNA were isolated. Single-read 50-bp sequencing was performed using v4 sequencing chemistry on an Illumina HiSeq 2500. To reduce influence of degradation products, only full-length 50-bp reads were mapped with Bowtie allowing for one mismatch and counted with featureCounts. Read coverage over Class I candidate loci were calculated with BEDTools genomecov v. 2.26.0. Class I RNAs were considered to be validated by RNA-seq if the read coverage indicated a distinct 5′ end and reads specifically matched the predicted loci, that is, did not appear to be part of a considerably longer transcript. Principal component analyses were performed using DESeq2. ROC plot evaluation of Class I prediction was performed using pROC package in R. Strains and genomic resources Strain names and accession numbers for genomic sequences are listed in Supplemental Table S1. Identification and analyses of Class I RNAs Of the 40 D. discoideum Class I RNAs annotated previous to this study, six were excluded from the model build because they represented truncated fragments or lacked the canonical features such as the stem or conserved sequence motif. The remaining 34 were aligned with MAFFT v7.407 using the ginsi setting. Consensus structure for the alignment was predicted with RNAalifold 2.3.3 using the -T 22 option to account for the optimal growing temperature of the amoebas. Alignment and consensus structure was combined to a Stockholm alignment file, and a covariance model was created with Infernal 1.1.2. Infernal was then used to search the genomes of D. discoideum, D. purpureum, D. lacteum, P. pallidum, A. subglobosum, and D. fasciculatum using default settings, and candidates with a score ≥ 25 were added to the alignment using MAFFT. The new alignment was manually curated and used to predict consensus structure, create a new covariance model, and perform a new search in the same genomes. This procedure was iterated six times, that is, until no new candidates with an Infernal score ≥ 25 were identified. Enriched sequence motifs were identified up to 150 nt upstream of identified candidates with MEME v. 5.0.3. For final Class I identification, Infernal searches were performed with increased sensitivity, and all candidates scoring 15 or higher were kept. The candidates were then evaluated based on the presence of DUSE and TGTG box in the 150 nt preceding the predicted start of transcription using FIMO v. 5.0.3. Infernal score, FIMO motif score, and a motif distance score were then added to a total score. Missing DUSE or incorrect distance was penalized with −10 or −5, respectively. If a total score of 32 was achieved, the candidate was considered likely to be an expressed true Class I RNA and kept for further analyses. Representative sequence logos of manually curated sequence alignments were created with WebLogo 3. For each Class I RNA, a maximum expected accuracy secondary structure was predicted with RNAfold. Based on this, the percentages of predicted base-pairing were calculated and plotted for both the entire Class I RNA as well as the 11-nt motif region. Class I RNA GC content, lengths, and genomic distribution were analyzed and plotted with in-house Python scripts. Ortholog identification and shared synteny search For Dictyostelia species lacking genome annotations, gene prediction was performed with Gene id v. 1.4 using the Dictyostelium parameter file. Ortholog identification was performed using OrthoFinder v. 2.3.3. Protein domain architectures for rnp1A orthologs were analyzed with hmmscan using the HMMER web interface. Ortholog information for D. discoideum, D. firmibasis, D. lacteum, P. pallidum, A. subglobosum, and D. fasciculatum was used to investigate shared synteny for Class I RNA loci. For each Class I RNA locus, gene information within a 10-kb flanking region was retrieved. Next, we searched for orthologs of these genes in the other organisms included in the search. If a Class I RNA was found within 10 kb of an orthologous gene in another organism, the genomic context was drawn and manually inspected to determine the level of shared synteny. Data access The RNA-seq data generated in this study have been submitted to the NCBI BioProject database under accession number PRJNA638268. Python scripts necessary to reproduce analyses and plots are available at GitHub and in Supplemental Code together with example files. An alignment of RNAs identified in this study have been submitted to Rfam for an update of the Class I RNA family. Competing interest statement The authors declare no competing interests. Supplementary Material Supplemental Material: Click here to view. 