 Open in a separate window Highlights • We identify a new regulator that shapes macropinocytic and phagocytic cups • Shaping protrusions into cups requires differential regulation of Ras and Rac • Cups are organized by integrating interactions with phospholipids and multiple GTPases • Defective cup formation causes a target shape-specific defect in phagocytosis Forming cup-shaped protrusions allows cells to engulf extracellular fluid and particles by macropinocytosis and phagocytosis, respectively. Buckley et al. identify a new regulator that differentially regulates small GTPases to generate the cup shape. They propose a model whereby this coordinates the shape and allows cells to engulf different shapes. Introduction The capture and engulfment of extracellular material serves a number of important cellular functions. While the clearance of pathogenic microbes or apoptotic cells by phagocytic immune cells is best understood, the engulfment of fluid by the related process of macropinocytosis also plays important functions by allowing cells to capture antigens or other factors from their environment such as nutrients to support growth. To capture extracellular fluid or particulate material, cells must encircle and isolate their target within a vesicle. This can be achieved by several mechanisms, but the mechanism that is best understood and evolutionarily widespread involves the extension of a circular cup- or ruffle-shaped protrusion from the cell surface to enwrap and internalize the target. Many components of cup formation have been identified, but how they are coordinated in space and time is poorly understood. Here, we describe a novel mechanism used by the amoebae Dictyostelium discoideum to integrate different signaling elements and form complex cup-shaped protrusions that efficiently mediate engulfment. Macropinocytic and phagocytic protrusions are formed by localized actin polymerization at the plasma membrane, using much of the same machinery that generates pseudopods and lamellipodia during cell migration. While migratory protrusions only need the cell to define a simple patch of actin polymerization, forming a cup requires a higher level of organization, with the protrusive activity restricted to a ring encircling a static interior domain. During phagocytosis, this is aided by the presence of a particle to act as a physical scaffold and locally activate receptors. These interactions are proposed to guide engulfment by a zippering mechanism. However, macropinocytic cups self-organize with an almost identical structure in the absence of any external spatial cues. Cup formation can therefore occur spontaneously by the intrinsic dynamics of the underlying signaling. Recent studies in Dictyostelium proposed a model whereby the cup interior is defined by spontaneous localized activation of the small GTPase Ras and consequent accumulation of the phospholipid PIP 3. This patch appears to restrict actin polymerization to its periphery to create a protrusive ring. How this is achieved is unknown, but in at least Dictyostelium, it may depend on the activity of the PIP 3 -activated protein kinase B/Akt. Both active Ras and PIP 3 also accumulate at cups in mammalian cells, and Ras activation is sufficient to drive ruffling and macropinocytosis in cancer cells. PI3K inhibition also completely blocks macropinocytosis and phagocytosis of large particles by macrophages. Ras and PIP 3 therefore play a general role in macropinosome and phagosome organization across evolution. Other small GTPases are also involved in cup formation. Active Rac1 overlaps with Ras activity in the cup interior in both macrophages and Dictyostelium. Rac1 is a direct activator of the SCAR/WAVE complex, which drives activation of actin polymerization via the ARP2/3 complex. Consistent with this, Rac1 is required for macropinosome formation in dendritic cells, and optogenetic Rac1 activation is sufficient to drive ruffling and macropinocytosis in macrophages. Expression of constitutively active Rac1 also leads to excessive actin at macropinocytic cups in Dictyostelium. Therefore, while Ras appears to define the cup interior, Rac1 is important for regulating actin protrusions, as it is does during cell migration. The presence of active Rac1 throughout the cup interior is at odds with the tightly restricted SCAR/WAVE activity and protrusion at the extending rim. Therefore, further layer of regulation must exist. This is likely provided by the small GTPase CDC42 that is also required for Fc-γ-receptor-mediated phagocytosis and collaborates with Rac1 during engulfment of large particles. In contrast to Rac1, active CDC42 is restricted to the protrusive cup rim in macrophages indicating differential regulation and functionality. In Dictyostelium however, no clear CDC42 ortholog has been identified. Cup formation requires integrated spatio-temporal control over multiple GTPases. This must be able to self-organize in the absence of external cues during macropinocytosis and robust enough to phagocytose physiological targets of varying size and shape. Small GTPase activity is controlled by a large family of proteins such as GTPase exchange factors, which promote the GTP-bound active form, and GTPase activating proteins, which stimulate hydrolysis and transition to a GDP-bound inactive state. In this study, we characterize a previously unstudied dual GEF- and GAP-domain-containing protein in Dictyostelium that integrates Ras, Rac, and lipid signaling. This provides a mechanism to coordinate the cup interior with the protrusive rim, allowing efficient macropinosome formation and the engulfment of diverse bacteria of differing geometry. Results Identification of a Novel BAR-Domain-Containing Protein Recruited to Cups Our initial hypothesis was that cells may use the different membrane curvature at the protrusive rim compared to the cup base to recognize and differentially regulate cup shape. Membrane curvature can recruit proteins containing BAR domains. To identify candidates involved in macropinocytosis, we searched the Dictyostelium genome for BAR domain-containing proteins. Excluding proteins of known localization or function, we systematically cloned each candidate and expressed them as both N- and C-terminal GFP-fusions in axenic Ax2 cells. We thus cloned nine previously uncharacterized BAR-containing proteins and observed their localization in live cells. Of these, six were expressed at detectable levels. Figure 1 Identification of BAR Domain Proteins Associated with Macropinocytosis DDB_G0284997, DDB_G0305372, and DDB_G0285851 were associated with plasma membrane puncta, consistent with the well-characterized role of BAR domains in clathrin-mediated endocytosis. DDB_G0276447 localized to vesicles too small to be macropinosomes, and GFP-DDB_G0272368 was exclusively in the nucleus. Only one of the proteins tested localized to what appeared to be the protrusive regions of macropinocytic cups. DDB_G0269934 is a 225 kDa multidomain protein and also contains regulator of chromatin condensation, RhoGEF, and RasGAP domains. DDB_G0269934 has not previously been studied, and due to its domain organization, we will subsequently refer to it as RGBARG. Combining BAR, GEF, and GAP activities in a single protein potentially provides an elegant mechanism to coordinate Ras and Rac activity to organize engulfment. We therefore investigated RGBARG in detail. Examining RGBARG-GFP dynamics by time-lapse microscopy confirmed strong enrichment at the protrusive rim and weaker enrichment in the interior of both macropinocytic and phagocytic cups, delocalizing rapidly after engulfment. Co-expression with the PIP 3 reporter PH CRAC -RFP that demarks the cup interior confirmed RGBARG-GFP localized to the periphery of this signaling domain. This differs from the RasGAP Neurofibromin, which was previously reported to control cup formation, and localizes throughout the cup. RGBARG may therefore play a specific role in organizing engulfment. Video S9: Successful Phagocytosis by RGBARG− Cells, Related to Figure 6D Phagocytosis of TRITC-labeled yeast by RGBARG- cells expressing PH CRAC -GFP. Click here to view. Video S1: RGBARG-GFP Is Enriched at the Tips of Macropinocytic Cups, Related to Figure 1C Video of RGBARG- cells expressing RGBARG-GFP in axenic culture. Click here to view. Video S2: RGBARG-GFP Is Enriched at the Tips of Phagocytic Cups, Related to Figure 1 RGBARG- cells expressing RGBARG-GFP engulfing a TRITC-labeled budded yeast. Click here to view. RGBARG and NF1 Play Distinct Roles in Macropinosome Formation To test its functional role, we disrupted the rgbA locus, deleting a 3.6 Kb region of the middle of the gene. Independent clones were isolated with comparable phenotypes. JSK02 was used unless otherwise stated with effects of loss of RGBARG validated by rescue experiments. To check for macropinocytic defects, cells were incubated with FITC-dextran, a pH sensitive dye that is quenched at low pH. As Dictyostelium macropinosomes acidify in under two min, only nascent macropinosomes are visible. In this assay, RGBARG− cells formed slightly more, but significantly smaller macropinosomes, measuring 0.5 ± 0.1 μm 3 compared to 1.5 ± 0.2 μm 3 in Ax2 controls. Consistent with this, bulk fluid uptake was reduced by ∼50% in RGBARG− cells, although this did not significantly inhibit axenic growth. Figure 2 RGBARG− Cells Produce More, but Smaller, Macropinosomes As engulfment and migration use much of the same machinery, we also tested chemotaxis toward folate. While chemotactic accuracy was unaltered, RGBARG− cells only moved at half the speed of Ax2 controls, migrating with an exceptionally broad and persistent leading edge. In contrast to the clear enrichment at cup protrusions, however, very little RGBARG-GFP was recruited to the leading edge of chemotaxing cells, with only small, transient puncta visible. We therefore focused on the role of RGBARG in cup formation. Video S3: RGBARG-GFP Localizes to the Periphery of PIP 3 Patches during Macropinocytosis, Related to Figure 1 3D Video of cells macropinosome formation in RGBARG- cells expressing RGBARG-GFP and PH CRAC -RFP. Click here to view. Video S4: Aberrant Chemotaxis of RGBARG− Cells, related to Figure 2 and Figure S1. Under agar chemotaxis of Ax2 and RGBARG- cells to folate. Scale bar = 50μm. Click here to view. The mutants above were generated in the Ax2 laboratory strain, which harbors a mutation in the axeB gene encoding NF1 that facilitates axenic growth by increasing fluid uptake. To test how RGBARG affects macropinocytosis in cells with intact NF1, we made additional mutants in the wild-type DdB strain, named JSK18 and 19. We refer to both Ax2 and DdB background mutants as RGBARG− cells, which are identified by the appropriate parental control. Using DdB-derived NF1 mutants we compared the effect of disrupting RGBARG or NF1 alone. NF1 loss increased macropinosome volume over 2-fold with no change in number, but DdB-derived RGBARG mutants again formed larger numbers of significantly smaller vesicles. This had no significant effect on total fluid uptake, and consequently was unable to enhance axenic growth. RGBARG is therefore functionally important during macropinosome formation and plays a distinct role to NF1. RGBARG Coordinates Signaling and Regulates Cup Shape As both RGBARG and NF1 are RasGAPs, we examined Ras signaling using the Ras binding domain of Raf1 fused to GFP. Disruption of NF1 in DdB cells increased the average active Ras domain from 5.6 μm to 6.5 μm. This affect is more modest than previously described because we axenically adapted DdB-derived strains in medium enriched with 20% serum prior to all experiments, rather than unsupplemented medium. Under these conditions, DdB cells better overcome the suppression of macropinocytosis by bacteria or starvation and take up more fluid in significantly larger cups. Although neither mutant altered the number of active Ras patches, disruption of RGBARG had a much larger effect on patch size, averaging 13.4 μm, encompassing 55% of the entire cell perimeter, compared with 28% and 29% for DdB and NF1− cells, respectively. Similar results were obtained with both active Ras and PIP 3 probes in Ax2-derived RGBARG mutants, although in these cells the number of patches was increased 2-fold. Figure 3 RGBARG Regulates Cup Dynamics To understand how the enlarged Ras and PIP 3 patches in RGBARG− cells give rise to smaller macropinosomes, we studied three-dimensional signaling dynamics over time. As described in Ax2 cells, macropinocytic cups form by expanding around a spontaneous patch of PIP 3. These subsequently close, usually forming 1–2 large macropinosomes accompanied by termination of PIP 3 signaling on both the new vesicle and the cell surface. This process is relatively consistent, with each PIP 3 patch lasting an average of 150 s. Video S5: RGBARG− Cells Migrate with Wide, Persistent Protrusions, Related to Figures 2 and S1 High magnification DIC Video of Ax2 and RGBARG- cells chemotaxing under agar to folate. Click here to view. In Ax2 RGBARG− cells, PH CRAC -GFP still disappeared from internalized vesicles, but the plasma membrane domains were much flatter and more stable; while PIP 3 patches frequently split, they rarely dissipated completely and often lasted longer than the 30 min videos. It was therefore not possible to meaningfully measure the lifetime of PIP 3 signaling in RGBARG− cells. An identical phenotype was observed in DdB-derived RGBARG mutants expressing GFP-RBD. In contrast, the cups formed by NF1− cells were similar in shape to controls but larger, forming over a longer time with surface signaling terminating at closure. RGBARG therefore appears to primarily regulate cup shape, whereas NF1 regulates its size. Video S6: PIP 3 Dynamics and Cup Formation in Ax2 and RGBARG− Cells, Related to Figure 3 Airyscan maximum intensity projection of cells expressing PH CRAC -GFP, showing extinction of PIP3 signaling after macropinosome formation is complete in Ax2 and large, persistent protrusions in RGBARG- cells. Scalebar = 10μm. Click here to view. Although extinction of signaling did not accompany closure in RGBARG− cells, numerous small vesicles continuously budded from the ruffle base when folds of membrane collapsed in on themselves. This explains why these cells form more frequent but smaller macropinosomes, corroborating our FITC-dextran data. This formation mechanism implies that the entire PIP 3 patch is potentially fusogenic and can internalize vesicles by simply folding onto itself rather than requiring a specific mechanism for closure and fission at the rim. The RasGAP and RhoGEF domains of RGBARG could potentially coordinate both Ras and Rac signaling. We therefore co-expressed probes for the active forms of both small GTPases to study their activities relative to each other. In Ax2 cells, the active Ras probe was restricted inside the cup rim, whereas active Rac recruitment also encompassed the protrusive edge, extending up to 2 μm further. This differential was lost in RGBARG− cells, with both Ras and Rac probes restricted to within the rim. Although potential differences in probe affinity mean we cannot be sure of the precise extent of each signaling domain, this shows RGBARG differentially regulates Ras and Rac and spatially coordinates their activities. To test whether loss of RGBARG generally affected cup organization, we also expressed GFP-fusions of the class I myosin myoIB, which exhibits a similar rim enrichment to RGBARG; the SCAR/WAVE complex, which drives actin polymerization at the protrusive cup rim; and PTEN, which degrades PIP 3 and is excluded from cups. All three proteins localized normally in RGBARG mutants, indicating RGBARG controls cup dynamics, rather than being required to recruit specific effectors. GEF, GAP, and BAR Domain Interactions Each Contribute to RGBARG Positioning RGBARG localization will be critical to position its RhoGEF activity where protrusion is promoted, and the RasGAP activity where it can restrain expansion of the interior. To dissect the mechanisms of RGBARG recruitment, we tested the effect of deleting each protein domain in turn. To quantify RGBARG enrichment across the cup, line scans from cup tip to tip were averaged across multiple cells. GFP-fused to the cyclic AMP receptor localizes uniformly to the plasma membrane and was used as a control. This method confirmed RGBARG-GFP was enriched 3-fold at the protruding edges and 2-fold at the cup base, allowing us to quantify how each domain contributes to recruitment at the cup. Figure 4 Multiple Interactions Regulate RGBARG Recruitment Removal of the RCC1 domain had no effect on localization and fully rescued the formation of large macropinosomes. In contrast, deletion of either the RhoGEF or BAR domains caused RGBARG to become uniformly cytosolic and did not rescue the defect. RGBARGΔGAP-GFP however still localized to the plasma membrane but was much more broadly distributed throughout the cup. Consequently, it was significantly less enriched at the rim and unable to rescue the mutant defect in macropinosome formation. Co-expression with PH CRAC -RFP confirmed RGBARGΔGAP-GFP was no longer excluded from PIP 3 /active Ras domains. RasGAP interactions therefore restrict RGBARG to the periphery of the cup interior. To confirm the role of the RasGAP interactions in restricting RGBARG localization, we also made a point mutation in the conserved arginine that stabilizes the Ras-GTP to Ras-GDP transition. This mutation is predicted to disrupt GAP activity but still allow Ras binding. RGBARG R1792K -GFP was reduced in the cup interior similar to the wild-type protein and was slightly more enriched at the cup tip. However, despite recruitment to the protruding rim, RGBARG R1792K -GFP did not rescue cup organization of RGBARG− cells, which still produced enlarged PIP 3 patches and small macropinosomes. The RasGAP domain of RGBARG therefore also provides spatial information to position RGBARG to the periphery of the active Ras/PIP 3 patch. To identify the relevant binding partners and contribution of each domain, we also expressed them individually, fused to GFP. Although RhoGEF-GFP expressed too poorly to observe its localization, both the RCC1 and GAP domains expressed well and were completely cytosolic. In contrast, the BAR domain alone was sufficient for strong recruitment throughout the plasma membrane. This was blocked by including either of the adjacent RhoGEF or RasGAP domains, indicating additional intramolecular interactions. In contradiction to our initial hypothesis, however, BAR-GFP was not enriched at areas of curvature or protrusion. The BAR domain therefore appears to drive general recruitment to the plasma membrane rather than recognize curvature at cups. Figure 5 BAR, GEF, and GAP Domain Specificity As the BAR domain does not concentrate at specific membrane shapes, we investigated its lipid binding specificity by lipid-protein overlay. PIP strips indicated BAR-GFP bound to all PIPs with two or more phosphates, with PIP arrays indicating a slight selectivity for PIP 2. This broad binding to all highly phosphorylated phosphoinositides indicates that this BAR domain is likely to generally recognize high negative charge rather than specific phosphate configurations. To identify the targets of the RhoGEF domain, we performed co-immunoprecipitations with a library of recombinant GST-tagged small GTPases. The Dictyostelium genome contains an expanded set of Rac small GTPases, but no Rho or CDC42 subfamily members. Of these, only RacH and RacG bound the RhoGEF domain of RGBARG with no detectable binding to other Racs, including Rac1, which has previously been implicated in cup formation. While RacH is involved primarily in endocytic trafficking and localizes exclusively to intracellular compartments, RacG localizes to the plasma membrane and is enriched at the protruding rim of phagocytic cups. Overexpression of wild-type or constitutively active RacG also promotes phagocytosis, indicating a potential interaction with RGBARG. Consistent with previous reports, RacG mutants had no significant macropinocytic defect, forming normal sized active Ras patches and macropinosomes. RGBARG-GFP recruitment to cups however was more uniform and only enriched 1.8 ± 0.6-fold at the rim of RacG - cells compared with 2.6 ± 0.7-fold in isogenic controls. This indicates that RacG and RGBARG functionally interact in vivo and partly contribute to RGBARG localization. However, redundancy with other Racs or additional interactions are sufficient for partial RGBARG recruitment and apparently normal engulfment in the absence of RacG. Combined, our data indicate that RGBARG uses a coincidence detection mechanism to direct cup formation: BAR domain binding to negatively charged phospholipids directs the protein to the plasma membrane while additional interactions with RacG and active Ras constrain RGBARG to the cup rim. This tripartite regulation ensures that RGBARG is accurately positioned to exert its RhoGEF and RasGAP activities at the interface between cup interior and protrusion to organize engulfment. RGBARG Is a Highly Active Dual Specificity Ras/Rap GAP To investigate the differences between NF1 and RGBARG, we compared the specificity and activities of their RasGAP domains. The Dictyostelium genome encodes 14 Ras subfamily members of which RasB, RasG, and RasS are the most important for macropinocytosis. Overexpression of RasD can also partially compensate for loss of RasG and S. The small GTPase Rap, a close relative of Ras, has also been implicated in macropinosome formation. We therefore measured the GAP activities of both NF1 and RGBARG against each small GTPase. Consistent with the inability of RGBARG R1792K -GFP to rescue the knockout, the RGBARG RasGAP domain was active against all GTPases tested. The RasGAP domain of NF1 was also active against each Ras but with 75% less activity than RGBARG in each case. RGBARG is therefore a more potent RasGAP in vitro, but the lack of specificity for particular Ras isoforms for both RGBARG and NF1 indicates their functional differences are imparted by localization and dynamics. Loss of RGBARG Improves Phagocytosis of Large Objects As engulfment of solid particles such as microbes uses much of the same machinery as macropinocytosis and RGBARG also localizes to phagocytic cups, we also investigated how RGBARG contributes to phagocytosis. Disruption of NF1 was previously shown to increase the size of particles that Dictyostelium can engulf. As RGBARG also restricts the PIP 3 domains that define the cup interior, we first tested the ability of Ax2 RGBARG− cells to phagocytose different sized beads. Although disruption of RGBARG had no effect on phagocytosis of 1 μm diameter beads, engulfment of 4.5 μm beads was significantly enhanced with an average of 2.2 ± 0.4 beads engulfed per cell after 1 h, compared with 1.0 ± 0.4 in Ax2. Enhanced Ras activation therefore appears generally beneficial for the engulfment of large beads. Figure 6 Phagocytic Defects in RGBARG− Cells Surprisingly, although extrachromosomal expression of RGBARG-GFP fully rescued macropinosome formation, it reduced the ability of RGBARG − cells to engulf 4.5 μm beads to 63% of control levels. This effect was even more severe with domain deletion constructs including the ΔBAR, ΔGEF, and ΔGAP constructs, which do not localize properly and have no deleterious effect on macropinosome formation. This indicates a dominant negative effect, most likely due to sequestration of binding partners by overexpressed and/or mislocalized protein. In contrast, expression of RGBARG R1792K had no inhibitory effect on RGBARG− cells. This only differs from RGBARG-GFP in its RasGAP activity indicating that mislocalized or overexpressed RasGAP activity is sufficient to inhibit engulfment of large targets. To better understand how loss of RGBARG affects phagocytosis, we observed engulfment of TRITC-labeled yeast by cells expressing PH CRAC -GFP. Engulfment occurred rapidly in both cell types but failed at a frequency of 22% ± 7% in Ax2 cells with the PIP 3 patch dissipating and the yeast escaping. While the time for successful engulfment was similar upon loss of RGBARG, capture was much more robust failing in only 4% ± 5% of attempts. The main influence of RGBARG on the phagocytic efficiency of large targets thus appears to be increased cup stability and enlarged Ras signaling rather than rate of protrusion around the object. Video S7: Active Ras Dynamics in DdB and Isogenic NF1 and RGBARG− Mutants, Related to Figure 3 Airyscan maximum intensity projections of cells expressing GFP-RBD. Click here to view. Video S8: Failed phagocytosis of TRITC-labeled yeast by Ax2 cells, related to Figure 6C. A single confocal Plane of Cells Expressing PH CRAC -GFP Click here to view. Spatial Regulation of Ras by RGBARG Is Important for Phagocytosis of Elongated Targets Phagocytic cells must engulf microbes with differing physical properties such as shape, size, stiffness, and surface chemistry. As RGBARG is important for phagocytic and macropinocytic cup organization, we investigated its role during engulfment of different bacteria. Phagocytosis was measured by the ability of Dictyostelium cells to reduce the turbidity of a bacterial suspension over time. Although RGBARG disruption had no effect on clearance of Klebsiella aerogenes, engulfment of Escherichia coli was substantially reduced. Therefore, although loss of RGBARG had no effect on engulfing 1 μm beads and is beneficial for uptake of large beads and yeast, it causes a species-specific defect in phagocytosis of bacteria. Figure 7 RGBARG− Cells Have Shape-Dependent Phagocytic Defects The most obvious physical difference between K. aerogenes and E. coli is their shape. Both have similar short axes but K. aerogenes average 3.2 μm long compare to an average long axis of 5.4 μm for E. coli. Previous work investigating phagocytosis of different shaped beads by macrophages concluded that elongated shapes are more difficult to engulf. We therefore measured the ability of RGBARG− cells to engulf an additional rod-shaped bacterium by flow cytometry. This was again reduced by 75%, correlating with an inability to phagocytose elongated targets. The data above are consistent with a role for RGBARG in enabling engulfment of elongated bacteria. However, different bacteria also differ in other aspects such as surface composition, phagocytic receptor activation, and stiffness. To directly test the importance of RGBARG in engulfing different shapes we therefore stretched 3μm latex beads to generate oblate ellipsoids of conserved volume and surface chemistry. To measure relative phagocytosis in the same experiment, cells were incubated with a 1:1 mix of spherical and stretched beads and the number of engulfed beads of each shape quantified by microscopy. Both Ax2 and RGBARG− cells engulfed 3 μm spheres with similar efficiency, but while uptake of ellipsoids was only reduced by 30% in Ax2 cells, it was reduced by 70% in RGBARG mutants. These effects were again rescued by re-expression of RGBARG-GFP but not RGBARG R1792K -GFP, demonstrating a key role for RGBARG and its RasGAP activity in mediating phagocytosis of elongated particles. Discussion In this study, we identify a new component that organizes protrusions into the 3D cup shapes required to engulf extracellular fluid or particles. Consistent with previous work, our data support a model whereby cup formation is guided by the formation of a protrusive rim encircling a static interior domain. We show that RGBARG provides a direct link between the Ras and Rac activities that underlie these different functional domains, providing a mechanism to coordinate cup organization in space and time. RGBARG is not the only RasGAP in Dictyostelium involved in macropinosome formation, but it is the only one to also possess a RhoGEF domain and is therefore unique in its ability to integrate the activities of both GTPase families. No human proteins have an identical domain structure to RGBARG, and although most classical RasGAPs are found in multidomain proteins, none also contain a RhoGEF domain. A screen for RhoGAPs involved in macrophage phagosome formation identified three proteins. Although these all contain PIP 3 binding or BAR domains, none contain domains linking to other GTPase families. The oncogene TIAM1 contains both RhoGEF and Ras-binding domains, however, and BAR domains are found in conjunction with GAPs or GEFs in several other proteins. Therefore, although mammalian cells also need to coordinate Ras and Rac, this is likely achieved via multiple proteins or a complex. Multiple GAPs and GEFs collaborate to shape protrusions into cups. This is apparent in the different roles played by RGBARG and NF1; both negatively regulate Ras and are present at the cup interior, and while RGBARG is enriched at the rim, NF1 appears to be uniform throughout the cup. Although there may be some overlapping function at the cup base, RGBARG and NF1 play different roles as NF1 disruption increases cup size and the volume of fluid taken up whereas RGBARG appears more important for cup structure and shape. This model is doubtless overly simplistic, and other RasGAPs also contribute to shaping active Ras dynamics. For example, the IQGAP-related protein IqgC was also recently shown to have RasGAP activity and localize throughout the interior of macropinocytic and phagocytic cups in Dictyostelium. In contrast to NF1 and RGBARG, however, IqgC is reported to be a specific GAP for RasG. As the different Ras isoforms are non-redundant, IqgC adds a further layer of complexity to shape engulfment dynamics. While Ras regulation is becoming clearer, how protrusion is regulated during engulfment is less well understood. Several mammalian studies indicate actin dynamics and protrusion are regulated by the combined activities of Rac1 and CDC42. Rac1 and CDC42 are differentially activated with active Rac1 throughout the cup and CDC42 activation earlier and more restricted to the rim. We find RGBARG specifically interacts with the atypical Rac isoforms RacG and RacH. Although Dictyostelium does not possess a direct CDC42 ortholog, RacG is the most similar protein in sequence, and may therefore be functionally orthologous. No effectors of either RacG or RacH are known, but RacG does not interact with the Rac-binding domain of PAK commonly used as a probe for active Rac1 indicating at least partly distinct effectors. Nonetheless, in cell-free assays, RacG can induce actin nucleation and/or polymerization via the ARP2/3 complex and could therefore at least partly define the protrusive rim, possibly in collaboration with active Rac1. Whereas constitutively active Rac1 induces the formation of lamellipodial-type protrusions, constitutively active RacG and CDC42 both induce filopodia. Recently, it was also shown that filopodial “tent poles” can also drive macropinocytosis in macrophages. It is still not clear whether filopodia and lamellipodial sheets work together to form cups or represent distinct ends of a spectrum of macropinocytic mechanisms, but the involvement of RacG and CDC42 may indicate a conserved mechanism. How cells restrict protrusion to the periphery of a static interior remains a major unanswered question. It is not yet clear whether the RGBARG GEF domain is active, but simultaneous comparison of Rac and Ras activity clearly shows RGBARG can separate their signaling domains. If Rac-driven actin polymerization is suppressed by Ras or PIP 3, RGBARG-driven expansion of Rac activation just beyond active Ras provides a plausible mechanism to define the protrusive ring. The multi-layered regulation of small GTPases is particularly important when cells are challenged to engulf particles or microbes of different shapes. This is critical for amoebae to feed on diverse bacteria or immune cells to capture and kill a wide range of pathogens, but how cells adapt to different target geometries is very poorly understood. To our knowledge, RGBARG− cells are the first mutants reported to have a geometry-specific phagocytic defect, underlining the importance of coordinated Ras and Rac activities. This again differs from the role of NF1, as NF1-deficient Ax2 cells can efficiently engulf and grow on a wide range of bacteria, including E. coli. It is still not known how other regulatory elements or cytoskeletal components adapt to differing shapes, but it is likely that large-scale rearrangements are necessary to accommodate different targets. In summary, we describe a mechanism to coordinate the activity of Rac and Ras GTPases during engulfment in Dictyostelium. The proteins that mediate this coordination in mammalian cells remain unknown. However, we propose a general model by which spatial signals from multiple small GTPases are integrated to shape macropinocytic and phagocytic cups, enabling cells to engulf diverse targets. STAR★Methods Key Resources Table Resource Availability Lead Contact Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Jason King. Materials Availability All Dictyostelium strains and plasmids generated for this work are deposited in, and available from the Dictyostelium stock center. Plasmids kindly provided by Dr. Peggy Paschke are all available from Addgene. Data and Code Availability Code used to calculate average profiles of protein localization across cups can be found on Github: Experimental Model and Subject Details Dictyostelium culture and molecular biology Unless otherwise stated, axenic Dictyostelium strains were derived from the MRC-Ax2 axenic strain provided by the Kay laboratory and were routinely cultured in filter sterilized HL-5 medium at 22°C. RacG mutants and corresponding parental strain were kind gifts from Francisco Rivero. Growth rates were measured by seeding cells at 0.5 × 10 5 /mL in HL-5 and counting cell number twice daily for three days. Growth rate was then calculated by fitting an exponential growth curve using Graphpad Prism software. Cells were transformed by electroporation: 6 × 10 6 cells were resuspended in 0.4 mL of ice-cold E-buffer and transferred to 2 mm electroporation cuvette containing DNA. Cells were then electroporated at 1.2 kV and 3 μF capacitance with a 5 Ω resistor in series using a Bio-Rad Gene Pulser II. After 24 h transformants were selected in either 20 μg/mL hygromycin, 10 μg/mL G418 or 10 μg/mL blasticidin. Nonaxenic mutants were generated from the DdB subclone of NC-4 shown to be the lab isolate with fewest duplications and parent strain of Ax2. The published DdB strain and corresponding NF1 mutants were gifts from Rob Kay. All DdB-derived strains were routinely maintained on lawns of Klebsiella aerogenes bacteria in SM agar plates at 22°C. 24 h prior to all experiments, cells were washed free of bacteria and transferred to HL5 medium supplemented with 20% fetal calf serum to axenically adapt. DdB and its derivatives were transformed as described in : 2 × 10 6 cells were resuspended in 100 μl ice-cold H40 buffer and 10μg DNA in 2mm cuvettes and exposed to 2 pulses of 400V 5 s apart and 3 μF capacitance in a square-wave electroporator. Cells were then grown in Petri dishes in a suspension of K. aerogenes in SorMC buffer, and transformants selected with G418 using either 5 μg/mL for knockouts or 10 μg/mL for extrachromosomal vectors. BAR domain containing proteins were identified by multiple BLAST searches using Dictybase. Coding sequences were then amplified by PCR from vegetative Ax2 cDNA adding compatible restriction sites for subcloning into the BglII/SpeI sites of the N- and C-terminal GFP-fusion Dictyostelium extrachromosomal expression vectors pDM1043 and pDM1045 ). Truncation and point mutants of RGBARG were also generated by PCR and expressed using pDM450. The rbgA knockout construct was generated by PCR fusion of ∼1Kb 5′ and 3′ recombination arms with the floxed blasticidin selection cassette from pDM1079, as described in detail in. To select bacterially-grown cells, an identical construct was made using the G418 selection cassette from pDM1082. After transformation, independent clones were obtained by dilute plating in 96 well plates. Disruption of the RGBARG locus was screened by PCR from genomic DNA isolated from 1 × 10 6 cells lysed in 100 μl 10mM Tris- HCl pH8.0, 50 mM KCl, 2.5mM MgCl 2, 0.45% NP40, 0.45% Tween 20 and 0.4 mg/mL Proteinase K. After 5 min incubation at room temperature, the proteinase K was denatured at 95°C for 10 min prior to PCR analysis. The Ras binding domain of RAF1-GFP construct used as an active Ras reporter was a gift from Gareth Bloomfield. The PTEN-mCherry/PH PkgE -GFP, PH PkgE -RFP/GFP-MyoIB and RBD-GFP/PAK1 CRIB -GFP co-expression constructs were all gifts from Peggy Paschke. Method Details Macropinocytosis assays Bulk macropinocytosis was measured by flow cytometry as in. For Ax2 cells and their derivatives, 5 × 10 4 cells were seeded in 50 μl HL5 medium per well of a 96 well plate, with duplicate wells for 0, 5, 10, 30, 60, 90 and 120 min time points and left for 2 h to settle. 50 μl of 1 mg/mL TRITC-dextran was then added to the 120 min point wells, followed by the others at the appropriate time. After the final time point, the media was removed by flicking into the sink, and the plate washed by submerging in a dish of ice-cold KK2 buffer and flicking again. 100 μl of ice-cold KK2 buffer with 5mM NaN 3 was then added to each well on ice for 15 min to resuspend the cells. The plate was then analyzed by flow cytometry measuring > 5,000 cells per sample. Fluid uptake by DdB-derived cells was measured in the same way, except cells were grown and measured in HL5-medium supplemented with 20% FCS and 5mg/mL TRITC dextran was used to compensate for the lower uptake. Fluid uptake was calculated by the average TRITC fluorescence at each time point after subtracting background and normalized relative to the appropriate parental control at 120 min. Macropinosome volume was measured by incubating cells for 5 min in 0.1 mg/mL FITC-dextran and obtaining Z stacks on a spinning disc confocal microscope. FITC is pH-sensitive and the sensitivity was set so only new non-acidified macropinosomes were visible as transition to neutral post-lysosomes takes > 30 min. For analysis, individual cells were cropped out, randomized, and volume calculated from manually measuring the maximum diameter of each macropinosome in each cell, assuming they were spherical. Phagocytosis assays Phagocytosis of fluorescent beads was measured by flow cytometry as previously described in detail. Briefly, 1 or 4.5 μm diameter YG-carboxylated polystyrene beads were shaken with 2 × 10 6 Dictyostelium /mL at ratios of 200:1 and 10:1 respectively. 500 μl samples were removed at each time point and added to 3 mL ice-cold Sorenson sorbitol buffer containing 5 mM sodium azide. Samples were then centrifuged at 100 x g for 10 min, pellets resuspended in SSB and analyzed on an Attune NxT flow cytometer. Analysis was performed using FlowJo software as described. To measure uptake of GFP-expressing M. smegmatis by flow cytometry, the bacteria were grown to an OD 600 of 1 under shaking conditions at 32°C in Middlebrook 7H9 medium, 0.2% glycerol and 0.05% Tween 80 supplemented with 10% OADC. To avoid clumping they were cultivated in presence of 5 mm glass beads. Prior to use M. smegmatis were pelleted by centrifugation at 10,625 x g for 4 min and resuspended in 1 mL HL5 medium. Bacteria were then unclumped by passing through a 26-guage needle several times, before adding a 1/10th volume of bacteria to a Dictyostelium culture and processing as above. To measure phagocytosis of bacteria by decreasing turbidity, an overnight bacterial culture in LB was diluted 1:25 and grown at 37°C until an OD600 of 0.7 before pelleting and resuspension in SSB at an OD600 of 0.8. This was then added to an equal volume of Dictyostelium at 2 × 10 7 cells/mL in SSB at room temperature and shaken in flasks. The OD600 was then measured over time. Phagocytosis and TRITC labeling of heat killed S. cerevisiae was performed essentially as previously described. Dictyostelium at 1 × 10 6 cells/mL in HL5 were seeded in glass-bottomed microscopy dishes and left for 1 h prior to addition of a 5-fold excess of yeast. After 30 min, the fluorescence of extracellular yeast was quenched by addition of 0.2 mg/mL trypan blue and images of multiple fields of view taken on a wide-field microscope scoring > 100 cells per condition. Microscopy and image analysis Live cell imaging was performed in glass-bottomed microscopy dishes with cells seeded the preceding day in filtered HL-5 medium, unless otherwise stated. Spinning disc images were captured using a Perkin-Elmer Ultraview VoX spinning disk microscope running Volocity software with a UplanSApo 60x oil immersion objective and Hammamatsu C9100-50-EM0CCD camera. Laser scanning confocal images were obtained using a Zeiss LSM880 Airyscan confocal equipped with a Fastscan detector, and a 63x 1.4 NA objective. Images were acquired in fastscan mode and deconvolved by airyprocessessing using Zen black software. All image analysis was performed using ImageJ. For relative Rac and Ras activity profiles, linescans were drawn along the cell membrane from the center of the cup to ∼3 μm outside the rim. Line profiles from multiple cups were integrated by manually determining the edge of the Ras patch and defining this point as 0 μm. Fluorescence was then normalized to the average intensity of the first 10 points of the profile, minus background. Average plots of RGBARG protein enrichment across cups generated using a custom script in Igor Pro. For this, confocal images were captured and linescans of GFP-fluorescence intensity measured from the protrusive tip to tip. The average signal from a 1-2 μm non-protruding region of the cell was also measured as was the local background outside each cell. Local background was subtracted and signal across the cup divided by the non-protruding membrane signal to give fold-enrichment. To compare enrichment across multiple cups, normalized linescans were extrapolated over 1000 points and averaged. Enrichment at the cup tip was measured by the average of the first 100 points of the profile for each cup. The bacterial long axis was measured automatically from widefield images of either GFP or RFP expressing bacteria in ImageJ. Individual bacteria were identified by thresholding and long axis measured using the Feret’s diameter function. Western blotting and lipid overlay assays Western blotting was performed by standard techniques, separating proteins by SDS-PAGE and probing using a custom rabbit polyclonal antibody to GFP. Endogenously biotinylated proteins were used as a loading control, using Alexa680-labeled streptavidin. Blots were imaged Li-Corr odyssey SA fluorescence gel imager. For lipid overlay assays, 1 × 10 7 Ax2 cells expressing the BAR domain fused to GFP were washed once in SSB, lysed in 600 μl RIPA buffer, 0.5% Triton X-100) and left on ice for 45 min. Insoluble material was then removed by centrifugation at 15,871 x g for 20 min at 4°C. PIP strips or Arrays were blocked in 3% fatty acid-free bovine serum albumin in TBS-T. Samples were then diluted in TBS-T and incubated with the strips for 1 h at 22°C, before washing and processing as for western blotting. GAP and GEF biochemistry Interactions with recombinant GST-Rac isoforms were performed as described previously. Dictyostelium cells expressing GST-Rac bait proteins and GFP-fused to the GEF domain of RGBARG were expressed and lysed in 2mls of buffer including protease inhibitor cocktail. Lysates were mixed with glutathione Sepharose beads and incubated overnight at 4°C. Unbound proteins were washed away with PBS, and bound proteins detected by western blot using an anti-GFP antibody. For GAP activity measurements, His-NF1 GAP domain and MBP-His-RGBARG GAP domain were produced and isolated from E. coli Rosetta cells. His-NF1 GAP was purified using a HisTrap excel - affinity column and eluted in buffer containing 50 mM Tris, 50 mM NaCl, 5% Glycerol, 3 mM β-Mercaptoethanol and 200 mM Imidazole, pH7.5. MBP-His-RGBAR GAP, was purified by Maltose Binding Protein Trap - affinity column and eluted in 20 mM Tris, 200 mM NaCl, 5% Glycerol 1 mM β-Mercaptoethanol and 10mM Maltose, pH7.5. Proteins were further purified by size exclusion chromatography and stored in 50 mM Tris, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, and 5 mM MgCl2, pH7,5.1. 1 μM of the indicated Ras proteins with and without equal amount of indicated GAP domain was incubated with 50 μM of GTP at 20°C in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl and 5 mM MgCl 2. At each time point the GDP content of the samples was analyzed by a HPLC : a reversed phase C18 column was employed to detect GDP and GTP content as previously described. Linear rates of GDP production were calculated using GraFit 5.0. Ellipsoid bead generation and phagocytosis 3 μm unmodified non-fluorescent polystyrene beads were embedded in polyvinyl alcohol film and stretched as previously described. Briefly, 2.8 mL beads of bead solution were added to 20 mL 25% w/w dissolved PVA solution and poured into a 10.5 × 10.5 cm plastic mold to create a film. These were cut into 3 × 2 cm strips, marked with a grid to follow deformation and placed in a custom stretching device as described in detail in. Films were then placed in a 145°C oil bath to soften beads and film and slowly pulled to the desired length. After cooling, beads were extracted from the central region where the grid was deformed evenly. This part was cut into small pieces and rotated in 10 mls of a 3:7 mix of isopropanol:water overnight at 22°C to dissolve. Beads were aliquoted and twice heated at 75°C for 10 min and washed in isopropanol: water. Beads were then washed twice in isopropanol:water at 22°C, before two washes in water. The amount of stretch was measured by imaging on an inverted microscope and manually measuring their length in ImageJ. To measure phagocytosis, equal numbers of stretched and unstretched beads were mixed, sonicated and incubated at a 10-fold excess to cells at 1 × 10 6 /mL, shaking in HL5. After 30 min, 500 μl samples were added to 3 mL SSB with 5 mM sodium azide to detach unengulfed beads. Cells were washed in ice-cold SSB, transferred to a microscopy dish and allowed to adhere for 10 min before imaging and the number of each shape bead internalised quantified manually. Chemotaxis assays Chemotaxis assays were performed under agar using a folate chemoattractant as previously described. For each repeat, 8 mL of 1% agarose-HL5 solution was poured into a 60 mm × 15 mm plastic Petri dish, and was left to set overnight in a humidified chamber. Three parallel wells, set 5 mm apart, of 2 mm x 39 mm were cut into the gel using a razor blade. 200 μ L of 0.1 mM folate was added to the central well and 200 ì L Dictyostelium cells at 5 × 10 6 cells/mL, were added to the remaining two wells. Plates were returned to the humidifying chamber for a folate gradient to establish. After approximately three h cells performing chemotaxis were imaged using an LD A-plan × 20 air phase objective on a Zeiss Axiovert widefield microscope with a Hamamatsu Orca ER camera, running μ Manager software. Images were taken every 30 s for a total of 90 min and compiled into time-lapse Videos. For analysis 10 random cells were manually tracked using the manual tracking plugin for Fiji. Speed was measured as the total path distance divided by time, chemotaxtic index is the distance moved in the direction of the gradient/total path length. Quantification and Statistical Analysis Statistical analysis was performed using the software described in the sections above namely GraphPad Prism and Igor Pro. Details of statistical tests used, errors shown and significance values are located in figure legends. Unless otherwise stated n represents the number of independent experiments, and statistical comparisons are between mutant strains and the appropriate parental control. In all figures ∗∗∗ indicates p < 0.005, ∗∗ p < 0.01 and ∗ p < 0.05. 