 Polyphosphate is a linear chain of phosphate residues and is present in organisms ranging from bacteria to humans. Pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis accumulate polyphosphate, and reduced expression of the polyphosphate kinase that synthesizes polyphosphate decreases their survival. How polyphosphate potentiates pathogenicity is poorly understood. Escherichia coli K-12 do not accumulate detectable levels of extracellular polyphosphate and have poor survival after phagocytosis by Dictyostelium discoideum or human macrophages. In contrast, Mycobacterium smegmatis and Mycobacterium tuberculosis accumulate detectable levels of extracellular polyphosphate, and have relatively better survival after phagocytosis by D. discoideum or macrophages. Adding extracellular polyphosphate increased E. coli survival after phagocytosis by D. discoideum and macrophages. Reducing expression of polyphosphate kinase 1 in M. smegmatis reduced extracellular polyphosphate and reduced survival in D. discoideum and macrophages, and this was reversed by the addition of extracellular polyphosphate. Conversely, treatment of D. discoideum and macrophages with recombinant yeast exopolyphosphatase reduced the survival of phagocytosed M. smegmatis or M. tuberculosis. D. discoideum cells lacking the putative polyphosphate receptor GrlD had reduced sensitivity to polyphosphate and, compared to wild-type cells, showed increased killing of phagocytosed E. coli and M. smegmatis. Polyphosphate inhibited phagosome acidification and lysosome activity in D. discoideum and macrophages and reduced early endosomal markers in macrophages. Together, these results suggest that bacterial polyphosphate potentiates pathogenicity by acting as an extracellular signal that inhibits phagosome maturation. In metazoans, cells such as macrophages use phagocytosis to obtain nutrients, remove cell debris, and engulf and kill pathogens. Phagocytosis begins by recognition of particles by cell-surface receptors and engulfment of the ingested particle to form a phagosome. Ingested material in the phagolysosome is then degraded by lysosomal acid, enzymes, and oxygen radicals. Many successful pathogens, including Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Legionella pneumophila, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Streptococcus pyogenes, have evolved countermeasures to evade phago-lysosomal killing, allowing the pathogen to live in the arrested phagosome. One commonly used countermeasure is to inhibit phagosome acidification and fusion with lysosomes. How pathogens inhibit this process is poorly understood. Polyphosphate is a linear chain of phosphate residues present in all kingdoms of life. Polyphosphate metabolism is associated with the virulence of pathogens such as Burkholderia mallei, M. tuberculosis, Salmonella enterica, Shigella flexneri, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In a wide range of bacteria, including pathogens, polyphosphate is synthesized from ATP by an essential enzyme polyphosphate kinase, and polyphosphate levels are maintained by exopolyphosphatase, an enzyme that degrades polyphosphate by removing terminal phosphate residues. PPK mutants of many pathogens display decreased growth, reduced sensitivity to stress and starvation, decreased survival, reduced invasiveness, defects in quorum sensing, and defects in other features associated with virulence. However, the role of PPK in the survival of pathogenic bacteria is not clearly understood. The eukaryotic social amoeba D. discoideum uses phagocytosis to uptake nutrients such as bacteria. D. discoideum cells accumulate extracellular polyphosphate, and, as the local cell density increases, the extracellular polyphosphate concentration increases. To anticipate starvation when a colony of cells is about to overgrow its food supply, the concomitant high extracellular polyphosphate concentration inhibits proliferation. The G-protein–coupled receptor glutamate receptor-like protein D binds, and helps cells sense, polyphosphate. Since not digesting nutrients might be a way to inhibit D. discoideum proliferation, we examined whether polyphosphate might inhibit phagosome maturation in D. discoideum and human macrophages. In this report, we show that both exogenous polyphosphate and polyphosphate released from bacteria inhibit phagosome maturation in D. discoideum and that this effect is conserved in human macrophages. Results Polyphosphate Inhibits the Killing of Ingested Escherichia coli in D. discoideum and Human Macrophages. We previously observed that wild-type D. discoideum cells accumulate extracellular polyphosphate, and, at high cell densities, corresponding to stationary phase, the extracellular polyphosphate concentration reaches ∼704 µg/mL, and this concentration of polyphosphate inhibits proliferation and induces development. D. discoideum cells uptake nutrients from liquid medium by macropinocytosis. The endocytosed material is transported to early and late endosomes and fuses with lysosomes before degradation. The undigested material in postlysosomes is then exocytosed. To test if polyphosphate inhibits D. discoideum macropinocytosis, we measured the endocytosis and exocytosis of tetramethylrhodamine isothiocynate -labeled dextran. Endocytosis of TRITC–dextran was decreased by 470 µg/mL and higher concentrations of extracellular polyphosphate. Similarly, 470 µg/mL and higher polyphosphate concentrations reduced exocytosis. Together, this suggests that, as cells proliferate to high cell densities, the concomitant high concentrations of extracellular polyphosphate inhibit proliferation by inhibiting nutrient uptake and subsequent processing and exocytosis of waste products. D. discoideum normally feed on bacteria. To determine if extracellular polyphosphate affects uptake and digestion of bacteria, D. discoideum cells were incubated with Escherichia coli K-12 in the presence or absence of extracellular polyphosphate. The uningested bacteria were removed, ingested bacteria were cultured for 4 and 48 h, the D. discoideum cells were lysed, released bacteria were plated, and the colony-forming units of viable ingested E. coli were counted. We noticed that low concentrations of polyphosphate, which do not significantly affect proliferation, pinocytosis, or exocytosis, affect bacterial digestion. At 4 h, compared to cells with no polyphosphate, D. discoideum cells in the presence of low concentrations of polyphosphate showed no change in number of viable ingested E. coli. The addition of recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae PPX, an enzyme that degrades polyphosphate, did not affect the number of viable ingested E. coli at 4 h. At 48 h, in the absence of polyphosphate, there was no viable ingested E. coli present in cells, whereas in the presence of low concentrations of polyphosphate, there was viable ingested E. coli. The effect of polyphosphate was reversed with the addition of PPX, indicating that the effect was due to polyphosphate, and not to a contaminant in the polyphosphate. To determine the location of ingested bacteria, D. discoideum cells were incubated with LysoTracker, which stains acidic compartments, and ptrc99A–enhanced yellow fluorescent protein E. coli in the presence or absence of polyphosphate. At 4 h, compared to D. discoideum cells with no added polyphosphate, cells with 13 µg/mL polyphosphate contained ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli that did not colocalize with LysoTracker-stained acidic compartments. At 48 h, enlarged regions of ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli were observed in the presence of polyphosphate, and the relative eYFP fluorescence per cell increased. To determine if the polyphosphate-induced increase in bacterial survival was due to an increase in D. discoideum phagocytosis, D. discoideum cells were incubated with pHrodo zymosan bioparticles in the presence or absence of polyphosphate, and the number of bioparticles ingested by D. discoideum cells was measured. Polyphosphate did not significantly affect the phagocytosis rate. These data suggest that, while polyphosphate inhibits lysis or clearance of most of the ingested E. coli in D. discoideum cells, only some of the intracellular E. coli actually survive and proliferate, giving rise to bacterial counts at 48 h similar to those at 4 h. Fig. 1. Polyphosphate potentiates the survival of ingested E. coli in D. discoideum and human macrophages. D. discoideum cells were incubated with E. coli, uningested E. coli were removed, and viable ingested E. coli per 10 6 D. discoideum cells, in... D. discoideum cells lacking a putative polyphosphate receptor, GrlD, are insensitive to polyphosphate-induced proliferation inhibition and show strongly reduced binding of polyphosphate. To determine if polyphosphate inhibits the killing of bacteria in D. discoideum cells lacking GrlD, viable ingested E. coli were counted in WT and grlD − cells. At 4 h without polyphosphate, compared to WT cells, there were approximately fivefold more viable ingested E. coli present in grlD − cells. Adding polyphosphate did not affect the number of viable ingested E. coli in WT or grlD − cells. At 48 h without polyphosphate, there were very few ingested E. coli in WT or grlD − cells. Unlike in WT cells, polyphosphate did not increase the number of viable ingested E. coli in grlD − cells. This suggests that GrlD is required for D. discoideum cells to sense polyphosphate to inhibit the killing of ingested E. coli. Bacterial infection can be studied by using macrophages and D. discoideum cells as model systems. In metazoans with immune systems, macrophages protect their host by killing ingested microbes. To determine if extracellular polyphosphate inhibits the killing of ingested E. coli by human macrophages, human macrophages were generated by culturing peripheral blood mononuclear cells isolated from donor blood with granulocyte-macrophage–colony-stimulating factor for 5 d. Macrophages in the presence or absence of extracellular polyphosphate were incubated with E. coli, and the cfus of the ingested E. coli were determined at 4 and 24 h. At 4 h, polyphosphate did not affect the number of viable ingested E. coli in macrophages. At 48 h, colony counts for 0, 5, 8, 10, 13, and 15 µg/mL polyphosphate were 0 ± 0, indicating that the macrophages killed all of the ingested E. coli in the presence of up to 15 µg/mL polyphosphate. However, at 24 h, compared to macrophages with no added polyphosphate, macrophages with 15 µg/mL additional extracellular polyphosphate showed an increase in the number of viable ingested E. coli for male and female donors. This 15 µg/mL polyphosphate concentration is higher than the 5 ± 1 µg/mL polyphosphate concentration in human plasma and lower than the 470 µg/mL polyphosphate concentration that inhibits human PBMC proliferation. Polyphosphate Inhibits the Killing of Ingested Mycobacterium smegmatis in D. discoideum and Human Macrophages. Reduced expression of the polyphosphate-synthesizing enzyme PPK1 in M. tuberculosis decreases bacterial survival in human macrophages. To determine if reduced expression of PPK1 in Mycobacterium smegmatis, a nonpathogenic model to study Mycobacterium infection, decreases bacterial survival in D. discoideum and human macrophages, the ppk1 gene in M. smegmatis was knocked down by using Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeat interference to generate ppk1 knockdown cells, and reduced expression of ppk1 was confirmed by RT-PCR. E. coli did not accumulate detectable extracellular polyphosphate, while M. smegmatis accumulated detectable extracellular polyphosphate. Knockout of ppk in E. coli did not affect the accumulation of extracellular polyphosphate, whereas, compared to WT M. smegmatis, ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis had lower accumulation of extracellular polyphosphate. Fig. 2. Polyphosphate potentiates the survival of M. smegmatis bacteria in D. discoideum and human macrophages. Extracellular polyphosphate concentrations from WT and ppk knockout E. coli, or WT and ppk1 knockdown... At 4 h, compared to M. smegmatis, ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis showed unchanged viability in D. discoideum cells. Extracellular polyphosphate, PPX with no polyphosphate, or PPX with 15 µg/mL polyphosphate did not affect the viability of ingested WT or ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis in D. discoideum cells at 4 h. However, at 48 h, compared to M. smegmatis, ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis showed reduced viability in D. discoideum cells. Extracellular polyphosphate increased the number of viable WT and ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis, and the effect of extracellular polyphosphate on both WT and ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis viability was reversed by the addition of PPX. These data suggest that polyphosphate secreted by M. smegmatis in the phagosome may affect the host cells from within the phagosome. Since M. smegmatis appear to make their own extracellular polyphosphate to promote their survival in D. discoideum cells, we used grlD − cells to determine if this effect is mediated by GrlD. At 4 h, similar numbers of viable ingested M. smegmatis were present in WT and grlD − cells. At 48 h, the number of viable ingested M. smegmatis were decreased in grlD − cells compared to WT D. discoideum cells. This indicates that GrlD promotes the ability of polyphosphate to inhibit the killing of ingested M. smegmatis. Together, these data suggest that reduced expression of ppk1 in M. smegmatis decreases the accumulation of extracellular polyphosphate and increases their killing in D. discoideum cells and that GrlD potentiates the ability of M. smegmatis to survive in D. discoideum cells. Assuming that, like other G-protein–coupled receptors, GrlD is on the plasma membrane, one possibility is that some GrlD receptors are endocytosed along with bacteria and can sense polyphosphate released by bacteria in the phagosome. Compared to D. discoideum cells, macrophages required relatively high concentrations of extracellular polyphosphate to inhibit the killing of E. coli. In cocultures with human macrophages, at 4 h, reduced expression of ppk1 did not affect the viability of ingested M. smegmatis, and extracellular polyphosphate at relatively high concentrations compared to those used in D. discoideum did not affect the viability of ingested WT and ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis in macrophages. However, at 48 h, and compared to WT M. smegmatis, reduced expression of ppk1 in M. smegmatis decreased bacterial viability in macrophages. At 48 h, extracellular polyphosphate did not affect the viability of ingested WT M. smegmatis, but increased the viability of ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis in macrophages. These data suggest that M. smegmatis PPK1 potentiates M. smegmatis viability in macrophages, possibly by secreting polyphosphate in the phagosome, and that WT M. smegmatis may produce sufficient polyphosphate to saturate the polyphosphate response in human macrophages and survive in macrophages longer than E. coli. PPX Potentiates the Killing of Ingested M. tuberculosis in Human Macrophages. Similar to M. smegmatis, M. tuberculosis bacteria accumulate extracellular polyphosphate as cell density increases. To determine if polyphosphate potentiates the survival of M. tuberculosis in macrophages, human macrophages were incubated with M. tuberculosis bacteria with and without PPX and stained with antibodies to detect M. tuberculosis. At 4 h, compared to control, PPX did not change the number of macrophages or the M. tuberculosis staining. At 48 h, the macrophage count in the cultures with M. tuberculosis was decreased compared to 4 h, and the addition of PPX partially reversed this. At 48 h, the total M. tuberculosis staining intensity increased compared to 4 h, and the addition of PPX partially reversed this. Aside from decreased M. tuberculosis staining intensity in female compared to male macrophages at 4 h, there was no significant difference between the response of macrophages from male and female donors. These results suggest that polyphosphate secreted from M. tuberculosis may potentiate their survival in human macrophages and decrease the viability of the ingesting macrophages. Fig. 3. PPX increases viability of human macrophages when infected with M. tuberculosis and reduces ingested M. tb staining. Differential interference contrast and fluorescence images of human macrophages containing ingested M. tb in... Polyphosphate Inhibits Phagosome Acidification in D. discoideum and Human Macrophages. Many successful pathogens have evolved ways to evade phagosome–lysosome killing, often by inhibiting phagosome acidification. To determine if polyphosphate inhibits the killing of ingested bacteria by inhibiting phagosome acidification, D. discoideum cells were allowed to ingest pHrodo zymosan bioparticles. When these bioparticles are acidified, their fluorescence intensity increases. Cells were also stained with LysoTracker, which stains acidic compartments. In control cells, the bioparticles tended to colocalize with LysoTracker staining. Extracellular polyphosphate decreased both the bioparticle fluorescence intensity and LysoTracker staining. These effects of polyphosphate were abolished in cells lacking GrlD. These results suggest that polyphosphate may inhibit the killing of ingested bacteria by inhibiting phagosome acidification and that GrlD is necessary for polyphosphate inhibition of phagosome acidification. Fig. 4. Polyphosphate inhibits phagosome acidification in D. discoideum cells. WT and grlD − D. discoideum cells were incubated with pHrodo zymosan bioparticles in the presence of polyphosphate for 1 h and... To determine if polyphosphate also inhibits phagosome acidification in human macrophages, monocyte-derived macrophages were allowed to ingest pHrodo zymosan bioparticles and stained with LysoTracker. In control macrophages, acidification of the bioparticles occurred within 5 min of ingestion, and the bioparticles colocalized with LysoTracker staining. Polyphosphate inhibited acidification of ingested bioparticles and colocalization of bioparticles with LysoTracker staining. These data suggest that polyphosphate inhibits phagosome acidification to prevent the killing of ingested bacteria in human macrophages. Fig. 5. Polyphosphate inhibits phagosome acidification, reduces early endosome markers, and retains coronin in human macrophages. Fluorescence intensities of pHrodo zymosan bioparticles in human macrophages, in the absence or presence of 470... Polyphosphate Reduces Early Endosome Markers and Causes Coronin to Be Retained on the Phagosomes in Human Macrophages. During phagocytosis, cells extend their plasma membrane around particles to form a phagosome. Phagosome maturation is separated into early, late, and lysosomal fusion stages. Clathrin is a self-assembling protein that mediates micropinocytosis, but is also associated with early phagosomes. The newly formed phagosome fuses with small vesicles to acquire the small GTPase Rab5, which recruits class III phosphoinositide 3-kinase vacuolar protein-sorting 34 and early endosomal antigen 1 that are necessary for phagosome acidification via acquisition of V-ATPase and maturation to a late phagosome. During maturation of the phagosome, Rab7 replaces Rab5, and this mediates fusion of the phagosome with a lysosome to form a phagolysosome. To determine if polyphosphate affects levels of proteins involved in phagosome maturation, Western blots of human macrophages were stained for known endosomal markers. Polyphosphate did not alter levels of clathrin or the late endosomal marker Rab7, but reduced levels of the early endosomal markers EEA1 and Rab 5 at 4 and 48 h after M. smegmatis infection and reduced levels of the early endosomal marker VPS34 levels at 48 h, but not 4 h. To investigate if extracellular polyphosphate alters phagosome maturation and, thus, alters the distribution of endosome markers on phagosomes, macrophages were infected with ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli for 48 h and were stained for endosome markers. With no extracellular polyphosphate, very little ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli was detected, indicating the digestion of ingested ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli. In the presence of polyphosphate, the fluorescence of ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli was observed, indicating that there was less digestion of the bacteria. Although the presence of extracellular polyphosphate reduced the levels of early endosome markers such as EEA1, VPS34, and Rab5, ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli partially colocalized with EEA1 and Rab5, as indicated by an approximately twofold increase in the Pearson’s correlation coefficient compared to that of clathrin, VPS34, and Rab7. PCC values close to zero indicated no colocalization. These data indicate that polyphosphate reduced early endosome markers in M. smegmatis -infected macrophages and caused the retention of early endosome markers in phagosomes containing ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli. These data also suggest that extracellular polyphosphate inhibits phagosome maturation, possibly by retaining the early endosome markers on phagosomes and, thus, preventing the recruitment of the late endosome marker Rab7, which is necessary for the fusion of phagosomes with lysosomes. Coronin 1 is a cytoskeleton-associated protein that connects actin filaments to the plasma membrane and transiently localizes on a phagosome membrane. Coronin is retained on mycobacteria-containing phagosomes, and this retention may be responsible for blocking phagosome maturation. To investigate if extracellular polyphosphate alters coronin localization on phagosomes, human macrophages were incubated with pHrodo zymosan bioparticles for 1 h, fixed, and stained for coronin. Compared to macrophages with no extracellular polyphosphate, macrophages with extracellular polyphosphate showed reduced fluorescence of phagosomes containing pHrodo zymosan bioparticles and increased coronin staining on those phagosomes, suggesting that extracellular polyphosphate causes coronin to be retained on the phagosomes in human macrophages. Human coronin shares ∼30% homology with D. discoideum coronin A. Although D. discoideum coronin is involved in phagocytosis, loss of coronin A does not alter the survival of pathogens such as Mycobacterium marinum and Legionella pneumonia in D. discoideum. To determine if polyphosphate alters coronin localization on D. discoideum phagosomes, coronin-null D. discoideum cells expressing Coronin–GFP were incubated with pH-independent Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated zymosan A bioparticles for 1 h, and cells were imaged. Unlike with human coronin, polyphosphate did not appear to alter the localization of coronin A in phagosomes containing bioparticles within D. discoideum cells. Taken together, these data suggest that polyphosphate inhibits phagosome acidification, possibly due to retention of coronin on the phagosomes in human macrophages, but does not alter coronin localization on D. discoideum phagosomes, indicating that other factors in D. discoideum contribute to polyphosphate-mediated inhibition of phagosome acidification. Polyphosphate Reduces Lysosome Activity in D. discoideum and Human Macrophages, and Reduced Expression of ppk1 in M. smegmatis Causes Increased Lysosome Activity. Polyphosphate reduced LysoTracker staining of acidic compartments in D. discoideum and human macrophages. To determine if polyphosphate alters lysosome activity, cells were incubated with the Biovision Lysosomal Intracellular Activity Assay Kit lysosome substrate, which becomes fluorescent after being cleaved in the lysosome. Compared to control, polyphosphate or the presence of WT M. smegmatis reduced the lysosome substrate fluorescence in D. discoideum cells, and, for M. smegmatis, this effect was reversed by knockdown of ppk1. In macrophages, polyphosphate also reduced the lysosome substrate fluorescence, and, compared to WT M. smegmatis, knockdown of M. smegmatis ppk1 increased the lysosome substrate fluorescence in macrophages. As a control, cytochalasin D, an inhibitor of endocytosis, reduced the lysosome substrate fluorescence in both D. discoideum cells and macrophages. Taken together, polyphosphate appears to reduce lysosome activity in D. discoideum and macrophages, and this might prevent lysosomal degradation of ingested bacteria. Fig. 6. Polyphosphate inhibits lysosome activity in D. discoideum and human macrophages. Fluorescence and differential interference contrast images of D. discoideum cells or human macrophages with lysosome substrate in the presence... Polyphosphate Causes D. discoideum to Carry Bacteria during Development. The soil-dwelling amoeba D. discoideum feed on prey bacteria during the vegetative stage of their life cycle, but amoebas start aggregating as soon as the food bacteria become scarce. Developing D. discoideum cells form a fruiting body consisting of a column of stalk cells holding a mass of spores off the ground. Burkholderia bacteria or lectins secreted by D. discoideum cells induce carriage of food bacteria by D. discoideum cells. To determine if polyphosphate causes a retention of internalized bacteria during development, cells were grown on a lawn of ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli in the presence or absence of polyphosphate. After 4 d, spore masses were picked with a pipette tip and spotted on Luria–Bertani agar plates to check for bacterial growth. Polyphosphate increased the percentage of spore masses that contained at least one viable bacterium. These data suggest that, similar to secreted D. discoideum discoidin I, polyphosphate can cause some, but not all, D. discoideum cells to retain unkilled bacteria during development. Fig. 7. Polyphosphate potentiates carriage of E. coli during D. discoideum development, and farming Burkholderia accumulate more polyphosphate than nonfarming Burkholderia bacteria. WT D. discoideum cells were grown in the presence of E. coli in the absence... As a social amoeba, D. discoideum can form a stable symbiotic relationship with Burkholderia species. Specific Burkholderia species called “farming strains” colonize D. discoideum during development, and these bacteria are stably carried through multiple D. discoideum generations. We observed that the farming strains B. agricolaris, B. hayleyella, and B. bonniea, which can stably colonize D. discoideum, accumulated more extracellular polyphosphate than “nonfarming” strains B. xenovorans, B. fungorum, and B. phymatum. These data suggest that polyphosphate may potentiate the ability of farming Burkholderia species to colonize D. discoideum cells. To determine if exogenous polyphosphate can increase the percentage of viable nonfarming Burkholderia in D. discoideum spore masses, D. discoideum cells were grown on a lawn of a mixture of farming or nonfarming Burkholderia and ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli in the presence or absence of polyphosphate. After 4 d, D. discoideum spore masses were picked with a pipette tip and spotted on SM/5 agar plates to check for bacterial growth. When D. discoideum cells were grown on farming Burkholderia, 100 ± 0% of spore masses contained viable bacteria. Lower percentages of spore masses contained viable bacteria when D. discoideum cells were grown on nonfarming Burkholderia. The addition of polyphosphate to the agar plates did not significantly increase the percentage of D. discoideum spore masses containing viable nonfarming Burkholderia. These data suggest that extracellular polyphosphate in the substrate material is not sufficient to increase the retention of nonfarming Burkholderia in the spore masses that are held up off the substrate. Discussion Proliferating D. discoideum cells accumulate extracellular polyphosphate as their local cell density increases, and the cells sense extracellular polyphosphate to help them sense the local cell density and anticipate when the cells will overgrow their food source and starve. We found that exogenous polyphosphate, at concentrations that do not induce development, inhibits the killing of ingested E. coli and M. smegmatis bacteria in D. discoideum. A possible explanation for this is that the response to extracellular polyphosphate would then allow some of the D. discoideum cells to start carrying ingested bacteria as a future food source when the D. discoideum cell density starts getting high and the cells are about to starve. Remarkably, human macrophages similarly respond to polyphosphate by inhibiting digestion of phagocytosed bacteria, but why they do this is unclear. Pathogens such as M. tuberculosis inhibit phagosome maturation and, thus, phagolysosomal killing to survive in host cells, and reduced expression of PPK in these pathogens diminishes their survival in macrophages. In agreement, we found that, in comparison to parental M. smegmatis cells, ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis cells survive poorly in D. discoideum and human macrophages. Exogenous polyphosphate rescued the diminished survival of the ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis cells in both D. discoideum and human macrophages, suggesting that polyphosphate is a signal released from M. smegmatis cells to potentiate their survival in both D. discoideum and human macrophages. This, in turn, suggests a similarity in the polyphosphate response that has been conserved from D. discoideum to humans. After infecting human macrophages, M. tuberculosis can escape the host cells by inducing macrophage cell death. When M. tuberculosis bacilli number per macrophage is less than approximately five, the bacterial proliferation is slow, and the bacteria have less cytotoxic effect in the host macrophages. However, when M. tuberculosis bacilli number exceeds ∼18 per macrophage, M. tuberculosis induces macrophage cell death. We observed that ∼10 to 20 M. tuberculosis bacilli per macrophage induced some macrophage cell death. The addition of PPX partially reversed both the increase in M. tuberculosis and the M. tuberculosis -induced macrophage death. Together, this suggests that extracellular polyphosphate from M. tuberculosis potentiates M. tuberculosis survival in macrophages. How M. tuberculosis and other bacteria secrete polyphosphate is unknown. At very low cell densities, and, thus, low extracellular polyphosphate concentrations, D. discoideum cells digest all bacteria. As the cell density increases, as indicated to cells by ∼10 µg/mL extracellular polyphosphate, ∼1 in 1,000 D. discoideum cells start storing rather than digesting bacteria, and, at high cell densities, all of the cells respond to the concomitant high concentration of polyphosphate by inhibiting nutrient uptake and initiating development. Whereas digesting rather than storing nutrients is advantageous if there will be more nutrients available, storing rather than digesting nutrients might be advantageous if the cell does not encounter more bacteria to eat. Together, this suggests the possibility of a stochastic or deterministic bet-hedging strategy driving some cells to store, and other cells to digest, phagocytosed bacteria. In humans, in a limited subset of antigen-presenting cells such as macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells, the major histocompatibility complex class II molecules bind and display small peptides at the cell surface, such that T lymphocytes recognize the peptides and induce antigenic response against foreign peptides. APCs are less proteolytically active and show reduced degradative capacity to maximize antigen presentation. We observed that polyphosphate causes ∼1 in 100 macrophages to store rather than digest bacteria, suggesting that a stochastic or deterministic process causes most of the macrophages to kill ingested bacteria and some macrophages to slow the killing of ingested bacteria, possibly to allow antigen presentation. For the macrophages, the extracellular polyphosphate that triggers this may come from platelet degranulation during blood clotting and wound healing. These results suggest an evolutionarily conserved process in D. discoideum and human macrophages, where exogenous polyphosphate or polyphosphate secreted by bacteria induce only a small subset of cells to not immediately kill and digest ingested bacteria. D. discoideum can uptake nutrients by macropinocytosis. Polyphosphate at a concentration of ≥470 µg/mL inhibits D. discoideum proliferation, and we found that this polyphosphate concentration partially inhibits macropinocytosis, indicating that polyphosphate may inhibit D. discoideum proliferation in part by inhibiting macropinocytosis. Polyphosphate at a concentration between 5 and 47 µg/mL inhibits the killing of ingested bacteria, but does not significantly inhibit macropinocytosis or proliferation. This, then, suggests that as the cell density and extracellular polyphosphate concentration in a colony of D. discoideum cells increase, some of the cells start storing bacteria, and, then, at higher cell densities and higher extracellular polyphosphate concentrations, closer to the point where cells will overgrow their food supply and starve, a larger percentage of the cells decrease macropinocytosis for unknown reasons and inhibit cytokinesis to increase the percentage of large cells. During the exponential growth phase of a culture of M. smegmatis bacteria, with N 0 the initial cell density and t time, cell density N will be N = N 0 e kt. Assuming no breakdown of polyphosphate, and cells secreting m molecules of polyphosphate per cell per second, the change in extracellular polyphosphate concentration at time t will be d d t = N m. The extracellular polyphosphate concentration will then be = ∫ 0 t N m d t = N 0 m ∫ 0 t e k t d t = N 0 m k e k t + C. From the growth curves in SI Appendix, Fig. S3 D, for the interval of 12 to 24 h, for each experiment, we calculated k, and from the extracellular polyphosphate concentration measurements in SI Appendix, Fig. S3 E, we calculated the change in between 12 and 24 h, Δ. With N 12 being the cell density at 12 h and t being 12 h, m = Δ Pp k / N 12 e kt − 1, we find that for WT M. smegmatis, m is 53 ± 3 × 10 −12 µg of polyphosphate per cell per second, and for the ppk1 knockdown strain, m is 3 ± 1 × 10 −12 µg of polyphosphate per cell per second. From figure 1 of ref. 71, at 15 min after ingesting a 3.23-µm-diameter yeast, the inner diameter of the phagosome is 3.64 µm. Assuming that both the yeast and the phagosome are spherical, the annular space volume is 7.6 × 10 −12 mL. From the above calculation for the polyphosphate secretion rate from a M. smegmatis bacterium, there will be 5 × 10 −8 µg of polyphosphate secreted in 15 min, so the concentration in the space between the bacterium and the inner wall of the yeast-sized phagosome will be ∼6,100 µg/mL. For the ppk1 knockdown, the concentration will be ∼360 µg/mL. Since the bacteria are smaller than a yeast, the volume between a bacterium and the inner wall of the phagosome will be smaller, making these concentrations even higher. If the initial ingestion event involves the plasma membrane touching the bacterium, so that both the annular space and the polyphosphate concentration in this space are initially both 0, and assuming that the fluid leakage through the phagosome membrane is roughly linear with time, causing the annular volume to increase linearly with time, and assuming the polyphosphate secretion rate is also linear with time, then the polyphosphate concentration in this annular space will be roughly constant, and, thus, for the WT M. smegmatis, the polyphosphate concentration will be ∼6,100 µg/mL or more within a time much shorter than 15 min. We observed that the concentration of phosphate monomers in polyphosphate needed to keep some bacteria from being digested is ∼10 µg/mL, well below the concentrations in a phagosome with WT and ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis calculated above. Assuming that a few polyphosphate receptors will be internalized with the region of the plasma membrane used to form the phagosome, this concentration of polyphosphate in the phagosome might be sufficient to prevent digestion of the M. smegmatis bacterium by cells that have not accumulated >10 µg/mL extracellular polyphosphate. How the addition of extracellular polyphosphatase affects the ability of phagocytosed Mycobacteria to inhibit their digestion by D. discoideum or macrophages is unknown. One possibility is that the polyphosphatase hydrolyzes polyphosphate weakly bound to the bacterium, so that for a few critical seconds after phagocytosis, there is not enough polyphosphate to activate from within the phagosome the pathway that inhibits lysosome fusion. Another possibility is that some polyphosphatase, either free or weakly binding to the bacterium, is brought into the phagosome. D. discoideum cells appear to use GrlD to sense both extracellular polyphosphate and the polyphosphate released by bacteria in a phagosome. Assuming that macrophages also use a receptor to sense polyphosphate to inhibit phagosome maturation, this implies that there is a polyphosphate signal-transduction pathway in macrophages exploited by pathogens such as M. tuberculosis to promote their own survival. An intriguing possibility is that blocking this pathway would cause macrophages to digest all, rather than most, internalized pathogens such as M. tuberculosis, suggesting a therapeutic approach to promote clearance of these pathogens in patients. Materials and Methods D. discoideum and Human Cell Culture. WT AX2 and grlD − D. discoideum strains were obtained from the Dictyostelium Stock Center. D. discoideum cells were provided by Ludwig Eichinger, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. Cells were grown at 21 °C in shaking culture in synthetic medium and on SM/5 agar on lawns of E. coli. A quantity of 100 µg/mL dihydrostreptomycin and 100 µg/mL ampicillin was used to kill E. coli in D. discoideum cultures obtained from SM/5 agar. grlD − cells were grown under selection with 5 µg/mL blasticidin. Bacterial survival assays were performed in type 353047 24-well plates with 10 6 D. discoideum cells per well in 1 mL of SIH, and phagocytosis and lysosome activity assays were performed in type 353219, 96-well, black/clear, tissue-culture-treated, glass-bottom plates with 10 5 cells per well in 100 µL. Human peripheral blood was collected from healthy volunteers who gave written consent, with specific approval from the Texas A&M University human subjects institutional review board. PBMCs were isolated as described. The PBMCs were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute Medium containing 10% bovine calf serum, 2 mM l -glutamine, and 50 ng/mL human GM-CSF at 37 °C in a humidified chamber with 5% CO 2 in type 353047, 24-well plates with 10 6 cells per well in 1 mL or type 353219, 96-well, black/clear, tissue-culture-treated, glass-bottom plates with 10 5 cells per well in 100 µL. After 5 d, loosely adhered cells were removed by gentle pipetting. Bacterial survival assays were performed in 24-well plates, and phagocytosis and lysosome activity assays were performed in 96-well plates. Bacterial Culture. E. coli K-12, E. coli JW2486-2 from the E. coli Genetic Stock Center, and HCB33 /ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli were grown at 37 °C in LB broth. A quantity of 100 µg/mL ampicillin was used to select for HCB33 /ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli. M. smegmatis, and attenuated Biosafety Level-2 strain of M. tuberculosis were grown as described in Middlebrook 7H9 broth at 37 °C or at 37 °C in a rotator in a humidified incubator or 7H10 agar containing 0.5% glycerol, 0.05% Tween 80, and Middlebrook albumin dextrose catalase Enrichment or the Middlebrook Oleic ADC Enrichment. M. tuberculosis ΔleuDΔpanCD liquid cultures were additionally supplemented with 50 μg/mL leucine and 50 μg/mL pantothenate. CRISPRi-mediated knockdown of ppk1 in M. smegmatis was performed by Thomas Snavely as described. The M. smegmatis ppk1 DNA sequence 5′-AGTGCCGGGCGCACCGAGTC-3′ was cloned into the PLJR962 vector to generate the guide RNA that target the template DNA strand within the open reading frame of ppk1 to generate ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis. Anhydrotetracycline hydrochloride, an inducer of CRISPRi knockdown, was used at a concentration of 200 ng/mL for ppk1 knockdown M. smegmatis. Burkholderia strains were grown at 21 °C on SM/5 agar plates as described. RNA Extraction and PCR. To examine the CRISPRi-mediated knockdown of ppk1 in M. smegmatis and the deletion of ppk in E. coli K-12, M. smegmatis and E. coli K-12 were grown to optical density of 0.5 to 1.0. M. smegmatis was grown in the presence of 200 ng/mL ATc. RNA was extracted from M. smegmatis and E. coli as described. Complementary DNA was synthesized from 2 µg of RNA by using the Maxima H Minus First Strand cDNA Synthesis kit. PCR was performed to verify the reduction or loss of cDNA associated with the gene knockdown or deletion using M. smegmatis ppk1 gene-specific primers and E. coli K-12 ppk gene-specific primers. PCR products were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis. Band intensities on gels were quantified by using Image Lab. Recombinant Polyphosphatase and Polyphosphate Assays. Sodium polyphosphate was dissolved in water to a concentration of 15 mg/mL, and the pH was verified to be pH ∼ 6.9. This stock diluted 1,000 × in cultures was defined as 15 µg/mL polyphosphate. Higher dilutions were used to make lower polyphosphate concentrations. The sodium polyphosphate was also dissolved in water to a concentration of 70.4 mg/mL, the pH was checked, and this stock was diluted 100 × in cultures to make 704 µg/mL polyphosphate; higher dilutions were used to make culture concentrations down to 15 µg/mL. The plasmid for purifying S. cerevisiae PPX1 was a gift from Michael Gray, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. Recombinant PPX1 was purified as described in a protein-purification protocol. A quantity of 5 µg/mL PPX with 5 mM MgCl 2 was used for treatment of D. discoideum and human macrophages in the assays. To check PPX enzymatic activity, polyphosphate was treated with 5 µg/mL PPX with 5 mM MgCl 2 for 1 h at 37 °C. Extracellular polyphosphate secreted by E. coli or M. smegmatis, or polyphosphate from the above assay, was assessed by adding 25 µg/mL DAPI, and measuring fluorescence at 415/550 nm, as described. Culture supernatants were clarified by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 2 min. Extracellular polyphosphate secreted by Burkholderia was assayed by growing cells on SM/5 agar for 48 h, and the agar was crushed and resuspended in 10 mL of sodium phosphate buffer, incubated for 5 min, and clarified by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 2 min, and polyphosphate in the suspension was measured. Phagosome volume was calculated from ref. 71. Bacterial Survival Assay. D. discoideum cells or human macrophages were seeded in a 24-well plate. After 30 min, either polyphosphate or PPX, or polyphosphate and PPX was added to the cells and mixed by gentle pipetting. E. coli K-12 or M. smegmatis bacteria were washed two times in Sorensen buffer for D. discoideum and phosphate-buffered saline for human macrophages by centrifuging at 12,000 × g for 2 min, and resuspended in Sorensen buffer for D. discoideum or PBS for human macrophages to a final OD 600 of 0.1. E. coli K-12, or M. smegmatis was added to D. discoideum cells or human macrophages and incubated for 2 h. Bacteria outside the cells were removed by gently washing D. discoideum cells with SIH or human macrophages with RPMI. The remaining uningested bacteria were killed by adding 200 µg/mL gentamicin. Cells were washed as above to remove gentamicin. After 4, 24, or 48 h, D. discoideum cells or human macrophages were washed as above and lysed by using 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min at room temperature by gentle pipetting, and lysates were plated on LB agar for E. coli K-12 growth or 7H10 agar for M. smegmatis growth and incubated at 37 °C. Polyphosphate or PPX, when assayed, was present in all incubation steps up to the Triton lysis step. E. coli K-12 colonies were visible after 24 h, whereas M. smegmatis colonies were visible after 72 h. Bacterial colonies were counted, and viable bacteria in D. discoideum cells as cfu/10 6 D. discoideum cells or viable bacteria in human macrophages as cfu/mL were calculated. For imaging, D. discoideum cells or human macrophages were incubated with HCB33 /ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli for 4 and 48 h as described above, and cells were stained with 100 nM of LysoTracker for 30 min after 3.5 or 47.5 h of incubation. Cells were washed two times with SIH or RPMI, images were taken with a 40× objective on an FV1000 confocal microscope, using Olympus Fluoview Version 4.2a software, and figures were prepared by using CorelDRAW X8. Fluorescence intensity was measured, and colocalization was analyzed with the Coloc2 plugin in Fiji. To study M. tuberculosis survival in human macrophages, a bacterial survival assay was performed as described above, except that there were there were ∼10 to 20 M. tuberculosis bacteria per macrophage. After 4 and 48 h, macrophages with ingested M. tuberculosis were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 10 min. Cells were washed two times with PBS, and 1 mL of PBS was added to the well. Fixed macrophages were washed once with PBS and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min. Macrophages were washed two times with PBS, blocked with 1 mg/mL type 0332 bovine serum albumin in PBS for 1 h, and washed once with PBS. A concentration of 1:2,000 rabbit anti- M. tuberculosis antibody in PBS/0.1% Tween 20 was added to macrophages and incubated at 4 °C overnight. Macrophages were washed three times with PBST and incubated with 1:500 Alexa 488 anti-rabbit and 10 µg/mL DAPI in PBST for 1 h. Macrophages were washed three times with PBST, and 1 mL of PBS was then added to the well. Each washing step was done for 5 min, and all steps were performed at room temperature, if not indicated otherwise. Images of macrophages were taken with a 4× dry or 100× oil-immersion objective on a Nikon Eclipse Ti2 microscope, and deconvolution of images was done by using the Richardson–Lucy algorithm in NIS-Elements AR software. Macrophage count and fluorescence intensity of M. tuberculosis were analyzed by ImageJ. Figures were prepared by using CorelDRAW X8. Viable bacteria in D. discoideum spore masses was quantified as described with the following modifications. Stationary-phase HCB33 /ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli grown in LB agar or Burkholderia grown on SM/5 agar was collected in SM/5. Log-phase D. discoideum cells grown in SIH and bacteria were washed two times in SM/5 by centrifugation at 500 × g for 3 min. A quantity of 2 × 10 5 D. discoideum cells in 50 µL of SM/5 was added to 300 µL of SM/5 containing HCB33 /ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli or 300 µL of SM/5 containing 90% HCB33 /ptrc99A–eYFP E. coli and 10% Burkholderia. The mixture was plated on SM/5 agar plates in the presence or absence of polyphosphate and incubated at 21 °C for 3 to 4 d. The D. discoideum cells overgrew the bacteria, starved, and formed fruiting bodies. Individual D. discoideum spore masses were picked with a sterile pipette tip, spotted on SM/5 agar plate, and incubated at 21 °C for 24 to 48 h, and bacterial colonies were counted. Endocytosis and Exocytosis Assays. Endocytosis and exocytosis of TRITC–dextran were performed as described. For control endocytosis, the time point 180 min was assigned 100% relative fluorescence. For control exocytosis, the time point 0 was assigned 100% relative fluorescence. Rate constant K of endocytosis and exocytosis, expressed in reciprocal of the x -axis time units, was generated by fitting the curve to one phase-association equation. Fluorescence Microscopy. D. discoideum cells were seeded in a 96-well, black/clear, tissue-culture-treated plate. After 30 min, polyphosphate was added to the cells and mixed by gentle pipetting. pHrodo zymosan bioparticles were resuspended in Sorensen buffer to a concentration of 0.5 mg/mL. Ten microliters of bioparticles and 100 nM LysoTracker was added to the cells and mixed by gentle pipetting, and the plates were spun down at 300 × g for 2 min. After 1 h, images of D. discoideum cells were taken with a 40× objective on a Nikon Eclipse Ti2, and we used the Richardson–Lucy algorithm for deconvolution of images in NIS-Elements AR software. The number of bioparticles ingested per cell per hour was calculated as a mean number of ingested bioparticles per phagocytosing D. discoideum cell multiplied by the percentage of D. discoideum cells engaged in phagocytosis. Fluorescence intensity was analyzed by ImageJ software. Figures were prepared by using CorelDRAW X8. To investigate coronin localization, D. discoideum coronin A knockout mutant with overexpressed coronin A-GFP or human macrophages was seeded in 96-well tissue-culture plates. D. discoideum cells were incubated with Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated zymosan bioparticles, and macrophages were incubated with pHrodo zymosan bioparticles for 1 h; uningested extracellular bioparticles were removed by washing D. discoideum with SIH or macrophages with RPMI, and cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 10 min. Cells were washed two times with PBS, and 100 µL of PBS was added to the well. Images of fixed D. discoideum cells were taken to analyze coronin A localization. Fixed macrophages were washed once with PBS, permeabilized, blocked with BSA, and stained with 1:2,000 anti-coronin antibody as described in Bacterial Survival Assay. Macrophages were washed three times with PBST, and 200 µL of PBS was then added to the well. Images of D. discoideum and macrophages were taken with a 40× objective on a Nikon Eclipse Ti2, and deconvolution of images was done by using the Richardson–Lucy algorithm in NIS-Elements AR software. Fluorescence intensity of coronin and pHrodo zymosan bioparticle was analyzed by ImageJ. Figures were prepared by using CorelDRAW X8. Live-Cell Microscopy. Human macrophages in 96-well, black/clear, tissue-culture-treated, glass-bottom plates were incubated with 100 nM LysoTracker for 30 min, followed by incubation with 10 µL of 0.5 mg/mL pHrodo zymosan bioparticles, and the plates were spun down at 300 × g for 2 min. Imaging of cells took place in a controlled chamber maintaining 37 °C with 5% CO 2. Confocal images were taken with a 60× glycerol-immersion objective at 15-s intervals for 45 min by using a Leica SP8 confocal microscope. Lysosome Activity Assay. D. discoideum cells or human macrophages were seeded in 96-well plates. Cytochalasin D or polyphosphate was added to the cells and incubated for 30 min. Lysosome activity assays were performed with a K448-50 lysosomal intracellular activity assay kit following the manufacturer’s directions. Cells were imaged with a 40× objective on a Nikon Eclipse Ti2 and processed with NIS-Elements AR software. The fluorescence intensity of the lysosome substrate was analyzed by ImageJ software. Figures were prepared by using CorelDRAW X8. Immunoblot Analysis. Macrophages were lysed in sample buffer containing 1x Pierce protease inhibitor and heated to 95 °C for 5 min. Samples were separated by SDS/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis using Tris–glycine 4 to 20% polyacrylamide gels, transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride blotting membrane, and immunoblotted following the manufacturers’ directions. Blots were blocked with 5% skim milk in PBS. The following primary antibodies were used: rabbit monoclonal anti-clathrin heavy chain, rabbit monoclonal anti-EEA1, rabbit monoclonal anti-Rab5, rabbit monoclonal anti-Rab7, and rabbit polyclonal anti-VPS34. Bound antibodies were detected with an enhanced chemiluminescence Western blotting kit. Band intensities on blots were quantified by using Image J. For loading control, samples were separated by SDS/PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250, band intensities were quantified, and adjusted equivalent amount of total cell lysates were used for immunoblotting. Toluidine Blue Staining of Polyphosphate. Extracellular polyphosphate secreted by Burkholderia was resolved by PAGE using a 16- × 16-cm 2 10% polyacrylamide solution; VWR Life Science Seradigm) gel as described. Conditioned medium from Burkholderia agar cultures was concentrated ∼20 times by using a 1-kDa spin filter by centrifugation at 4,000 × g for 2 h. Polyphosphate standards of specific chain lengths were provided by Toshikazu Shiba, RegeneTiss Inc.. The running buffer was 1× TAE per liter, and the 6× sample buffer was 0.01% Orange G ; 30% glycerol; 10 mM Tris, pH 7.4; and 1 mM EDTA. PAGE was performed at 100 V for 2 to 3 h at room temperature until the Orange G had run through two-thirds of the gel. Gels were stained with 0.05% toluidine blue, 20% methanol, and 2% glycerol for 1 h and destained 2 to 3 d with several changes of destaining solution, and images were taken in white light by using a Bio-Rad scanner. Images were prepared in CorelDRAW X8. Statistical Analysis. Statistical analyses were performed by using GraphPad Prism 8 or Microsoft Excel. P < 0.05 was considered significant. Supplementary Material Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. 