Dictyostelium discoideum as a non‐mammalian biomedical model You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Dictyostelium discoideum as a non‐mammalian biomedical model Microb Biotechnol. 2021 Jan; 14: 111–125. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Microb Biotechnol v.14; 2021 Jan Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Dictyostelium discoideum as a non‐mammalian biomedical model Javier Martín‐González, Javier‐Fernando Montero‐Bullón, and Jesus Lacal Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials Table S1. Dictyostelium proteins involved in Legionella pneumophila infection. MBT2-14-111-s001.xlsx GUID: BE1D64F7-053B-4FE2-8F28-F655047C1595 Table S2. Dictyostelium proteins involved in directed cell migration. MBT2-14-111-s002.xlsx GUID: A6109CBB-6CE6-40CD-8E7A-7F1FB826F5CB Table S3. Dictyostelium proteins involved in neurological disorders. MBT2-14-111-s003.xlsx GUID: 6E4C8760-3C56-4AD9-8031-D70923F5FD54 Table S4. Dictyostelium proteins involved in autophagy/phagocytosis. MBT2-14-111-s004.xlsx GUID: 5DD2D230-8065-4778-894F-ADCAB56C57BD Table S5. Dictyostelium proteins involved in mitochondrial syndromes. MBT2-14-111-s005.xlsx GUID: 867C479D-1124-4128-8A75-D7E23E34564D Table S6. GO Term analysis for biological processes associated to the proteins studied in Dictyostelium. MBT2-14-111-s006.xlsx GUID: 77CAEFD3-4F7B-4597-991E-01641F4E5FD2 This MS opens a window to the general audience on the potential of Dictyostelium as a model microbe in biomedicine. Summary Dictyostelium discoideum is one of eight non‐mammalian model organisms recognized by the National Institute of Health for the study of human pathology. The use of this slime mould is possible owing to similarities in cell structure, behaviour and intracellular signalling with mammalian cells. Its haploid set of chromosomes completely sequenced amenable to genetic manipulation, its unique and short life cycle with unicellular and multicellular stages, and phenotypic richness encoding many human orthologues, make Dictyostelium a representative and simple model organism to unveil cellular processes in human disease. Dictyostelium studies within the biomedical field have provided fundamental knowledge in the areas of bacterial infection, immune cell chemotaxis, autophagy/phagocytosis and mitochondrial and neurological disorders. Consequently, Dictyostelium has been used to the development of related pharmacological treatments. Herein, we review the utilization of Dictyostelium as a model organism in biomedicine. Introduction The cellular slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum is a protist that has long been regarded as a valuable and attractive tool for the study of eukaryotic cell biology because a high number of conserved functions and host‐pathogen interactions comparable to human cells. Dictyostelium provides a potential valuable vehicle for studying functions of protein human orthologues in a system which is experimentally tractable with an intermediate complexity between yeasts and higher multicellular eukaryotes. Based on studies that survey the presence of human orthologues in D. Discoideum, probing a set of genes related to human disease, the number of hits was estimated highly relevant and similar to other model organisms such as D. melanogaster or C. elegans, while higher than in S. cerevisiae or S. pombe. Dictyostelium has a 34 Mb haploid genome with six chromosomes encoding ~ 12 500 proteins. Its genome has been entirely sequenced and detailed genomic and proteomic information can be found in dictyBase. In particular, Dictyostelium is one of eight non‐mammalian model organisms recognized by the National Institute of Health in the United States for its utility in the study of fundamental molecular processes of human medical importance. Its developmental life cycle is unique among protists and at the different stages of development, Dictyostelium features both plant‐ and animal‐like characteristics. Different stages in the life cycle of D. discoideum are shown in Figure 1. Dictyostelium grows by the mitotic division of single cells that feed by phagocytosis on bacteria, or by macropinocytosis on simple axenic liquid medium, making it possible to reach high cell densities. Upon starvation, Dictyostelium cells exhibit an impressive multicellular cooperativity and start to aggregate by chemotaxis in response to released cAMP signals. More than 100,000 cells are forming the aggregate called motile slug. The slug responds thermotactically and phototactically with exquisite sensitivity. After the formation of a motile slug, the differentiation culminates in the production of a fruiting body consisting of 80% spore cells and 20% dead stalk cells. Fig. 1 Dictyostelium cells and developmental time course in the absence of nutrients. Wild‐type AX3 cells grown in shaking axenic culture were plated on glass, and on non‐nutrient agar plates and allowed to starve... D. discoideum has been studied for many years, and some papers have presented it as a relevant model in biomedicine. To the best of our knowledge, D. discoideum was not just first isolated but also studied within the biomedical field in the infection of human pathogen bacteria. However, Dictyostelium will not be considered as a biomedical model until many years later. Nowadays, recent papers have a different and wider perspective from those of the beginning, from studies of the extracellular vesicle in cancer, the endoplasmic reticulum stress or microbiome regulation and homeostasis in humans, to CRISPR technology applications. In this minireview, we recapitulate the major areas using D. discoideum as a model organism in biomedicine. Infection by bacterial pathogens Due to the similarities between D. discoideum and human cells, Dictyostelium is a good model for the study of microbial infection since the damage made by the pathogen is mimicked. Legionella pneumophila is perhaps the most studied bacterial pathogen in Dictyostelium. During the colonization of the human respiratory tract, L. pneumophila enters and multiplies within alveolar macrophages, leading to severe pneumonia called Legionnaires disease. In order to characterize the intracellular life cycle of Legionella, investigators have used a variety of host cells, including free‐living protozoa and human cells. In human cells L. pneumophila enters in the macrophages by phagocytosis, then recruits endoplasmic reticulum vesicles where it starts to multiply, and newly form bacteria get out of the host by lysis. D. discoideum has been used to analyse the uptake, the dynamics movements of L. pneumophila containing vacuole, the transcriptional changes after infection, the protein composition of LCV and also to study some of the Legionella virulence factors and cellular targets. The most studied proteins are related to the uptake process, which is made by conventional phagocytosis, including but not limited to G proteins, phospholipase C, calnexin, calreticulin and cytoskeleton‐associated proteins. Regarding the uptake and bacterial replication in the phagosome, both processes have been studied in D. discoideum profilin‐minus strains, that are more susceptible of Legionella infection. On the other hand, Nramp1‐minus Dictyostelium cells displayed a reduced phagocytosis and a higher intracellular growth of L. pneumophila because depletes the phagosome of iron. Dictyostelium Ca 2+ ‐binding proteins with chaperone activity in the endoplasmic reticulum calnexin and calreticulin were found to be involved not only in endocytosis but also in exocytosis. Fig. 2 D. discoideum genes with implications in pathogenesis. A total of 29 genes have been identified in Dictyostelium as host model for pathogenesis. The encoded proteins are involved in intracellular growth, bacterial uptake and in both processes... Apart from the uptake via phagocytosis, there are evidences that suggest macropinocytosis as another mechanism for bacteria uptake. Some other factors related with both, phagocytosis and macropinocytosis, are Arp2/3 complex, RpkA, WASP and WAVE, small G proteins of the Rho family and actin‐binding proteins such as coronin, a well‐conserved protein in Dictyostelium whose absence produces a reduced Legionella uptake and enhances intracellular growth. All the above proteins are essential in the uptake of L. pneumophila. Rac proteins and PTEN are also necessary for the uptake of nutrients. The decrease in PIP₂ has been related with a higher Legionella infection in collaboration with PIPLC, PI3K and the PI‐5‐phosphatase, helping the fusion of vesicle and lysosome. Besides the discoveries made in the uptake process, Dictyostelium helped identifying new host cell factors for intracellular growth including LimC/LimD, myosin I, profilin and Nramp1. Also, the presence of inositol polyphosphate 5‐phosphatase, similar to the human protein OCRL1, reduces pathogen replication and the LCV formation. AMP‐activated protein kinase overexpression, a central cellular energy sensor, helps for a higher proliferation of L. pneumophila. Further, a defective AMPK in D. discoideum causes reduced growth, impaired aggregation, misdirection and mislocalization at the slug stage, impaired slug phototaxis and thermotaxis. Last but not least, we would like to mention that there are more pathogens for which D. discoideum was used as a model organism to study infection. Bordetella genus is involved in pathologies such as whooping cough. Recently, species of the genus B. bronchiseptica were proposed to use Dictyostelium as an environmental reservoir. Other pathogens include but are not limited to Mycobacterium marinum, Salmonella typhimurium, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Francisella noatunensis subsp. Noatunensis, Cryptococcus neoformans and yeast such as Candida albicans. These organisms are less studied than L. pneumoniae, but they allowed the identification of key proteins including the orthologue of the mammalian SLC11a1 protein, myosin and atg1. These and other host key proteins in D. Discoideum have been unravelled. Table 1 D. discoideum proteins involved in Legionella pneumophila infection. M.m.: Mycobacterium marinum, S.m.: Salmonella typhimurium, K.p.: Klebsiella pneumoniae, F.n.: Francisella noatunensis subsp. Noatunensis, C.n.: Cryptococcus neoformans, C.a.: Candida... Directed migration, or chemotaxis, of immune cells Many immune cells can detect the direction and intensity of an extracellular chemical gradient and migrate towards the source of stimulus. This process, called chemotaxis, is essential for immune system function and homeostasis. As aforementioned, some studies on D. discoideum exploit the similarities with macrophages in the uptake of pathogens such as Legionella. In Dictyostelium, vegetative cells access nutrient sources by migration towards products such as folic acid derived from bacteria or yeast, or locally secreted cAMP in the formation of motile slug during periods of starvation. This amoeboid movement is well conserved along eukaryotic evolution and resembles movement in human cells such as leucocytes or metastatic tumour cells. Indeed, many immunity diseases are linked with defects in leucocyte and macrophage chemotaxis and can also be modelled in Dictyostelium. Interestingly, there are many similarities between the chemotactic signalling pathway of Dictyostelium and leucocytes, where G‐protein‐coupled receptors signal changes cytoskeletal dynamics. Regarding immunity diseases, Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome is caused by mutations in the WAS gene and is characterized by abnormal or non‐functional white blood cells. D. discoideum WASP protein contributes to front‐rear cell polarity by controlling localization and cellular levels of activated Rac. Shwachman–Diamond syndrome particularly affects the bone marrow, pancreas and bones. This syndrome is caused by mutations in the SBDS gene encoding a protein that is required for the assembly of mature ribosomes and ribosome biogenesis. Dictyostelium SBDS localizes to the pseudopodia in cAMP gradient, and when mutated, caused defective PMN leucocytes orientation towards a N ‐formylmethionyl‐leucyl‐phenylalanine spatial gradient. Many other Dictyostelium proteins involved in chemotaxis are conserved in humans, such as TORC2, RAS PTEN and PI3K, PKB and PAKa. Also Dictyostelium has allowed to study the chemotaxis in tumour cells, by the GPCRs signalling pathways mentioned above, and also by the LEGI model, in which receptor occupancy by the chemoattractant triggers a fast, local excitatory signal and a lower global inhibitory signal. Table 2 D. discoideum proteins related to directed cell migration of immune cells. Proteins are classified by its biological function including actin cytoskeleton organization, regulation of signal transduction, protein phosphorylation and small GTPase‐mediated... Neurological disorders D. discoideum is also a good model for the study of some neurological disorders including Alzheimer, Huntington, epilepsy, bipolar disorder or neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses. One of the biggest advantages of using D. discoideum in neuronal disorders is that unlike mammalian models where some of these genes are essential for embryogenesis such as HTT, presenilins or amyloid beta peptide, in D. discoideum they are not and therefore, they can be mutated. Also, the genes related with the neural pathology in mammals do not exist in some cases in other eukaryotic models but appears in D. discoideum, including but not limited to genes responsible for the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Main Dictyostelium proteins studied in neurological disorders with human orthologues are listed in Figure 3 and Table S3. Fig. 3 D. discoideum genes implicated in neurological disorders. This Venn diagram includes some of the most interesting genes in D. discoideum for the study of neurological diseases in humans including Alzheimer, Huntington, epilepsy, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis... Alzheimer is a neurodegenerative disorder that causes dementia. In Alzheimer, Hirano bodies, amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are the hallmarks of this disease. The Hirano bodies are an aggregate of actin filaments with actin‐interacting proteins, whose function is unknown in the biology of the disease. Interestingly, D. discoideum cells can synthetize very similar aggregates to Hirano bodies. The main component of Hirano bodies that were found in D. discoideum cells correspond to a 34 kDa actin cross‐linking protein with an aberrant C‐terminal portion. Researchers have found that some cases of the disorder can result from mutations in the APP, PSEN1 or PSEN2 genes. APP encodes amyloid precursor protein, whereas PSEN1 and PSEN2 encode presenilin 1 and 2 respectively. When any of these genes is altered, large amounts of a toxic protein fragment called amyloid beta peptide are produced in the brain. This peptide can build up in the brain to form clumps called amyloid plaques. Although APP is not present in D. discoideum, cells expressing mammalian APP were able to process it and form Aβ40/Aβ42, the peptides that cause the Alzheimer’s disease in humans. On the other hand, presenilin protein in Dictyostelium, as in mammals, is a component of the γ‐secretase complex and is essential in Dictyostelium differentiation. Myo‐inositol is an abundant carbocyclic sugar in brain and other mammalian tissues where it plays an important role as the structural basis for a number of secondary messengers in eukaryotic cells, mediating cell signal transduction in response to a variety of hormones, neurotransmitters and growth factors. In addition, inositol serves as an important component of the structural lipids phosphatidylinositol and the phosphatidylinositol phosphate lipids. Myo‐inositol has been largely studied in human cells, as well as in Dictyostelium. Some studies in Dictyostelium suggested that INO1, a key enzyme in myo‐inositol biosynthesis pathway, is responsible for metabolic changes resulting in elevated protein degradation, glucose breakdown and high levels of amino acids. Other Dictyostelium proteins implicated in Alzheimer's disease are tau‐tubulin kinase orthologue and 3‐hydroxyacyl‐CoA dehydrogenase type‐2. Huntington’s disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder with many consequences such as motor, cognitive and behavioural disturbances. It is caused by mutations in the HTT gene coding for a protein called huntingtin which plays an important role in neurons in the brain and is essential for normal development before birth. The hallmark of Huntington’s disease is the high repetition of a CAG trinucleotide leading to the expansion of the HTT gene, that confers a gain‐of‐function property. Dictyostelium represents a good model to study this disease since it has a huntingtin human orthologue whose mutation or deficiency is not lethal for the cells. Dictyostelium htt mutant cells show pleiotropic defects such as reduced cell–cell and cell‐substratum adhesion, delayed development, a strong cellular sensitivity to osmotic stress, cytoskeletal defects, chemotaxis defects and regulate cell fate during development. These pleiotropic defects are consistent with the in vitro observations using human cells from Huntington’s disease patients. Alzheimer and Huntington’s disease patients were found to have increased levels of AMPK. In response to reduction of intracellular ATP levels, AMPK activates energy‐producing pathways and inhibits energy‐consuming processes, as well as cell growth and proliferation. As mentioned above, AMPK is conserved in D. discoideum and it is important as a central regulator of energy production in the cells. Another neurological pathology where D. discoideum has been very useful is in epilepsy, although the genetics of epilepsy are complex and not completely understood. Seizures is the main hallmark of this neurological disorder, and as in Alzheimer, the myo‐inositol balance is critical in humans. Apart from myo‐inositol, some studies in D. discoideum show that the phosphoinositide PIP₃ is reduced during seizure activity. PIP₃ regulates voltage‐gated channel, neuronal excitability and insertion of ion channels into synaptic plasma membranes. PIP₂ is also important in the develop of seizures in the DOORS syndrome, a disorder involving multiple abnormalities, caused by mutations in the TBC1D24 gene. Another key player protein is calmodulin, observed in human cells, not only related to heart arrhythmias, but also to epilepsy and delayed neurodevelopment. Dictyostelium represents a good model for the study of CalA mutations thanks to its highly conserved structure, haploid genome and the possibility to obtain numerous mutations. As mentioned above, D. discoideum has been very useful to study neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, a group of inherited progressive degenerative brain diseases characterized clinically by a decline of mental and other capacities, epilepsy and vision loss through retinal degeneration. Related to this pathology, there are 13 genes that when mutated are known to cause the disorder, 11 out of these 13 genes are conserved in D. discoideum. These 11 genes are Ppt1, Tpp1, CtsD and CprA which encode lysosomal enzymes, Ddj1 and Kctd9 which are membrane proteins, Cln5 a soluble lysosomal protein, Grn a granulin domain‐containing protein and Cln3, Mfsd8 and Kil2 coding for transmembrane proteins that localize in different organelles. Interestingly, Ppt1, Tpp1, CLN3, CLN5 and CtsD have been studied in Dictyostelium. Promising results are expected using D. discoideum as a model for the study of NCL. Bipolar disorder is a neuropsychiatric disorder where the patients have severe mood, energy and behaviour swings. Very little is known about the genetics of bipolar disorder, although some of the genetic changes associated with bipolar disorder have also been found in people with other common mental health disorders, such as schizophrenia. Understanding the genetics of bipolar disorder and other forms of mental illness is an active area of research. Both, the myo‐inositol imbalance and autophagy are essential in the course of this pathology. Indeed, the inositol changes are the target of the actual treatment of the disease. The way that VPA and lithium produce a reduction of myo‐inositol has been studied in many model organisms including D. discoideum. Studies using Dictyostelium show that these treatments cause an intracellular reduction of InsP₃ and increase the INO1 transcription. VPA also causes a reduction of phosphoinositides like PIP₂ while lithium causes a suppression of PIP₃‐mediated signalling. Hence, the dysregulation of phosphoinositides and inositol are linked with the pathology. Dictyostelium discoideum as a model organism in autophagy/phagocytosis Autophagy is a fast‐moving field with an enormous impact on human health and disease which has benefited from the use of D. discoideum. D. discoideum has shed light on the mechanisms that regulate autophagosome formation and contributed significantly to the study of autophagy‐related pathologies. Importantly, autophagy is a process associated with the infection of pathogens such as L. pneumophila and S. thyphimurium and involved in neurodegenerative disorders and cancer. About 17 proteins related to autophagy have been annotated in D. discoideum. D. discoideum ATG mutants result in phenotypes with reduced survival under nitrogen starvation, impaired endocytosis and growth, aberrant morphogenesis and defective spore differentiation. Among the proteins mediating autophagy ATG8, ATG9 and ATG16 function on phagocytosis. In particular, ATG8 was suggested as a great marker of the autophagy linked with autophagosome–lysosome fusion. ATG Dictyostelium proteins and other key proteins related to autophagy/phagocytosis are listed in Tables 3 and S4. D. discoideum has also been used to study autophagy in the elimination of pathogens such as S. aureus, S. enterica, F. noatunensis and M. marinum. Some of the studies are related with the process called ejection, that leads to the escape of the bacteria. Several proteins are involved in the ejection process including but not limited to ATG8, ATG18 and Sqstm1. As mentioned above, ATG9 and ATG16 play a role in the uptake. Table 3 D. discoideum proteins involved in pathologies caused by autophagy and phagocytosis defects. A total of 32 proteins have been identified. The proteins are grouped based on their biological function, including autophagy, endosomal transport, multivesicular... There is evidence of a possible relation between Alzheimer, Huntington and Parkinson diseases, and autophagy dysfunction, that leads to accumulate aberrant organelles and proteins. Some candidates include Vmp1, Sqtm1, ATG5 or ATG1, which are involved in protein degradation, or ATG8, ATG5 and ATG1 involved in Hirano bodies‐like aggregates degradation in Alzheimer. Regarding Hirano bodies present in Alzheimer, it has been shown that Dictyostelium can degrade the Hirano bodies‐like aggregates by autophagy and the proteasome In neurodegenerative disorders, other protein related with autophagy dysfunction is the VPS13 involved in Parkinson’s disease and Chorea‐acanthocytosis. Also, the gene KIAA0196/Strumpellin which encodes a component of the WASH complex is related with the autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia in humans. The CdcD protein, orthologue of VCP/p97 in humans, is related with cell death by autophagy in the presence of aberrant mitochondria and has been linked to IBMPFD, HSP, and a form of ALS. The process that causes cell death by autophagy is called autophagic cell death, and it is related with tumour suppression and neurological disorders as a consequence of psychological stress. Interestingly, this process was also observed in D. discoideum. This process starts in the stalk cells during starvation and finalize with the presence of differentiation factor DIF‐1 for cell death induction. However, it was found that in Dictyostelium this process is prevented when some genes are mutated including atg1, iplA, talB, ugpB and glcS. Mitochondrial syndromes Mitochondrial diseases are genetic disorders that occur when mitochondria fail to produce enough energy for proper body function. Different diseases may arise including but not limited to metabolic strokes, seizures, cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, developmental and cognitive disabilities. Some mitochondrial syndromes are closely related to neurodegenerative diseases such as Huntington and Alzheimer, whereas other mitochondrial syndromes are related with diabetes, myopathy, kidney disease, blindness or deafness The mitochondrial genome of Dictyostelium has 55,564 base pairs, its circular and encodes 33 proteins. It also contains six ORFs, two ribosomal RNA genes and 18 transfer RNA genes. The proteins are mainly involved in respiration and translation. There are some important similarities between human and Dictyostelium mitochondrial DNA including the main oxidative phosphorylation pathway. Indeed, important proteins implicated in mitochondrial syndromes have been studied in D. discoideum. Table 4 Main D. discoideum proteins involved in mitochondrial disorders. Most studied proteins are encoded in the nuclear genome, whereas some other proteins are encoded in the mitochondrial genome. Many mitochondrial syndromes have been related with nuclear encoded proteins that exert their role in mitochondria, mainly AMPK, which overactivation is neurotoxic and it is related with AICA‐ribosiduria, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer, Huntington and Parkinson. In D. discoideum, the kinases involved in AMPK activation are LKB1, TAK1 and CaMKK2. The mitochondrial chaperonin 60 protein in D. discoideum, is not only related with neurological disorder but also causes developmental diseases, respiratory enzyme deficiencies and early infancy death. Complex I dysfunction, with various factors present in D. discoideum, causes Leigh syndrome, Parkinson and Alzheimer. D. discoideum was also used to study the mitochondria glycine cleavage system, GCVH1, orthologue of the human GCSH, which is involved in epilepsy. Thanks to D. discoideum we now know that CBD could be a good treatment for this pathology. D. discoideum htrA, orthologue of the human protein HTRA2, was found to play a proteolytic role in mitochondria and its function was related with autosomal dominant late‐onset Parkinson’s disease. The most common D. discoideum phenotypes related to mitochondrial syndromes are impaired phototaxis and thermotaxis, aberrant multicellular morphogenesis, impaired aggregation and growth and altered phagocytosis. Heteroplasmy also happens in D. discoideum and results in severe phenotypes depending on the number of mitochondrial DNA copies altered. Pharmacological treatments Dictyostelium discoideum, as a pharmacological model, provides useful insight into the cellular and molecular functions of both therapeutic drugs and pharmacologically active natural products. In particular, the haploid genome of D. discoideum and its amenability to genetic manipulation has helped with the identification of specific genes involved in some pharmacological treatments. One of the most studied drugs in Dictyostelium is valproic acid. VPA is the most highly prescribed epilepsy treatment worldwide, also used to prevent bipolar disorder and migraine, since it has been demonstrated to have neuroprotective effects in neurodegenerative conditions. Some of the VPA targets identified in Dictyostelium are InsP₃, InsP₂ and PIP₃, INO1, DGKA, solute carrier 4 bicarbonate transporter, histone deacetylase and phospholipase A2. Treatments for the control of seizures and bipolar disorder studied in D. discoideum include VPA, lithium and medium fatty acid, all of them act regulating phosphoinositides levels. Lithium and decanoic acid are also involved in DGKA and in InsP₃ reduction as seen for VPA. Due to its activity as a regulator of cell growth, cell death and anti‐/pro‐oxidant, curcumin has been investigated in Dictyostelium as a treatment for Alzheimer, Parkinson, multiple sclerosis cardiovascular diseases, cancer, allergy, asthma, rheumatoid arthritism, diabetes and inflammation. D. discoideum has allowed to discover two curcumin targets, phosphatase 2A regulatory subunit and presenilin‐1. Both proteins are conserved in human, PP2A and PS1 respectively. The orthologue for the phosphatase 2A regulatory subunit is the subunit B56 of the PP2A protein, involved in many functions such as cell proliferation, signal transduction, apoptosis and related with some cancers. Presenilin‐1 human orthologue is involved in the APP cleavage and it has a key role in the develop of Alzheimer’s disease. Curcumin acts maintaining PP2A subunit B, leading to Tau dephosphorylation and GSK3β inhibition leading to growth arrest in some cancers. Dictyostelium did not respond to salty, sour, umami or sweet tasting compounds; however, cells rapidly responded to bitter tastants. Tastants are taste‐provoking chemical molecules that are dissolved in ingested liquids or saliva to stimulate the sense of taste. Dictyostelium showed varying responses to the bitter tastants, providing a suitable model for early prediction of bitterness for novel tastants and drugs. For instance, a novel human receptor involved in bitter tastant detection was identified using Dictyostelium discoideum. Dictyostelium is a good model to study the bitter tastant and could replace the actual model which is the rat in vivo brief access taste aversion. Other approaches include the study of naringenin and aminobisphosphonates. The action of naringenin, a dietary flavonoid with antiproliferative and chemopreventive actions of carcinogenesis, was investigated as a potential new therapeutic agent in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. On the other hand, Dictyostelium allowed to identify the enzyme farnesyl diphosphate synthase as the target of aminobisphosphonate bone resorption inhibitors in mammalian osteoclasts. Conclusions and perspectives D. discoideum represents a good model to study different pathologies with high incidence in human health. So far, D. discoideum has proven to be a suitable model for the study of neurological diseases including but not limited to Alzheimer, epilepsy, bipolar disease, NCL and Huntington. Indeed, D. discoideum was used as an advantageous model for pharmacogenetic research in both epilepsy and bipolar disease. Besides, D. discoideum was used as a research model in major findings related with other pathologies including Wiskott–Aldrich and Shwachman–Diamond syndromes, in autophagy and mitochondrial syndromes, neurodegenerative diseases and cancer. D. discoideum can be infected by Legionella and this information provided insight into the proteins involved in the process in order to eventually understand better how to fight these human pathogens. D. discoideum also has de ability to chemotax, like human leucocytes or tumour cells, and that is why it has been chosen as the key model organism for the study of eukaryotic chemotaxis. D. discoideum is an exceptional model organism to study a wide range of neurological disorders, many of them characterized by altered mitochondrial dynamics, structure and/or function, proven D. discoideum as a mitochondrial disease system. Thanks to D. discoideum it was possible to identify and study proteins involved in those neurological disorders, in part because D. discoideum cells do not exhibit variation in symptoms, thus simplifying the study on mitochondrial diseases. Studied proteins related to the aforementioned diseases are involved in actin cytoskeleton, endocytosis, transport, metabolism and signalling pathways including but not limited to RAS and Notch. The analysis of the biological function of the proteins studied in D. discoideum, based on their human orthologues, evidences the cellular mechanisms that can be targeted using this model organism. A total of 27 D. discoideum proteins are related to infection by bacterial pathogens and correspond mainly to cellular adhesion to substrate and component assembly, actin‐related mechanisms and vesicle transport and phagocytosis. From the 28 D. discoideum proteins related to directed migration of immune cells, most are involved in processes of signal transduction including small GTPase mediation, protein phosphorylation and actin cytoskeleton organization. In neurological disorders, up to 33 D. discoideum proteins are related to the Notch and ephrin receptors, amyloid precursor metabolism, processing and proteolysis of proteins and autophagy. In autophagy and phagocytosis, with 60 D. discoideum proteins, the main related processes include but are not limited to vacuolar, endosomal and multivesicular management, organelle and vesicle assembly, and membrane budding. Related to mitochondrial syndromes, the studied 37 D. discoideum proteins are implicated in the respiratory chain, ATP synthesis and NADH enzymatic reactions. Finally, pharmacological treatment studies have been done with 45 D. discoideum proteins that tackle both single and multicellular processes with a focus on transport and localization, anion transport and biological quality. Further information on the biological processes and the associated proteins can be found in Table S6. Many of these discoveries need to be done in mammalian cell lines, thus enabling to corroborate the results obtained. The use of Dictyostelium addresses the development of the principles of the 3Rs in research, to reduce the reliance on the use of animal tissue and whole‐animal experiments, which might lead to an increasing number of studies using this social amoeba as a biomedical model in the upcoming years. Fig. 4 Biological implications of Dictyostelium discoideum proteins according to the different fields reported in this review. The six most significant GO terms for biological processes are represented based on their... Conflict of interest The authors declare no conflict of interest. Supporting information Table S1. Dictyostelium proteins involved in Legionella pneumophila infection. Click here for additional data file. Table S2. Dictyostelium proteins involved in directed cell migration. Click here for additional data file. Table S3. Dictyostelium proteins involved in neurological disorders. Click here for additional data file. Table S4. Dictyostelium proteins involved in autophagy/phagocytosis. Click here for additional data file. Table S5. Dictyostelium proteins involved in mitochondrial syndromes. Click here for additional data file. Table S6. GO Term analysis for biological processes associated to the proteins studied in Dictyostelium. Click here for additional data file. Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge the AGI of Salamanca University for their support in Open Access publishing fund paying article processing charges. Notes Microbial Biotechnology 14, 111–125 Funding information No funding information provided. Article information Microb Biotechnol. 2021 Jan; 14: 111–125. Published online 2020 Oct 30. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.13692 PMCID: PMC7888446 PMID: 33124755 Javier Martín‐González, 1 Javier‐Fernando Montero‐Bullón, 2 and Jesus Lacal 1 Javier Martín‐González 1 Molecular Genetics of Human Diseases Group, Department of Microbiology and Genetics, Faculty of Biology, University of Salamanca, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, Salamanca E‐37007 Spain Find articles by Javier Martín‐González Javier‐Fernando Montero‐Bullón 2 Metabolic Engineering Group, Department of Microbiology and Genetics, University of Salamanca, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, Salamanca E‐37007 Spain Find articles by Javier‐Fernando Montero‐Bullón Jesus Lacal 1 Molecular Genetics of Human Diseases Group, Department of Microbiology and Genetics, Faculty of Biology, University of Salamanca, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, Salamanca E‐37007 Spain Find articles by Jesus Lacal 1 Molecular Genetics of Human Diseases Group, Department of Microbiology and Genetics, Faculty of Biology, University of Salamanca, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, Salamanca E‐37007 Spain 2 Metabolic Engineering Group, Department of Microbiology and Genetics, University of Salamanca, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, Salamanca E‐37007 Spain Jesus Lacal, Email: se.lasu@lacalj. Corresponding author. * For correspondence. E‐mail se.lasu@lacalj ; Tel. +34 664 320 510. Received 2020 Jun 12; Revised 2020 Oct 6; Accepted 2020 Oct 11. Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Microbial Biotechnology published by Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd This is an open access article under the terms of the License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Articles from Microbial Biotechnology are provided here courtesy of Wiley-Blackwell 