 The Scar/WAVE complex is the principal catalyst of pseudopod and lamellipod formation. Here we show that Scar/WAVE’s proline-rich domain is polyphosphorylated after the complex is activated. Blocking Scar/WAVE activation stops phosphorylation in both Dictyostelium and mammalian cells, implying that phosphorylation modulates pseudopods after they have been formed, rather than controlling whether they are initiated. Unexpectedly, phosphorylation is not promoted by chemotactic signaling but is greatly stimulated by cell:substrate adhesion and diminished when cells deadhere. Phosphorylation-deficient or phosphomimetic Scar/WAVE mutants are both normally functional and rescue the phenotype of knockout cells, demonstrating that phosphorylation is dispensable for activation and actin regulation. However, pseudopods and patches of phosphorylation-deficient Scar/WAVE last substantially longer in mutants, altering the dynamics and size of pseudopods and lamellipods and thus changing migration speed. Scar/WAVE phosphorylation does not require ERK2 in Dictyostelium or mammalian cells. However, the MAPKKK homologue SepA contributes substantially— sep A mutants have less steady-state phosphorylation, which does not increase in response to adhesion. The mutants also behave similarly to cells expressing phosphorylation-deficient Scar, with longer-lived pseudopods and patches of Scar recruitment. We conclude that pseudopod engagement with substratum is more important than extracellular signals at regulating Scar/WAVE’s activity and that phosphorylation acts as a pseudopod timer by promoting Scar/WAVE turnover. The Scar/WAVE complex is the dominant driver of actin protrusions - pseudopods, filopods and lamellipods - in migrating cells. This study shows that phosphorylation of Scar/WAVE, previously thought to be an essential step in its activation, is dispensable. In vivo, phosphorylation modulates pseudopods to make them smaller and shorter-lived. Introduction Scar/WAVE is the dominant source of actin protrusions at the edge of migrating cells. In particular, lamellipods and pseudopods are driven by Scar/WAVE recruiting the actin-related proteins complex, which in turn promotes an increase in the number of polymerizing actin filaments and growth of actin structures. It works as part of a large, 5-membered complex, whose members have multiple names ; in this paper, they will be referred to as Nap1, PIR121, Scar, Abi, and Brk1 in Dictyostelium, and Nap1, PIR121, WAVE2, Abi2, and HSPC300 in mammals. The principal known activator of Scar/WAVE complex activation is the small GTPase Rac. Inactive Rac is guanosine 5’ diphosphate -bound but on stimulation becomes temporarily guanosine 5’ triphosphate bound. The GTP-bound, but not the GDP-bound, form binds to the complex, in particular through the A site of PIR121, which includes a Rac-binding DUF1394 domain. Interaction with GTP-bound Rac is essential for the complex to be able to function. However, though it is clear that Rac is essential, it is not the only regulator. Various experiments have found that Rac activation occurs later than the onset of actin-based protrusion, and signal-induced actin polymerization can occur earlier than Rac activation. In Dictyostelium, Scar/WAVE behavior is much more locally variable than Rac activity, so the Rac cannot simply be driving the changes in Scar/WAVE. To understand pseudopod dynamics, it will therefore be vital to enumerate different modes of Scar/WAVE regulation. One potential form of regulation—phosphorylation—has been described in a number of papers and is also found in untargeted and high-throughput screens. A typical narrative is that Scar/WAVE is phosphorylated in response to external signaling, through kinases such as the global signal transducer ERK2. This has been described in cultured fibroblasts, mouse embryonic fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. The phosphorylation is typically found to change the complex from an inactive to an activatable state, so Scar/WAVE phosphorylation directly leads to actin polymerization. Tyrosine kinases, in particular Abl, have been found to be similarly activating. These reports are curious, for a number of reasons. First, actin is a strongly acidic protein, so phosphorylation of binding proteins typically weakens their affinity for actin and actin-related proteins. Second, ERK2 has a tightly defined consensus sequence; however, the proposed phosphorylation sites do not fit this consensus. We have therefore explored the biological functions of Scar/WAVE phosphorylation in detail. A separate set of phosphorylations is present in the C-terminal VCA domain of Scar/WAVE. It is not detectable by, for example, a change in banding pattern on western blots and is difficult to see by mass spectrometry, so it is far less widely described. We and others have shown that this is constitutive and has a role in tuning the sensitivity of the Scar/WAVE complex rather than activating it; both phosphomimetic and phosphorylation-deficient mutants are active. One key process in Scar/WAVE biology that is particularly poorly understood is autoactivation. It is clear that pseudopods of migrating cells are controlled through positive feedback—new actin polymerization occurs adjacent to recent pseudopods, leading to traveling waves at the edges of cells, but the mechanism of this regulation is not well understood. It does, however, emphasize the importance of understanding the full dynamics of Scar/WAVE—its recruitment and release from pseudopods, and its synthesis and breakdown—rather than focusing exclusively on its activation. There is no compelling reason to connect Scar/WAVE phosphorylation to the activation step. Phosphorylation could alter the activity of the complex after it is activated or alter properties like the rate of autoactivation or the stability of Scar/WAVE once recruited. In the present work, we find that phosphorylation’s primary role appears to be centered around biasing pseudopod behavior, as required by pseudopod-based models of cell migration, rather than in initiating new pseudopods or actin polymerization. Results Detailed analysis of Scar/WAVE phosphorylation in vivo A number of authors have observed Scar/WAVE phosphorylation. Inactive Scar/WAVE is constitutively phosphorylated in the extreme C-terminus. Additional phosphorylation is seen in growth factor–stimulated cells, which a number of authors have placed downstream of ERK2, implying it is part of the process by which signaling causes pseudopods to form. To analyze the phosphorylation in detail, we devised an optimized electrophoresis regime. Examined by western blot on normal SDS-PAGE gels, Dictyostelium Scar runs as a single band with a diffuse upper edge; quantitative analysis shows this band forms a single, diffuse peak. To improve separation of different phosphoforms, we optimized PAGE systems. The best separation occurred on 10% acrylamide gels containing low bis-acrylamide concentrations of 0.06% compared with the usual 0.3%. In such gels, Scar from migrating Dictyostelium resolves into at least 6 distinct bands with clear separation on an intensity plot. Lambda phosphatase resolved the multiple bands to a single one, shifting the multiple intensity peaks to single peak, confirming that the multiple bands are due to phosphorylation, and Scar is typically hyperphosphorylated to varying degrees. Fig 1 Multiple phosphorylations in Scar/WAVE. Similarly, WAVE2 from 2 mammalian lines appears on western blots as a broad band with a single intensity peak. As with Dictyostelium Scar, low-bis gels reveal multiple phosphorylated WAVE2 bands. Intensity plots show multiple well-resolved peaks that are shifted down after phosphatase treatment confirming the bands represent WAVE2 phosphoforms. Identification of phosphorylation sites in vivo Previous reports identified Scar/WAVE phosphosites using protein expressed in vitro or overexpressed fusion proteins. Because Scar/WAVE’s biological roles occur exclusively as part of the 5-membered Scar/WAVE complex, and overexpressed proteins are unevenly and incompletely incorporated into the complex, we analyzed the phosphorylation of native proteins. We purified the Dictyostelium Scar complex using nap 1 - cells stably transfected with single copies of GFP-Nap1, yielding normal expression levels, and pulled down the complex using GFP-TRAP. Under these conditions, Scar is only purified if incorporated in a properly assembled Scar/WAVE complex. Gel-purified Scar bands were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to identify phosphopeptides. Scar/WAVE is composed of N-terminal SH, central B, and polyproline, and C-terminal V, C, and A domains. We identified 3 phosphorylated tyrosines in the SH domain, 3 phosphorylated serines in the polyproline, and 3 in the V domain. These are additional to the constitutive phosphorylations found by Ura and colleagues from 430–440 in the A domain. The number of SCAR forms discernible as bands in western blots from migrating cells is therefore not a surprise—at least 16 sites are phosphorylated in vivo in normal cells. Conspicuously, none of the phosphorylated serines made up MAP kinase consensus sites. This was surprising, as a number of papers report that Scar/WAVE bands are uniquely caused by ERK2, which has a strong preference for prolines 2aa N-terminal to and 1aa C-terminal to the target site. To confirm that we had identified the full range of phosphorylations, we tested which amino acids had to be mutated to block extra bands in westerns. We expressed unphosphorylatable and phosphomimetic mutants in scar - cells. Removing the 5 phosphorylated serines in the A domain of Scar by deleting the VCA domain did not reduce the number of bands. Mutation of Y88/129/210F in SHD of Scar did not affect the band shifts. Mutation of the 3 serines in the polyproline domain to alanines reduced the number of bands but did not abolish them. Mutating 2 more nearby serines gave near-complete loss of Scar bands. Additional mutation of S387/388/389A from the V domain, giving Scar S8A, yielded Scar that was nearly homogeneous, with a single very faint band above the main Scar population. The residual heterogeneity was lost in cells whose Scar had also lost the sites in the A domain, giving Scar S13A. Similarly, mutation of the polyproline serines, or the polyproline and V domain serines to aspartate, caused a substantial mobility shift and 2 distinct bands on low-bis gel. The mobility shift of Scar S8D was also obvious on a normal-bis gel, but only a single band of Scar S8D was resolved. These 2 forms are apparently not caused by phosphorylation; strong phosphatase treatment, which also caused significant proteolysis, caused only partial loss of the upper band ; the difference may be due to a small modifier like ubiquitin, though we were unable to find ubiquitin itself by western blot in any variant. The mammalian Scar/WAVE2 has been also shown to be phosphorylated at multiple positions. As with Dictyostelium, the sites in human WAVE2 do not fit the MAP kinase consensus, with the exception of T346, which is relatively sparsely phosphorylated. Again, similarly to Dictyostelium Scar, mutation in WAVE2 S8A/T1A removed all higher-mobility bands. This confirmed that the multiple bands in WAVE2 are due to serine and threonine phosphorylations. In conclusion, the multiple bands seen in Scar/WAVE western blots are mostly caused by differential phosphorylation at sites in the polyproline region, with minimal contributions from the V and A domains. Scar/WAVE is phosphorylated after activation The Scar/WAVE complex must interact with the GTP-bound, active form of Rac1 before it can catalyze Arp2/3 complex activation and pseudopod generation. We would not expect Rac interactions to be important to the phosphorylation if, as described in several publications, the phosphorylation is an upstream process regulating Scar/WAVE activation. We therefore determined the effect of Rac1 binding on Scar/WAVE phosphorylation. First, we inhibited the Rac1 activity in both Dictyostelium and B16F1 cells by EHT1864, an effective inhibitor of RacGEF activity, and assessed the band shifts of Scar/WAVE. EHT1864 treatment resulted in complete loss of Pak-CRIB-mRFPmars2 from cell periphery and depolarized Dictyostelium cells, confirming that the inhibitor greatly reduced active Rac levels. Similarly, lamellipods of B16F1 cells collapsed after EHT1864 treatment; their filamentous actin at cell edges also appeared reduced. Fig 2 Rac1 binding and Scar/WAVE phosphorylation. To measure the effect of Rac1 inhibition on Scar phosphorylation, Dictyostelium cells were incubated with 50 μM EHT1864 for 2, 5, and 10 minutes, lysed, and analyzed by low-bis western. Inhibition of Rac1 resulted in a strong reduction in Scar phosphorylation. The intensity profile shows the disappearance of peaks for polyphosphorylated Scar even more clearly. Quantification of the fraction of Scar in the upper bands shows approximately 50% reduction. This figure underestimates the total change in phosphorylations on Scar, because the higher bands that are disproportionately lost contain several phosphates. Similarly, inhibition of Rac1 in B16F1 cells by EHT1864 reduced the intensity of the upper bands of WAVE2 within 2 hours; the change became even clearer after 6 hours of treatment. Intensity plots of WAVE2 bands show strong reduction in the highest peak of WAVE2 after EHT1864 treatment. Quantification of the ratios of the upper and lowest bands also suggest a substantial loss of WAVE2 phosphorylation. Generalized inhibition of Rac1 activity causes secondary effects, as many Rac-regulated proteins such as kinases are important for other aspects of motility, and inhibitors may have off-target effects. We therefore verified that active Rac1’s effect on Scar phosphorylation is direct. We examined cells in which the Pir121 protein was replaced by Pir121-EGFP, with and without the Rac1 nonbinding, A-site mutation. Pak-CRIB-mRFP-mars2 localizes to the pseudopods and cell periphery in both strains, confirming that Rac is activated in wild type and mutant cells. However, the Scar complex is only localized in cells expressing the functional Pir121EGFP, not the A-site mutant. Scar phosphorylation is greatly diminished in the A-site mutant, to a level comparable to that seen in cells treated with Rac inhibitor. Taken together, these experiments clearly demonstrate that Scar phosphorylation occurs only after the complex is activated by interaction with Rac1. To affirm the sequence of activation and phosphorylation, we tested the effect of latrunculin, an actin inhibitor, which causes exaggerated membrane recruitment of the Scar/WAVE complex in mammalian cells and Dictyostelium. In Dictyostelium, latrunculin causes concentrated and persistent recruitment of Scar complex to the membrane and activation of Arp2/3 complex. Upon latrunculin treatment, Scar phosphorylation rapidly increases; like the Scar recruitment and Arp2/3 activation, the phosphorylation reaches a far higher level than is normally seen. Thus, phosphorylation of Scar again correlates with its recruitment and activation, rather than upstream processes. It is interesting to note that there is currently no biochemical assay for Scar/WAVE activity. The only measures of activation are indirect, for example, recruitment to the extreme leading edge, and downstream consequences, such as actin polymerization. This phosphorylation assay could therefore be a potentially useful indirect measure of recent Scar/WAVE activation in vivo. Chemotactic signaling does not control Scar phosphorylation Earlier reports described the MAP kinase ERK2, induced downstream of chemotactic and growth factor signaling, as the principal driver of Scar/WAVE phosphorylation. This is important because it provides a direct connection between signaling and pseudopod initiation and growth that is otherwise lacking. As described earlier, we questioned this result, because MAP kinase sites are usually restricted to a consensus that was not seen in the sites we identified. We therefore examined the effect of extracellular signals and MAP kinases on Scar/WAVE phosphorylation. Growing Dictyostelium cells use folate as a chemoattractant. During multicellular development, they down-regulate folate receptors and express receptors to extracellular cyclic adenosine 3’,5’- monophosphate. Treatment of growing cells with folate, or developed cells with cAMP, causes increases in polymerized actin levels that are thought to be important for chemotaxis. To provide a general narrative, we examined Scar phosphorylation after both treatments. Despite massive activation of erkB protein, no change in the Scar phosphorylation was seen in either folate- or cAMP-treated cells, either visually from the gel or when expressed quantitatively as the phosphorylated fraction. Starved cells have less phosphorylated Scar than vegetative ones, so both basal and stimulated levels are lower. We do not know whether this is caused by decreased phosphorylation, increased dephosphorylation, or decreased stability of the phospho-Scar. Fig 3 Signaling and Erk-independent phosphorylation of Scar/WAVE. Knockouts of the Dictyostelium Gβ protein show a complete loss of G-protein signaling and reduced ErkB activity ; because there are also no tyrosine kinase receptors in Dictyostelium, these cells are complete chemotactic nulls. However, Gβ - mutant cells have normal levels of Scar phosphorylation, as well as morphologically normal pseudopods. This confirms that chemotactic signaling is not required for Scar phosphorylation. We determined the importance of MAP kinase signaling for Scar/WAVE phosphorylation in both Dictyostelium and mammalian cells. First, we examined the band shifts for Scar in western blots from erk A -, erk B -, and erk AB - nulls of Dictyostelium. The band shifts on the western blot and quantitated peaks were not discernibly different from the WT parent. Because ErkA and ErkB are the only MAP kinases in Dictyostelium, MAP kinase signaling is not important for Scar phosphorylation. To confirm this result is general, we examined WAVE2 phosphorylation in mammalian NIH3T3 and B16F1 cells after inhibition of Erk2 activity. Treatment with U0126, an efficient inhibitor of MEK immediately abolished Erk2 phosphorylation in both NIH3T3 and B16F1 cells but did not change the phosphorylation state of WAVE2 even after prolonged incubation. It is of course possible that Erk2 phosphorylates the Scar/WAVE complex under some conditions, but these results confirm that the Scar/WAVE phosphorylation we observe is neither executed by Erk2 nor requires Erk2 function. Physical adhesion promotes Scar/WAVE phosphorylation More generally, our data suggest Scar/WAVE phosphorylation is not primarily regulated by extracellular signaling. Another regulator of pseudopods and lamellipods is cell–substrate adhesion. We tested its role using Dictyostelium ’s ability to grow either in suspension or adhesion. First, we compared Scar phosphorylation in cells maintained in suspension and adherent cultures. More highly phosphorylated bands are more intense in cells grown adhering to petri plates, when compared with suspension-grown cells. Intensity plots clearly show more peaks and greater intensities of more-phosphorylated peaks in adherent cells. This suggests that adhesion stimulates Scar phosphorylation. To investigate this in more detail, we allowed suspensions of cells to adhere to a plastic surface, revealing a clear and significant up-regulation of Scar phosphorylation. The proportion of Scar in phosphorylated bands increases from 25 ± 6.9% to 42.5 ± 3.5%. Conversely, when we de-adhered cells using a stream of buffer from a pipette, we saw an obvious reduction in phosphorylated bands. The proportion of Scar in phosphorylated bands decreased from 40 ± 5 to 20 ± 4. Thus, cell–substrate adhesion induces Scar phosphorylation. Fig 4 Physical adhesion enhances Scar/WAVE phosphorylation. We examined whether cell–substrate adhesion coupled to phospho-Scar via adhesion-linked signaling or through a physical process such as mechanical deformation. This was enabled by talin A/B double-knockout Dictyostelium cells. Talin is a key link between adhesion molecules like integrins and the actin cytoskeleton. In the absence of Talin, outside-in signaling from integrins to cytoplasm does not occur. tal A/B - mutant cells completely fail to adhere when they encounter a substrate and consequently remain spherical and pseudopod-free when cultured, even in dishes where normal cells adhere. This is mirrored by failure to phosphorylate Scar in response to adhesion—in tal A/B - mutant cells, the phosphorylated bands were unchanged when cells were allowed to settle in a petri dish. However, we were able to force tal A/B - cells into adhesion to plastic, glass, or 1% agar surfaces by aspirating the liquid so cells were compressed by capillary forces. This yields cells that are mechanically coupled to the substrate without talin-based signaling. Under these conditions, Scar phosphorylation increases in tal A/B - just as it does in WT cells. This implies that Scar/WAVE phosphorylation is mediated by the physical process of attachment—through mechanochemical processes, for example—rather than through canonical integrin adhesion signaling. Phosphorylation-deficient and phosphomimetic Scar mutants are fully functional In essentially every lamellipod or pseudopod of normal cells, actin and Arp2/3 complex recruitment are mediated by the activation of the Scar/WAVE complex. Phosphorylation of the polyproline domain has been described as important for Scar/WAVE complex activation and formation of such protrusions. To test the importance of polyproline phosphorylation in vivo, we constructed mutants that were unphosphorylatable and phosphomimetic at the serines we had identified and expressed them in scar - cells. Both mutants were expressed at the same levels as unmutated Scar and at similar levels to untransfected parental cells. Westerns of Pir121, Nap1, Scar, and Abi from immunoprecipitates showed that Scar WT, Scar S8A, and Scar S8D were all found in complete, stable complexes ; phosphorylation of Scar was also identical in rescued and untransfected cells. Cells lacking Scar migrate inefficiently and are less directional. They migrate mainly by blebbing, and when pseudopods are made, they are small. In contrast, scar - cells rescued with Scar WT, Scar S8A, and Scar S8D formed longer pseudopods that moved faster and split frequently. The migration speed of knockout cells was completely rescued by expression of wild-type or either phosphomutant Scar, with phosphorylation changes causing a slight increase in cell speed. The tortuosity of the cell perimeters, which describes the amount of recent protrusion and shape change, was low in scar - cells but rescued by Scar S8A and Scar S8D just as well as by Scar WT. Thus, phosphorylation is clearly neither a precondition for activity nor a direct cause of SCAR inactivation. However, the dynamics of pseudopods were obviously altered. Scar - cell pseudopods lasted for a very short duration. Pseudopods in Scar S8A -expressing cells extended for far longer. Scar S8A pseudopods were also larger and broader. Because each pseudopod had a greater size and lasted longer, they were also formed less often. In contrast, Scar S8D -driven pseudopods had normal lifetimes and were made at same rate as Scar WT. Fig 5 Scar/WAVE phosphorylation mutants are functional. Phosphorylation-deficient Scar is recruited in larger and longer-lived patches Active Scar complex localizes to the fronts of cells and causes actin protrusions. Tagging Scar itself with GFP greatly alters both Scar and pseudopod dynamics. To observe the effects of Scar phosphorylation under physiological conditions, we therefore expressed Scar mutants in Scar- cells in which Nap1 has been replaced by a single copy of GFP-Nap1. Scar WT, Scar S8A, and Scar S8D all localized efficiently at the pseudopod periphery, but there were marked differences in dynamics. As usual, Scar WT was recruited in localized bursts of fairly short duration. The phosphorylation-deficient Scar remained recruited for a substantially longer duration. As well as being longer-lived, Scar S8A patches were also larger. This led to changes in patch frequency–the larger, longer-lived Scar S8A patches were made at a lower frequency than Scar WT. Conversely, localization of Scar S8D was even briefer, and patches were made at an even higher frequency than Scar WT, though they were about the same size. Fig 6 Scar/WAVE phosphorylation mutants are recruited to pseudopods and lamellipods. From these observations, we hypothesized that Scar/WAVE phosphorylation is not required for activation but rather modulates cell migration by controlling the dynamics of Scar/WAVE patches. To confirm this, we constructed nearly completely unphosphorylated and phosphomimetic Scar by additionally mutating the 5 serine residues of the acidic domain. Scar complex and F-actin were both beautifully accumulated in the pseudopods of cells expressing Scar S13A and Scar S13D and were similar to Scar WT. To confirm this observation in mammalian cells, we examined the effect of phosphorylation-deficient mutations in B16F1 cells. WAVE1/2 KO cells transfected with empty vector did not form lamellipods. However, expressing either WAVE2 WT and WAVE2 S8A/T1A in knockout cells rescued lamellipod formation. Quantitative examination revealed that WAVE2 S8A/T1A driven lamellipods were longer-lived than WAVE2 WT driven ones. Lamellipod width and cell perimeter of WAVE2 S8A/T1A cells were also significantly increased. WAVE2 WT and WAVE2 S8A/T1A equally rescued the random migration velocity of WAVE1/2 KO. These results clearly show that Scar/WAVE does not require phosphorylation to be functional. Scar phosphomutants rescue scar-/wasp- cells Dictyostelium cells lacking Scar can repurpose Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome protein to drive pseudopod formation and Arp2/3 complex activation, which complicates the phenotypes of scar mutants. Scar - / wasp - cells cannot move and cannot grow; we have therefore developed an inducible double-knockout cell line, in which Scar expression depends on the presence of doxycycline, to test Scar function without WASP complementation. We exploited this line to test Scar phosphomutants’ ability to support growth and pseudopod formation. Scar tet / wasp - cells were transfected with Scar S8A and Scar S8D then deprived of doxycycline 48 hours prior to experiments to remove native Scar. As expected, protein levels of expressed Scar WT and both mutants are very similar to those in untransfected wild-type cells. Expression of both Scar S8A and Scar S8D is dominant; expression of the native Scar is suppressed even in the presence of doxycycline. Fig 7 Scar phosphomutants rescue growth and pseudopods in scar - / wasp - cells. Both Scar S8A and Scar S8D fully rescued the growth of Scar tet / wasp - cells. To study the migratory phenotype, cells were examined migrating under agarose up a folate gradient. As previously observed, repressed Scar tet / wasp - cells made long, stable filopods but could not form pseudopods or migrate. However, cells expressing either Scar S8A or Scar S8D showed clear localization of Scar complex to protrusions and F-actin polymerization, and robust pseudopod formation. Both mutants rescued cell migration effectively. Scar S8A supported a substantially higher speed than either WT or Scar S8D. Thus, phosphorylation-deficient and phosphomimetic mutants are fully functional for growth and cell migration, without requiring cooperation from WASP. sepA kinase and scar phosphorylation Because the Scar/WAVE phosphorylation we observe is not mediated by Erk2, we sought other kinases. We identified kinases that interact with the Scar complex by lightly cross-linking EGFP-Nap1 to its neighbors using formaldehyde ;, followed by immunoprecipitation of GFP and mass spectrometric identification of bound proteins. This revealed sepA as a strong candidate. sepA was originally named “septase” because it is important for normal cytokinesis ; it was also identified as a “regulator of adhesion and motility” by Lampert because mutant cells showed excessive adhesion. Both observed phenotypes are consistent with known Scar complex roles. SepA is a ste20 family member with a number of mammalian homologues, notably, MAP3K19 and MAP3K3. Scar phosphorylation was substantially diminished in sepA - cells. The multiple high-motility peaks on low-bis gels were lost. SepA- cells, unlike WT, did not show stimulation of Scar phosphorylation when allowed to adhere. Thus, sepA is an important contributor to Scar phosphorylation. Fig 8 SepA is required for Scar phosphorylation. To confirm the physiological relationship between sepA and Scar phosphorylation, we explored pseudopod and Scar complex recruitment dynamics in mutant cells. SepA- cells formed pseudopods that were very similar to Scar S8A -expressing cells. They made exaggeratedly long pseudopods, which were also long-lived. Being longer-lived, they were also made less frequently. We also examined recruitment of the Scar complex in sepA- cells using HSPC300-GFP. Scar complex patches were broader, less frequent, and longer-lived in sepA- cells. The similarity between the behavior of Scar in sepA- cells and Scar S8A supports and confirms the hypothesis that sepA is an important contributor to Scar phosphorylation. Discussion We have used an improved assay for phosphorylation of Scar/WAVE’s polyproline domain to open a window on pseudopod dynamics. This has revealed a number of surprises. Phosphorylation occurs on multiple sites after Scar/WAVE is activated by proteins such as Rac-GTP and reveals an adhesion-dependent, signaling-independent pathway. It is clear that these phosphorylations are not important for Scar/WAVE to be active, and it seems likely that they do not inhibit its activation either. Rather, phosphorylation appears to be a subtle but important tool by which cells can manipulate the dynamics of Scar/WAVE patches and thus pseudopods. Pseudopod lifetime intersects with a wide range of cell biology—it underlies the mechanism of chemotactic steering and regulates cell polarity, persistence, and shape change —and mutants with uncontrolled pseudopod lifetime have serious motility defects. Thus, although the function of Scar/WAVE phosphorylation is different from what has been believed, it is fundamentally physiologically important. Our finding that signaling does not greatly alter the rate of Scar/WAVE phosphorylation does not imply that signaling is not important to pseudopod formation and evolution. Chemotaxis—cells migrating up gradients of soluble signaling molecules—clearly happens and is clearly mediated by pseudopods. However, we and others have found that normal chemotaxis rarely involves initiation of new pseudopods—rather, pseudopod generation is mostly random, but localized receptor activation modulate the positions where pseudopods evolve, their lifetime and stability after they are formed, and sometimes the pattern in which new split pseudopods are directed. None of these measured processes require extracellular signals causing direct activation of pseudopod catalysts; rather, more subtle changes like the precise subcellular localization and timing of Scar/WAVE activation could be biased by chemoattractant signaling. Equally, chemoattractants could work through pathways other than Scar/WAVE activation, biasing the growth and lifetimes of pseudopods rather than their initiation. This is in full agreement with the pseudopod-centered view of chemotaxis, which emphasizes that pseudopods are self-organized, rather than the outcome of external signals. The kinase sites around the polyproline domain have little in common with one another and do not match the consensus sequences for most kinases that are active in the actin domain. We hypothesize that the phosphorylation sites are sterically inaccessible until the Scar/WAVE complex is activated. Once the complex is active it adopts an open conformation, whereupon SepA in particular can act on it. This means the phosphorylation is a passive reflection of the fact that the complex has been activated, rather than a driver or even modulator of the initial activation process. Of course, different kinases might have different effects in vivo, so our experiments could miss subtle controls, though the general conclusion that phosphorylation is inhibitory seems sound. The Ste20 family of kinases, part of the large and diverse MAPKKK family, is often associated with signaling pathways. The 2 most related family members in human, MAP3K19 and MAP3K3, are not well studied, so little can be concluded about their regulation; a number of other MAP3K family members are also very similar, so redundancy is possible. When phosphorylating Dictyostelium Scar/WAVE, SepA does not seem to require upstream activation, at least by G-protein linked or chemoattractant signaling, which paints a different picture of Scar/WAVE activation from what we had expected. This work showcases our ability to use scar - / wasp - cells to test the functioning of mutated Scar proteins and the phenotypic changes caused by alterations in the sequence. Previously, results have been complicated because WASP changes its organization and cell biological role when the Scar complex is not present. We have therefore been working against an ill-defined background of partial rescue. In this work, we show that either phosphomimetic or phosphorylation-deficient Scar is fully able to rescue the mutant phenotypes, because scar - / wasp - Dictyostelium cells cannot grow, do not make pseudopods, and barely move. Similarly, the use of WAVE1/WAVE2 knockout B16-F1 cells allows detailed study of physiologically normal levels of WAVEs without partial complementation. We therefore look forward to a new focus on physiological function and a more direct connection between the dynamics of the Scar/WAVE complex, the behavior of pseudopods and lamellipods, and cell migration. Our results imply that cell:substrate adhesion is a crucial driver of Scar/WAVE activation. Adhesion has been an undeservedly neglected area of Scar/WAVE biology. It seems intuitively obvious that pseudopod formation should be regulated by adhesion—if pseudopods or lamellipods are generated in a location where adhesion is difficult or impossible, they will be inefficient or ineffective at producing cell migration. Cells should, in retrospect, therefore be expected to monitor adhesion and to favor pseudopods that can attach. The results in Fig 4 showing normal Scar/WAVE activation in talin knockouts offer 1 reason why connections have so far been missed—activation does not require the integrin-linked signaling pathways that dominate adhesion of mammalian fibroblasts. Instead, we hypothesize that the connection is physical, by direct mechanical coupling. This is a well-documented and common mechanism for coupling proteins and cell behavior. Overall, this work exposes a new and conserved mechanism for regulating migration, which will influence cells moving in many physiological contexts. We look forward to seeing new biological examples emerge. Materials and methods Reagents and cell lines All the reagents and cell lines used in this study are described in S2 Table. Dictyostelium discoideum strain AX3, haploid, mating type mat A derived from wild-type NC4 was obtained from Dictyostelium stock center. Growth of mammalian cells Mammalian cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum or donor bovine serum and 1% L-glutamine in tissue culture dishes at 37°C, 5% CO 2. Cells were washed twice with PBS prior to trypsinisation or lysis. Generation of WAVE1/2 knockout cells by CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing B16-F1 cells lacking WASF1 and WASF2 genes, encoding WAVE1 and WAVE2 proteins, respectively, were generated using CRISPR/Cas9. Specifically, WAVE2 KO cells were generated first by targeting exon 1 of the WASF2 gene using pSpCas9-2A-Puro vector. Subsequently, WAVE1/2 double KO cells were obtained upon transfection of WAVE2 KO clone #11 with pSpCas9-2A-Puro vector targeting the first coding exon of WASF1. Generation of knockout cell clones was initiated by addition of puromycin selection medium for 3 days after transfection with gene disruption vector, to remove nontransfected cells, followed by extensive dilution into 10-cm dishes and picking of macroscopically visible colonies several days later, to obtain single cell-derived clones. Clones were screened for the absence of respective gene product using WAVE1- and WAVE2-specific antibodies. Successful gene disruption was further validated by confirmation of the absence of any wild-type allele by sequencing of respective genomic regions. Inhibition of Rac1 activity by EHT1864 To determine the effects of Rac1 inhibition on Scar phosphorylation in Dictyostelium, EHT1864 was added to the medium or DB. Cells were lysed at 0, 2, 5, and 10 minutes after addition of EHT-1864 using LDS sample buffer and analyzed for Scar phosphorylation. A total of 10 5 cells expressing Pak-CRIB-mRFPmars 2 were seeded on Lab-Tek II chambered coverglasses. Cells were imaged by AiryScan confocal microscopy during and after treatment. Similarly, to determine the effect of Rac1 inhibition on WAVE2 phosphorylation, B16-F1 cells were incubated with 50 μM EHT-1864 in DMEM and lysed with RIPA buffer after 0, 2, 4, and 6 hours. The effect of Rac1 inhibition on lamellipods was determined by phalloidin immunofluorescence staining. Inhibition of actin polymerization by latrunculinA Latrunculin A was added to the medium or DB. Cells were lysed at 0, 10, 20, and 30 minutes after addition of latrunculin and analyzed for Scar phosphorylation using low-bis acrylamide SDS-PAGE. To examine the effect of latrunculin on Scar/WAVE complex activation, 1×10 5 EGFP-NAP1 cells were seeded on Lab-Tek II chambered coverglasses. Cells were imaged by AiryScan confocal microscopy during and after treatment. Inhibition of Erk2 activation by U0126 To determine the effect of Erk2 inhibition on WAVE2 phosphorylation, growing B16-F1 and NIH3T3 cells were incubated with U0126 and cells were lysed with RIPA buffer at 0, 5, 10, 20, 30, and 60 minutes. Protein samples were analyzed for WAVE2 phosphorylation by low-bis acrylamide SDS-PAGE and western blotting. Transfection of Dictyostelium cells Extrachromosomal plasmids were introduced into the cells by electroporation. A total of 1×10 7 cells/ml were washed one time with electroporation buffer, and 0.5 μg plasmid DNA was electroporated into the cells by pulsing once at 500 V using an ECM399 electroporator. Cells were then transferred into HL5 medium. After 24 hours, 10 μg/ml G418 or 50 μg/ml hygromycin were added to select transformants. Transfection of mammalian cells Extrachromosomal expression plasmids were transfected into B16-F1, WAVE1/2 knockout cells using lipofectamine-2000 according to manufacturer’s instruction. In 6-well plates, 3×10 5 cells were allowed to adhere for 4–6 hours. Next, 7 μl lipofectamine-2000 and 2.5 μg plasmid DNA diluted and mixed in 200 μl serum free DMEM in 2 separate tubes. Later, diluted plasmid DNA and lipofectamine were pooled together and mixed well and incubated at room temperature. This mixture was added to the cells and mixed by swirling the plate. Then, 40 hours after transfection, cells were used for western blotting and immunofluorescence staining. Time-lapse and AiryScan imaging was performed after 24 hours of transfection. Stimulation of cells with folate/cAMP A total of 2×10 7 cells/ml were incubated in DB for 1 hour, then 50 μM folate was added. Cells were lysed in LDS sample buffer at 0, 20, 40, 60, 120, and 240 seconds and tested by western blotting. For cAMP stimulation, 2×10 7 cells/ml cells in DB were starved. After 1 hour, cells were pulsed with 100 nM cAMP every 6 minutes for 4 hours. After 15 minutes of last pulse cells were stimulated with 1 μM of cAMP and lysed in 1X LDS sample buffer at 0, 20, 40, 60, 120, and 240 seconds and used for western blotting. Adhesion and de-adhesion of Dictyostelium cells Dictyostelium cells were grown either in suspension or in petri plates. Cells grown in adhesion were de-adhered by trituration with a P1000. For facilitating adhesion, 2×10 6 cells grown in suspension were added to 35-mm petri plates, lysed with LDS at appropriate time points, and western blotted. Immunofluorescence B16-F1 and WAVE1/2 knockout cells transiently expressing WAVE2 constructs were allowed to adhere and form lamellipods on laminin A–coated coverslips for 4 hours, then washed twice with PBS and fixed in PBS/4% paraformaldehyde for 15 minutes. Blocking and permeabilization were performed for 15 minutes in blocking solution. Cells were stained with TRITC-phalloidin for 1 hour, washed twice in PBS, and mounted on slides using DAPI Fluoromount-G. After 24 hours, slides were imaged by AiryScan confocal. Under-agarose chemotaxis Formation of pseudopods and cell migration were measured by under-agarose folate chemotaxis assay as described in Laevsky and Knecht, 2003. In brief, 0.4% SeamKem GTG agarose in Lo-Flo medium was prepared by boiling. After cooling, 10 μM folic acid was added. Next, 5 ml of agarose-folate mix was poured into the BSA-coated 50-mm glass-bottom dishes. A 5-mm-wide trough was cut with sterile scalpel and filled with 2×10 6 cells/ml. Cell migration was imaged after 4–6 hours with 10× and 60× DIC. To examine the localization of labeled proteins in the pseudopods, cells were also imaged by AiryScan confocal microscope. Western blotting Dictyostelium cells were lysed by directly adding NuPAGE LDS sample buffer containing 20 mM DTT, HALT protease, and phosphatase inhibitors on top of moving cells and immediately boiling for 5 minutes. Mammalian cells were lysed with RIPA buffer, stored on ice for 10 minutes and debris cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm, 5 minutes. Proteins were separated on 10% Bis-Tris NuPAGE gels or on hand-poured low-bis acrylamide gels then separated at 150 V, 90 minutes. Proteins were electrotransferred onto 0.45 μM nitrocellulose membrane. Membranes were blocked in TBS+5% nonfat milk. Primary antibodies were used at 1:1,000 dilution. Fluorescently conjugated secondary antibody was used at 1:10,000 dilution to detect the protein bands by Odyssey CLx Imaging system. For Dictyostelium samples Mccc1 and for mammalian samples tubulin were used as a loading controls. Quantification of western blots To quantify the proportion of Scar/WAVE phosphorylation, the total intensity of all bands and the lowest band were determined using the Odyssey CLx Imaging system. The percentage phosphorylation is calculated by following formula: % p h o s p h o r y l a t i o n = × 100 / a. Phosphatase treatment Dictyostelium cells grown in a 35-mm petri dish were lysed in 100 μL TN/T buffer and kept on ice for 5 minutes. Mammalan cells were lysed in above buffer containing 1% triton X-100 and kept on ice for 5 minutes. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation and proteins were phosphatased using 1 μL Lambda phosphatase at 30°C. Western blotting assessed dephosphorylation of proteins as described. Cross-linking, GFP-TRAP pull-down, and mass spectrometry Cell lysis and cross-linking was performed as described in. Cells grown adhering to a 15-cm dish were washed with ice cold DB and lysed with 1 ml TNE/T buffer containing HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Lysates were kept at ice for 5 minutes. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation. A volume of 25 μL GFP-TRAP beads were washed twice with TNE/T buffer and resuspended in 100 μL TNE/T buffer. Further, 900 μL of lysate was added to the beads and kept on rotation for 2 hours at 4°C. Beads were spun down at and washed 4 times with TNE/T buffer. To elute the proteins from the beads, 25 μL 2 x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer was added and boiled. Protein samples were analyzed on low-bis 10% acrylamide gels and proteins bands near Scar were analyzed by LC-MS/MS to identify phosphorylation sites on Scar. DNA constructs To construct Scar/WAVE expression vector, Scar was PCR amplified from the Dictyostelium discoideum genomic DNA and cloned in pDM304 expression vector. Scar/LifeAct-mRFPmars2 co-expression constructs were generated by ligating pDM641 NgoMIV fragment into Scar expression vectors. Scar phosphorylation sites were mutated by site-directed mutagenesis using primers mentioned in S3 Table. All mutations were confirmed by sequencing. WAVE2 was amplified from pEGFP-WAVE2 and cloned into the pCDNA3.1 or pEGFP-C1 vector using KpnI and XbaI restriction sites. Phosphorylation sites were mutated to unphosphorylatable alanine by site-directed mutagenesis using primers listed in S3 Table. Mass spectrometry In-gel proteolytic digestion Eluates from GFP-NAP1 immunoprecipitation were separated by low-bis acrylamide SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue. The area of migration of SCAR indicated in S1A Fig was excised and digested separately with trypsin or chymotrypsin as previously described. MS analysis Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC 1200 coupled online to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer via nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated over a 60-minute gradient on a 20-cm fused silica emitter packed in house with reverse-phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 μm. For the full scan, a resolution of 60,000 at 250 Th was used. The top 10 most intense ions in the full MS were isolated for fragmentation with a target of 50,000 ions at a resolution of 15,000 at 250 Th. MS data were acquired using the XCalibur software. Data analysis Raw data obtained were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1. Andromeda peak list files generated were converted to Mascot generic files using APL to MGF Converter. The resulting MGF files were searched using Mascot, querying dictyBase plus an in-house database containing common proteomic contaminants and the sequence of GFP-NAP1 constructs used in the experiment. Mascot was searched assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin or chymotrypsin allowing for 2 miscleavages with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. The iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the PeptideProphet algorithm, resulting in a peptide false discovery rate of 0.63%. The identified phosphopeptides are listed in S4 Table. Microscopy and image analysis To determine the morphology, chemotactic speed, and directionality of cells, phase contrast time-lapse microscopy was performed at 10x/0.3NA on Nikon ECLIPSE TE-2000-R inverted microscope equipped with Retiga EXI CCD monochromatic camera. Images of cells migrating under agarose toward folate gradient were captured per minute for 45 minutes. DIC images were taken every 3 seconds for 7.5 minutes with 60x/1.4 NA to observe the pseudopod formation. The lifetime and width of pseudopods were quantified by ImageJ. EGFP-Nap1- or HSPC300-EGFP-expressing Dictyostelium cells were used to determine the activation of Scar complex. The localization of Scar/WAVE complex, Pak-CRIB, and F- Actin used a 63x/1.4 NA objective on an AiryScan Zeiss 880 inverted confocal microscope. Images were analyzed by homemade ImageJ plugin written by Dr. Luke Tweedy to determine chemotactic speed and tortuosity. Random motility assay was performed to determine the velocity, lamellipods’ lifetime, and width of WAVE1/2 knockout cells expressing pCDNA3.1, WAVE2 WT, and WAVE2 S8/T1A. Cells were seeded on laminin-coated glass-bottom 6-well plates and allowed to adhere and form lamellipods for 4 hours. Time-lapse movies were recorded at the interval of 2.5 or 10 minutes for 16 hours. Movies were analyzed using the MTrackJ plugin to calculate the velocity of cells. The resulting data was analyzed by chemotaxis tool. Lamellipod width and perimeter of cells were measured by straight or freehand line measurements. EGFP-WAVE2 WT - and EGFP-WAVE2 S8/T1A -expressing WAVE1/2 knockout cells were seeded on laminin-coated 35-mm glass-bottom dishes and imaged by AiryScan super-resolution imaging as before. Quantification and statistical analysis All the experiments were performed at least 3 times, and individual data were quantified to avoid any error. The cell’s speed and tortuosity were calculated from hundreds of cells. Scar/WAVE patch dynamics was observed from hundreds of pseudopods of at least dozens of cells. Any data points were not excluded from the list at any time of analysis. To compare the expression level and changes in phosphorylation of Scar, blots were quantified using Odyssey CLx Imaging system analysis tool. Statistical significance analyses of manual measurements such as speed, tortuosity, Scar patch lifetime/patch accumulation size, and patch frequency were performed by nonparametric statistics, such as 1-way ANOVA and Dunn’s multiple comparison tests. The experimental groups were tested for normal distribution using Shapiro–Wilk test of Prism 7 software. Sample sizes are provided in the figure legends. n refers to biological repeats in western blotting, total number of cells for cell speed, tortuosity and Scar patch frequency, duration of patches/accumulation size in ≥25 or more cells. Supporting information S1 Fig GFP-TRAP pull-down of EGFP-NAP1 cells. Coomassie brilliant blue stained low-bis acrylamide PAGE gel of GFP-TRAP pull-down samples. Lane 1, 2, and 3 indicates samples from Scar-/EGFPNAP1, and lane 4, 5, and 6 indicates samples from EGFPNap1 cells. The Scar band indicated on the gel was excised for LC-MS/MS. Representative western blot of above gel indicating phosphorylated Scar bands. LC-MS/MS, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Click here for additional data file. S2 Fig Incorporation of Scar mutants in the complex. GFP-TRAP pull-down was performed using MG132-treated and untreated Dictyostelium Scar-/EGFP-NAP1 cells expressing Scar WT, Scar S8A, and Scar S8D. The eluates were analyzed on low-bis PAGE western blotting for Pir121/Nap1/Scar and ubiquitin. Scar expression in the cell lysates was analyzed by low-bis PAGE and western blotting. Click here for additional data file. S3 Fig Phosphorylation of Scar during starvation. Cells were washed with non-nutrient buffer, starved for the indicated times, separated on low-bis gels, and probed with anti-Scar. The amount of phosphorylated Scar is reduced following development. Click here for additional data file. S4 Fig Expression pattern and effect of endogenous Scar, Scar WT, Scar S8A, and Scar 8D in the complex formation. Nap-/EGFP-Nap1 and Scar-/Nap-/EGFP-Nap1 cells rescued with Scar WT, Scar S8A, and Scar 8D cell lysates were immunoprecipitated using GFP-TRAP. Lysate and pull-down samples were analyzed for the expression of Pir121, Nap1, Scar, and Abi. Quantification of western blots shows that similar to Scar Endo, Scar WT, Scar S8A, and Scar 8D formed stable complexes. The numerical data are included in S1_Data. Phosphorylated Scar in the complex. Lysate and GFP-TRAP samples were analyzed on low-bis gels. Scar Endo and Scar WT are similarly phosphorylated in lysates and GFP-TRAP samples. The numerical data are included in S1 Data. Click here for additional data file. S1 Video Effect of EHT1864 on Rac1 and Scar complex localization. Dictyostelium cells expressing PakCRIB-mRFPmars2 were allowed to migrate under agarose up folate gradient and observed by AiryScan confocal microscopy. Filmed at 1 frame/2 seconds, movie shows 10 frames/second. EHT1864 was added at frame 7 in the video. Click here for additional data file. S2 Video Scar/WAVE and Rac1 activation in cells with mutant PIR121 A site. Pir121 knockout cells expressing WT Pir121-EGFP and A-site Pir121-EGFP were further expressed with PakCRIB-mRFPmars2. Scar complex and PakCRIB-mRFPmars2 localization was visualized in migrating cells under agarose up folate gradient. Filmed at 1 frame/2 seconds, Movie shows 10 frames/second. Click here for additional data file. S3 Video Effect of Latrunculin treatment on Scar complex localization. eGFP-NAP1 cells were seeded on Lab-Tek II coverglass chambers and imaged by AiryScan imaging. LatrunculinA was added to the cells undergoing imaging. Filmed at 1 frame/30 seconds, movie shows 10 frames/second. Latrunculin was added after frame 2. Click here for additional data file. S4 Video Pseudopod formation in Scar phosphomutants. Scar- cells expressing Scar WT, Scar S8A, and Scar S8D were allowed to migrate under agarose up a folate gradient and observed by DIC. Filmed at 1 frame/3 seconds, movie shows 10 frames/second. Click here for additional data file. S5 Video Scar complex localization in Scar phosphomutants. Scar-/EGFP-Nap1 cells expressing Scar WT, Scar S8A, and Scar S8D were allowed to migrate under agarose up folate gradient, and Scar complex activation in pseudopods were observed by AiryScan confocal microscopy. Filmed at 1 frame/3 seconds, movie shows 10 frames/second. Click here for additional data file. S6 Video Scar complex activation in total Scar phosphomutants. Scar-/EGFP-Nap1 cells expressing Scar S13A and Scar S13D were allowed to migrate under agarose up folate gradient and Scar complex activation in pseudopods were observed by AiryScan confocal microscopy. Filmed at 1 frame/3 seconds, movie shows 10 frames/second. Click here for additional data file. S7 Video Recruitment of WAVE complex and lamellipod formation in WAVE1/2 KO rescued with WAVE2 WT and WAVE2 S8A/T1A. Randomly migrating cells were imaged using AiryScan confocal microscopy. Filmed at 1 frame/20 seconds, movie shows 5 frames/second. Click here for additional data file. S8 Video Scar complex activation in Scar-/wasp- cells expressing phosphomutant Scar. Scar tet /wasp- cells expressing Scar WT, Scar S8A, and Scar S8D were allowed to migrate under agarose up folate gradient and Scar complex activation in pseudopods were observed by AiryScan confocal microscopy. Filmed at 1 frame/2 seconds, movie shows 10 frames/second. Click here for additional data file. S9 Video Pseudopod formation in Scar-/wasp- cells expressing phosphomutant Scar. Scar tet /wasp- cells expressing Scar WT, Scar S8A, and Scar S8D were allowed to migrate under agarose up folate gradient and were observed by differential interference contrast microscopy. Filmed at 1 frame/2 seconds, movie shows 10 frames/second. Click here for additional data file. S10 Video Pseudopod formation in WT and sepA- cells. WT and sepA- were allowed to migrate under agarose up folate gradient and were observed by differential interference contrast microscopy. Filmed at 1 frame/3 seconds, movie shows 10 frames/second. WT, wild type. Click here for additional data file. S11 Video Subcellular localization Scar complex in WT and sepA-. WT and sepA- expressing HSPC300-GFP. were allowed to migrate under agarose up folate gradient and were observed by AiryScan confocal micoscopy. Filmed at 1 frame/3 seconds, movie shows 10 frames/second. WT, wild type. Click here for additional data file. S1 Raw images Unprocessed images of all gels and blots in the paper. Click here for additional data file. S1 Data Numerical data for Fig 2E and 2H ; Fig 3B, 3C, 3E, 3F, 3H, 3L and 3N ; Fig 4D and 4F ; Fig 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 5F and 5G ; Fig 6B, 6C, 6D, 6G, 6H, 6I and 6J ; Fig 7B and 7F ; Fig 8D, 8F, 8G, 8I and 8J and S4B, S4C and S4E Fig.. Click here for additional data file. S1 Table. Peptide sequences and highlighted phosphorylated residues Click here for additional data file. S2 Table List of reagents, cells, and plasmids used in this study. Click here for additional data file. S3 Table List of oligos used in Scar/WAVE cloning and mutagenesis of unphospho- Scar and phosphomimetic Scar. Click here for additional data file. S4 Table List of phosphopeptides detected by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS, Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Click here for additional data file. 