 The mitochondrial calcium uniporter plays a critical role in mitochondrial calcium uptake into the matrix. In metazoans, the uniporter is a tightly regulated multicomponent system, including the pore-forming subunit MCU and several regulators. The calcium-conducting activity of metazoan MCU requires the single-transmembrane protein EMRE. Dictyostelium discoideum, however, developed a simplified uniporter for which the pore-forming MCU alone is necessary and sufficient for calcium influx. Here, we report a crystal structure of the N-terminal domain of DdMCU at 1.7 Å resolution. The DdMCU-NTD contains four helices and two strands arranged in a fold that is completely different from the known structures of other MCU-NTD homologues. Biochemical and biophysical analyses of DdMCU-NTD in solution indicated that the domain exists as high-order oligomers. Mutagenesis showed that the acidic residues Asp60, Glu72, and Glu74, which appeared to mediate the interface II, as observed in the crystal structure, participated in the self-assembly of DdMCU-NTD. Intriguingly, the oligomeric complex was disrupted in the presence of calcium. We propose that the calcium-triggered dissociation of NTD regulates the channel activity of DdMCU by a yet unknown mechanism. Introduction Mitochondrial calcium homeostasis plays a vital role in regulating various cellular activities, such as aerobic metabolism and cell apoptosis. 1 Several mitochondrial calcium transporters have been identified to be responsible for the maintenance of an internal steady state of calcium ions within the cytoplasm. 2 − 4 The Ca 2+ uniporter activity responsible for mitochondrial Ca 2+ uptake was reported more than 50 years ago, 5, 6 and later this uniporter was demonstrated by electrophysiological measurements to be an ion channel with remarkably high conductance and selectivity for calcium. 7 It was not until 8 years ago that the molecular components of the uniporter had been identified. 8 − 12 In vertebrates, the uniporter is a holocomplex consisting of multiple subunits, including two membrane-spanning subunits and two soluble proteins in the intermembrane space. The two soluble proteins are the mitochondrial calcium uptake proteins, MICU1 and MICU2, which are Ca 2+ sensing proteins that gate the activity of the pore in response to Ca 2+ concentrations outside the mitochondria. 13 − 17 The two membrane proteins are the mitochondrial calcium uniporter that forms the Ca 2+ conducting channel and the small single-pass transmembrane protein EMRE. 11, 18 As its name suggests, EMRE is essential for activating or keeping the pore in an open conformation, as well as for transducing the Ca 2+ sensing from MICU1/2 to MCU. 11 Now that the key molecular components of the calcium uniporter have been identified, more attention is turned to the molecular mechanism of MCU function and regulation. 19 The molecular architecture of the MCU core domain was first revealed by solution nuclear magnetic resonance and negative stain electron microscopy studies, with a truncated Caenorhabditis elegans MCU protein that lacks the extramembrane N-terminal domain. 20 The protein, named CeMCU-ΔNTD, contains two TM helices and adapts a pentameric complex with the second TM helix forming a hydrophilic pore across the membrane. The DxxE sequence motif critical for channel activity 21 between the first and the second TM helices forms two carboxylate rings at the entry of the pore, featuring a Ca 2+ selectivity filter. 22 In the NMR study, the NTD was not included; a separate X-ray study determined the high-resolution structure of the NTD of the human MCU, which adopts a ubiquitin-like fold. 23 Another crystal structure of HsMCU 72–189 also revealed a β-grasp-like fold with a negatively charged region that interacts with divalent cations, and this acidic patch is important for regulating human MCU activity in response to Mg 2+ and Ca 2+ binding. 24 Extensive efforts have been made to obtain the structures of the full-length MCU since its discovery. In 2018, the overall structures of the MCU were independently solved by several groups within a couple of months. The full-length structures of the fungal MCU homologues of Fusarium graminearum and Metarhizium acridum have been determined using X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy, revealing a dimer of dimer assembly of MCU. 25 Meanwhile, the structures of the full-length MCU homologues from Neurospora crassa, zebrafish, Cyphellophora europaea, and Neosartorya fischeri have also been determined using cryo-EM, showing a similar tetrameric fold. 26 − 28 These homologues show high sequence similarity in their transmembrane domain and share a similar pore architecture for calcium conductivity. Remarkably, the NTDs of these homologues also share a high structural similarity, in spite of the low sequence homology between NTDs. Recently, Wang et al. reported the cryo-EM structure of the human MCU–EMRE complex, providing the structural features for the EMRE regulation on the conformation of HsMCU. 29 It is interesting to note that the NTD adopts a unique side-by-side configuration to mediate the dimerization of two HsMCU tetramers, which indicates that the NTD may play an important role in modulating the function of MCU, although the removal of the NTD does not affect the mitochondrial Ca 2+ uptake. 23 Here, we determined the crystal structure of the NTD of Dictyostelium discoideum MCU at 1.7 Å resolution. Dictyostelium harbors a simplified uniporter complex, consisting of only the MCU protein to conduct Ca 2+, 11 and no EMRE is required for the channel activity. It has been shown that the expression of DdMCU alone is able to reconstitute uniporter activity in yeast mitochondria. 30 The same study showed that DdMCU could rescue the mitochondrial Ca 2+ uptake defects in HsMCU or HsEMRE knockout HEK-293T cells. Unexpectedly, the crystal structure of DdMCU-NTD showed a helix-rich fold that is completely different from the β-grasp-like structures of the HsMCU-NTD and other homologues. The structure also revealed a noncrystallographic interface, including intermolecular interactions of helix α3 and loop of protomer-A with helix α2 of protomer-B. We further showed that the DdMCU-NTD formed an oligomer in solution, consisting of at least four subunits. Mutating residues within the noncrystallographic interface caused the dissociation of the oligomer. Furthermore, the oligomeric state could be disrupted by the addition of Ca 2+. Our results revealed the divergent structures of MCU NTDs while suggesting the key residues of NTD in DdMCU channel assembly. Results Structure Determination of the DdMCU-NTD For the structural investigation of the NTD of DdMCU, we made five constructs, all lacking the predicted mitochondrial targeting sequence, based on the secondary structure and signal peptide prediction. These constructs include residues 29–126, 29–164, 29–164 with 88–106 removed, 29–164 with 92−106 removed, and 29–164 with 93−106 removed and GGSGG added to the C-terminus, respectively. The synthetic dsDNAs of the constructs above were inserted into the pET21a vector between the Nde I and Xho I restriction enzyme sites for expression and, thus, all proteins have a 6× His tag at the N terminus. The proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli and purified using nickel affinity, ion exchange, and size-exclusion chromatography. The construct containing residues 29–126 showed the best homogeneity and stability and was used for crystallization. We were able to crystallize DdMCU-NTD in a number of different conditions and in different forms. The best crystals were cube-shaped crystals formed in the precipitant solution containing 20% PEG 4000, 10% 2-propanol, and 10 mM HEPES-NaOH. These crystals diffracted to 1.7 Å with the P 2 1 2 1 2 1 space group. Since DdMCU-NTD has no sequence homology to any of the known structural domains in the database, we used the selenomethionine single-wavelength anomalous diffraction method 31 for experimental phasing. DdMCU-NTD has only one methionine out of 98 residues. To avoid the potential problem of having too few Met sites for labeling, we introduced several methionine residues by mutagenesis, including L8M, L54M, L86M, L71M/L67M, L8M/L20M, L8M/L86M, and L8M/L20M/L86M. One of the mutants, L8M/L20M, successfully produced crystals with the P1 2 1 1 space group that diffracted to 2.2 A°. SAD data collected with the crystals were used to obtain the initial phase and to solve the SeMet mutant structure. Four protomers with two types of interactions were found in an asymmetric unit, and all protomers were complete based on the electron density. One protomer was used as the search model to solve the wild-type structure by molecular replacement. The structure of the wild-type DdMCU-NTD was subsequently refined to 1.7 A° with R work / R free of 19.0/22.4%. We focused our discussion on the P 2 1 2 1 2 1 structure because the protein was not mutated. Figure 1 Overall structure of DdMCU-NTD. Ribbon representation of DdMCU-NTD with one pair of protomers colored green and cyan and one pair of protomers colored magenta and yellow. Crystal structure of the DdMCU-NTD protomer is composed of four helices... Table 1 Data Collection, Phasing, and Refinement Statistics DdMCU-NTD Adopts a Helix-Rich Fold Each protomer in the DdMCU-NTD wild-type crystal contains four α-helices with two helix–loop–helix motifs and a short antiparallel β-sheet formed between segments of the two loops. This is distinctly different from all NTDs of the solved structures. The known structures are largely composed of β-strands and adopt an ubiquitin-like fold as exemplified by the HsMCU-NTD structure. The NTDs of the four fungal homologues, MaMCU, CyMCU, NcMCU, and NfMCU, show tertiary structural resemblance to HsMCU-NTD with root-mean-square deviation 1.5–2.0 Å determined by Dali server in contrast to the low sequence identity/similarity with HsMCU-NTD. Despite being the fungal origin, DdMCU-NTD shares neither sequence nor structure similarities with the structure-known fungal homologues, suggesting divergent evolution. Figure 2 Crystal structure of DdMCU-NTD and comparison to the HsMCU-NTD structure. Ribbon representations of the crystal structures of DdMCU-NTD with two strands in yellow and HsMCU-NTD. DdMCU-NTD Forms a Stable Homo-Oligomer in Solution Consistent with various types of interprotomer interactions found in the crystal structure, DdMCU-NTD was shown to form a higher-order oligomer in solution. The size-exclusion chromatography retention volume suggested a molecular weight of ∼40 kDa, and more precise analysis with SEC-coupled multiangle light scattering suggested an average MW of 53.7 kDa, which is in close agreement with a 4- or 5-meric complex. The higher-order oligomer of DdMCU-NTD is also supported by cross-linking and blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis results. Cross-linking experiments were further performed using the amine-reactive glutaraldehyde. Multiple bands with low migration rates were observed on the sodium dodecyl sulfate -PAGE gel for the glutaraldehyde-treated sample, but not for the nontreated sample, suggesting a high-order oligomerization state. Taken together, these results suggest that DdMCU-NTD forms an oligomer that is at least composed of four subunits. By contrast, HsMCU-NTD forms mostly monomer and dimer in solution. 23, 24 Figure 3 Oligomeric state of DdMCU-NTD. SEC-MALS analysis of DdMCU-NTD. The left and right axes represent the light scattering detector reading and molecular weight, respectively. The black curve represents the calculated molecular weight, and the average... Key Interactions Driving NTD Oligomerization in Solution A dimer of dimer DdMCU-NTD assembly was observed in the crystal unit that displays two types of intermolecular associations, interface I and interface II. The PISA program identified interface I mediated by the intermolecular interactions, including Q38-I88, Q38-Y111, K43-E115, Q45-S85, and Q45-S87, in the P 2 1 2 1 2 1 wild-type crystal structure. For example, the hydrogen bonds were formed between side chain Hε of Q38 from one protomer with Ile88 backbone carbonyl and Tyr111 hydroxyl from an adjacent protomer. Other intermolecular hydrogen bonds were formed between Q45 and S85, and between Q45 and S87. The surface area of interface I is 379 Å 2, calculated by CCP4. Interface II involves the intersubunit interactions mainly between the polar side chains on α2 of one subunit and α3 of a neighboring subunit. One pair of interactions is identified between N59 side chain amine and N93 carbonyl, and between D60 side chain carbonyl and N93 amine. Another two pairs of the interactions in interface II are between E72 side chain carbonyl and N76 amine, and between K66 side chain amine and E74 carbonyl. The surface area of interface II is 82.55 Å 2. A dimerization interface is also observed in the crystal structure of HsMCU-NTD, 23 but due to the low sequence identity and structural assembly, the dimerization interfaces I and II of DdMCU-NTD are not conserved in the crystal structure of HsMCU-NTD. Figure 4 Key intermolecular interactions for DdMCU-NTD oligomer formation. Detailed view of intermolecular hydrogen bonds formed by Q38 with I88 and Y111. The two protomers are shown in green and cyan, respectively. A detailed view of the intermolecular N59/D60-N93... To gain more insights into the interactions that mediate oligomerization in solution, we examined the two types of interfaces in the crystal structures by mutagenesis. We introduced the single mutation Q38A and the double mutation S85A/S87A in the interface I and the single mutations D60A and N93A and double mutation D60A/N93A in the interface II to disrupt the NTD interactions. Unexpectedly, though interface I shows more tight interactions than interface II, size-exclusion chromatography and SEC-MALS showed that neither mutations in the interface I disrupted DdMCU-NTD oligomerization in the solution. While SEC-MALS analysis of the D60A and N93A mutants showed apparent MW of 33.8 and 25.7 kDa, respectively, the double mutant D60A/N93A showed the greatest size reduction to 19.0 kDa. We found that substituting the acidic side chains of E72 and E74 also altered the oligomerization pattern, i.e., single mutations E72A and E74A reduced the apparent MW of the solution complex to 42.5 and 39.8 kDa, respectively. All of the mutated proteins were eluted as a single major peak on a Superdex 200 10/300 column with a relatively broad peak width, except for D60A. The apparent molecular weights of the mutants ranged from ∼19 to ∼42.5 kDa, equaling to 1.6–3.6 times the theoretical 11.7 kDa monomer weight, suggesting the existence of monomer–dimer, dimer–trimer, and trimer–tetramer equilibrium in fast exchange, respectively. Notably, mutating E71, which is spatially close to E72 and E74, did not cause any significant decrease in size, suggesting that the observed interface sites containing E72 and E74 are specific. These results suggested that the interface II observed in the crystal structure mediated NTD oligomerization in solution. Table 2 Molecular Weights Estimated by SEC-MALS Calcium Disrupts DdMCU-NTD Oligomer in Solution A previous study of HsMCU-NTD showed that Ca 2+ or Mg 2+ could destabilize HsMCU-NTD oligomerization and shift the self-association equilibrium to monomer. 24 We found a similar Ca 2+ response for DdMCU-NTD. In the presence of 50 mM Ca 2+, the DdMCU-NTD oligomers reduced to an apparent MW of 20.2 kDa in MALS and 22 kDa in dynamic light scattering analysis. A control experiment using K + showed no obvious effect on DdMCU-NTD oligomerization, suggesting that the Ca 2+ -induced dissociation of the DdMCU-NTD oligomers is specific to divalent cations. Figure 5 Modulation of DdMCU-NTD oligomerization by calcium. Gel-filtration analysis of the DdMCU-NTD in the absence and presence of 50 mM Ca 2+ from Superdex 200 10/300 GL column. DLS intensity particle size distribution of... Next, we probed the oligomerization state of DdMCU-NTD using blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, which allows complexes to mostly maintain their stoichiometry. DdMCU-NTD WT mainly migrated at a molecular weight of ∼60 kDa, which supported a higher-order oligomeric state of the 5-/6-mer complex. The addition of calcium disrupts the oligomerization, and one band at ∼20 kDa was observed. Two mutants that did not show size changes in the SEC and two mutants that have obvious size differences from WT in the SEC were also analyzed by blue native gel in the absence and presence of calcium. D60A/N93A showed a band at ∼20 kDa with or without calcium, while the other three mutants showed a major band at ∼60 kDa and a minor band at ∼20 kDa in the absence of calcium and a major band at ∼20 kDa in the presence of calcium. This indicates that DdMCU-NTD may exist mainly as a dimer when it is dissociated by calcium addition or mutations. Discussion As indicated from the sequence alignment, the DdMCU has a higher sequence similarity in NTD-less domain than the NTD with other homologues. The transmembrane pore formed by the TM helices contains the Ca 2+ selectivity motif. The conserved pore architecture reflects the ability of MCUs to mediate Ca 2+ flux in a selective manner. Here, we found that one major difference is the conformation of the NTD, whereas HsMCU-NTD adopts a β-grasp-like fold with 26% β strands and 16% α helices, DdMCU-NTD has a helix-rich structure with 55% α helices and 7% β strands. In addition to the crystal structure of DdMCU-NTD being different from that of HsMCU-NTD, the oligomerization of DdMCU-NTD in solution is also different from what was observed in HsMCU-NTD. While the crystal structure showed both dimeric and tetrameric assembly, the DdMCU-NTD in solution showed higher-order oligomeric states when cross-linked. Native PAGE and SEC results also showed that DdMCU-NTD formed a 4- to 6-meric state. Because of the relatively low molecular weight of DdMCU-NTD, and the modest accuracy of the abovementioned methods in probing oligomerization states, it is currently difficult to define the exact oligomeric state. Based on the known oligomeric states for the full-length protein from other homologues, it is likely that DdMCU-NTD forms a tetramer in solution. Although the oligomerization state of DdMCU-NTD is not definitive, it is clear that DdMCU-NTD can self-assemble into a high-order oligomer in solution, while HsMCU-NTD did not show evidence of a stable oligomeric assembly; it instead exhibited monomer–dimer equilibrium in fast exchange. 24 We have independently confirmed by SEC and DLS that HsMCU-NTD in solution is predominantly dimeric. Based on these results, we conclude that DdMCU-NTD has a different self-association state from HsMCU-NTD. The recently published structures of the whole fungal MCUs show that MCUs form a well-packed tetrameric ring, while the NTDs are in a dimer of dimer assembly with two-fold symmetry. 25 − 28 Two interfaces have been identified in these NTDs. The interfaces are stabilized by similar intersubunit interactions, including hydrogen bonding between polar side chains and a conserved salt bridge between a Lys side-chain atoms of one subunit and an Asp side-chain atoms of a neighboring subunit. Such polar interactions are also observed in the crystal structures of the HsMCU-NTD. 23 Apart from the interfaces within one MCU channel, extensive dimerization interactions at the NTD were observed in the cryo-EM structure of the MCU–EMRE complex that multiple sets of salt bridges and hydrogen bonds form the v-shaped dimerization interface between two MCU tetramers. 29 Mutating the key electrostatic interactions abolished the dimerization of HsMCU but no alteration on the calcium uptake. 29 In DdMCU-NTD crystal structures, two interfaces are identified, including interface I containing Q38-I88/Y111, K43-E115, and Q45-S85/S87 three pairs of polar interactions, and interface II, including N59/D60-N93, K66-D74, and E72-N76. Surprisingly, mutations in the interface I that show tighter and larger contacting surface did not disrupt oligomerization, while mutations in the interface II play an important role in the formation and stabilization of the DdMCU-NTD oligomers. Disruption of either pair of the polar interactions in interface II by point mutations dramatically decreased the size of DdMCU-NTD. It is possible that K43-E115 in the interface I might be an essential interaction in the interface I or multiple-site mutations are required to disrupt the interactions in interface I. Future experimentation are required to explore these possibilities and depict the DdMCU-NTD assembly. Nevertheless, instead of the sequence and structure diversities, the oligomeric polar interfaces observed in different NTDs may play a role in maintaining the architectural integrity of the uniporter. According to the discovery of Lee et al., the disruption of the MCU-regulating acidic patch of HsMCU-NTD by Ca 2+ or Mg 2+ could weaken the oligomer assembly of the NTD and promote the NTD monomerization. 24 It is likely that Ca 2+ exits from the membrane-proximal chamber after passing through the TM pore. In this case, the local concentration of Ca 2+ in the chamber is estimated at the millimolar level. The observation led to a model in which the NTD of HsMCU plays an important Ca 2+ -dependent regulatory role. 24 We also found that Ca 2+ has the ability to disrupt the self-association equilibrium of DdMCU-NTD in solution, probably to a dimer instead of a monomer according to the analysis of the native gel. The structural observation that α4 helix is highly exposed in the subunit structure also indicates that the monomer may not be stable in the solution. Similar Ca 2+ -induced NTD dissociation has been observed for DdMCU and HsMCU, despite the large structural differences in the NTD, suggesting that the NTD may play a regulatory role in the Ca 2+ conductance of MCU. In conclusion, we have shown that the NTD of DdMCU adopts a fold that is completely different from the NTD of other MCU homologues. We have also shown that the DdMCU-NTD is capable of forming oligomers in solution, and such oligomerization appears to be mediated by intermolecular electrostatic interactions involving several acidic residues. The binding of calcium can disrupt the DdMCU-NTD oligomers. Although the functional role of the NTD in DdMCU remains to be investigated, our results provide structural insights into the NTD in the DdMCU channel assembly and the basis of calcium permeation. Materials and Methods Protein Expression and Purification The D. discoideum MCU N-terminal domain was cloned into the vector pET21a with a hexahistidine at the N terminus. The plasmid was then transformed into E. coli BL21 and cultured in the Luria–Bertani medium at 37 °C until the optical density at 600 nm reached 0.7. The expression of DdMCU-NTD was induced by the addition of 0.15 mM IPTG, followed by incubation at 18 °C for 12 h. The bacteria were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in lysis buffer (200 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 50 mM Tris–HCl ). After sonication, the lysate was centrifuged at 39 000 g for 40 min. Then, the supernatant was passed through a Ni-NTA affinity column, washed, and eluted with elution buffer (200 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM PMSF, 400 mM imidazole, 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0)). The imidazole was removed by dialyzing the sample against 15 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, and 20 mM Tris–HCl. The protein was then applied to a HiTrap-Q HP column equilibrated with 15 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 20 mM Tris–HCl, and eluted with a linear gradient to 1 M NaCl in 30 min. The protein was further purified using a HiLoad16/60 Superdex 200 column equilibrated with size-exclusion chromatography buffer (75 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 20 mM HEPES-NaOH ). The pooled fractions were concentrated to 20 mg/mL for crystallization. All of the mutants were purified following the same protocol. For crystal structure determination, selenomethionyl DdMCU-NTD was expressed in E. coli BL21 cells grown in M9 medium supplemented with SeMet, as described previously. 32 The SeMet-labeled mutant was then produced by following the same purification protocol used for the wild-type protein. Crystallization and Data Collection The DdMCU-NTD protein (20 mg/mL in 75 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 20 mM HEPES-NaOH ) was crystallized using the sitting drop vapor diffusion method with a reservoir solution of 20% PEG 4000, 10% 2-propanol, 10 mM HEPES-NaOH. Ca 2+ was not added to the crystallization buffer, and no ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid was added either to sequester residual Ca 2+ constitutively present in water. Crystals were grown for 3–5 weeks at 4 °C by mixing equal volumes of protein and reservoir solution in MRC 2 drop 96-well crystallization plate and cryo-cooled in a cryoprotectant consisting of the reservoir solution supplemented with 35% ethylene glycol. The SeMet crystals were produced in the same conditions used for the wild-type protein, with the exception that 8 mg/mL SeMet protein was used for crystallization. The SeMet crystals were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen with the same cryoprotective reagents. X-ray diffraction data were collected at the BL18U beamline in the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility. Diffraction data were processed using the XDS package. 33 − 35 Data collection statistics are shown in Table 1. Structure Determination and Refinement The structure was solved using Phenix.autosol with the single-wavelength anomalous dispersion data collected using the SeMet-labeled L8M/L20M mutant. An initial model was built using Phenix.autobild. 36 The structure was completed using alternate cycles of manual fitting in Coot 37 followed by structure refinement with Phenix.refine. Detailed data collection and refinement statistics are summarized in Table 1. SEC-MALS Analysis of the DdMCU-NTD Molecular Weight Molecular weight determination by gel filtration was carried out by comparing the gel phase distribution coefficient of DdMCU-NTD with the values obtained from several known calibration standards, including ferritin, aldolase, conalbumin, ovalbumin, and lysozyme (14 kDa). The equation derived from the calibration curve between the elution volume parameters of known proteins and the logarithm of their molecular weights is The instrument setup used for the SEC-MALS experiment consisted of an Agilent 1260 Infinity Isocratic liquid chromatography system connected in tandem with a Wyatt Dawn Heleos II multiangle light scattering detector, a Wyatt Optilab T-rEX refractive index detector, and a ViscoStar III differential viscometer (Wyatt Technology). Analytical size-exclusion chromatography was performed at room temperature using a Superdex 200 10/300 GL column equilibrated with a mobile phase containing 75 mM NaCl, 0.3 mM NaN 3, 50 mM MES-NaOH. One hundred microliters purified DdMCU-NTD sample at 10 mg/mL were injected into the column and eluted at a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. The column effluent was monitored in-line with three detectors that simultaneously monitored UV absorption, light scattering, and refractive index. The data from the three detectors were imported by the ASTRA software package, and the three-detector method 38 was used to determine the molecular weight. Dynamic Light Scattering Dynamic light scattering measurements were performed at 25 °C for DdMCU-NTD and HsMCU-NTD on a DynaPro NanoStar instrument with water or buffer alone as controls. Bovine serum albumin was used as a positive control to ensure that the instrument is performing as expected. Then, 100 μL of 0.1 mM DdMCU-NTD and HsMCU-NTD samples were loaded to obtain the hydrodynamic radius and the size distribution. Protein and particle sizes were then analyzed using the Rayleigh sphere model with the method of regularization by Dynamics V6 software accompanied by the instrument. Size distributions were reported as intensity distributions and the average radius was reported in terms of polydispersity. Characterization of the DdMCU-NTD Oligomeric State The oligomeric state of DdMCU-NTD was first examined by chemical cross-linking using glutaraldehyde. The reaction volume of 50 μL consisted of 0.5 mg/mL protein, 25 mM HEPES-NaOH, 150 mM NaCl, and various concentrations of glutaraldehyde (0.0015, 0.015, and 0.15%, v/v). The reaction was stopped after 2 min by adding 100 mM Tris–HCl. The samples were incubated for another 5 min. The reaction mixtures were analyzed using SDS-PAGE gel. Blue native gradient gel was generated with a NativePAGE 4–16% Bis–Tris Gel (Invitrogen, 16041980). Two micrograms of DdMCU-NTD (in the absence and presence of 20 mM CaCl 2 ) was mixed with NativePAGE sample buffer and G-250 additive, then analyzed by blue native gel. The electrophoresis was performed at 150 V in 1× NativePAGE anode buffer and 1× NativePAGE cathode buffer A for 70 min. The NativeMark unstained protein standard was used as a reference marker. 