Commentary: The Dynamics of Aerotaxis in a Simple Eukaryotic Model You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Commentary: The Dynamics of Aerotaxis in a Simple Eukaryotic Model Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022; 10: 844812. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Front Cell Dev Biol Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Commentary: The Dynamics of Aerotaxis in a Simple Eukaryotic Model Jean-Paul Rieu, Olivier Cochet-Escartin,, and Vincent Calvez Additional article information A Commentary on The Dynamics of Aerotaxis in a Simple Eukaryotic Model by Biondo, M., Panuzzo, C., Ali, S. M., Bozzaro, S., Osella, M., Bracco, E., and Pergolizzi, B.. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9:720623. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.720623 We read with interest the article by Biondo et al. in Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology, “ The Dynamics of Aerotaxis in a Simple Eukaryotic Model.” Reproducing the confinement assay we published in eLife earlier this year with the same cell line, they found the same emergent behavior, i.e., the propagation of a ring of cells, which they named corona, from a dense, confined colony through the self-generation of oxygen gradients by cell consumption. The authors claimed that cell division plays no role in the phenomenon, whereas in our study, we insisted on its important role. This message is wrong. In this commentary, we first clarify that ring formation is independent on cell division but that ring propagation over long times depends on it. Second, we discuss the possible experimental biases that may have led the authors to this conclusion. Cell division is not necessary for ring formation but is necessary for its sustained propagation. Biondo et al. observed exactly the same collective phenotype as us for the confined colony in a starving buffer that prevents cell division. A ring forms internally, but as soon as it reaches the colony edge, it stops and cells aggregate. In contrast, in a nutrient medium, the ring propagates far away from the initial colony for days. Biondo et al. neither commented on this fundamental difference between the two conditions nor on our model that demonstrates that cell division is necessary to maintain ring propagation even if it contributes little to the expansion speed. Independently of any model, a simple mass balance equation for the total cell number N with NB cells in the bulk region and NR cells in the ring region invalidates Biondo's assertion that division plays no role: N = N B + N R = ρ B π − L ) 2 + ρ R 2 π R L FIGURE 1 Cell proliferation during the aerotactic expansion of a small confined colony of vegetative Dictyostelium cells with an initial number of cell N = 1,000 and an initial radius R = 600 µm. Snapshots at 3, 18,... Using the experimental observations that the ring width L and density ρ R and bulk density ρ B are constant, and that the ring radius R is expanding at constant speed R = R 0 + σt, we predict that N B increases faster with time than N R. Experimentally, up to 30 h, N B increases faster than linearly with time while N R increases linearly. Initially N B /N R = 1, but after 24 h, N B /N R = 1.8, and after 47 h, N B /N R = 2.8. Hence, N B largely contributes to the overall cell number increase N. By comparison, Biondo et al. assume a constant N R, and they do not consider bulk cells at all. Cell divisions hold in the ring. Our confined colony grows slower than exponentially in Figure 1C ), but it grows /N = 8.5). In Cochet-Escartin et al., we propose a go-or-grow model where aerotaxis holds at low O 2 and cell division at high O 2. The threshold is around 1% O 2 as estimated by direct aerotaxis investigations using microfluidic devices and from literature values for cell division in hypoxic conditions. Such value corresponds to the O 2 level measured in the ring. Hence, divisions occur mostly in the ring, but ring cells are constantly transferred to the bulk to maintain a constant ρ B while R is increasing. This transfer occurs in our models, but perhaps it was not sufficiently supported by data. In Figures 1E,F, we present manually tracked trajectories in the ring frame. A few ones displayed with a green or purple color enter or escape the outward ring position, canceling any ring-to-front flux. Far more trajectories are directed backward. Interestingly, the measured flux of such a cell transfer, φ R → B = 12 cells/mm/h, explains fairly well the bulk cell number increase using the following equation: d N B = 2 π R ϕ R → B d t The fit is displayed in Figure 1C. Biondo et al. may have caught a transient regime only. Biondo et al. measured 3% and 5% O 2 in the bulk and ring regions, respectively. Above 2% O 2, aerotaxis should not hold ; the division rate is fairly the same as in normoxic conditions. A possible reason for this discrepancy is that O 2 is overestimated. Their measurements were performed with a commercial sensing film that is not compatible with transmission microscopy, contrary to the technology we developed in Cochet-Escartin et al. They may have a different confinement on plastic than on the sensing film. A loose confinement may generate a higher O 2 value under the colony. They also made colonies with a huge amount of cells. As the self-generated O 2 field depends on the consumption of every cell, we expect a huge degree of hypoxia. Finally, they never reached a stationary expansion regime due to the large initial excess of inner cells. That excess density slowly decreases with time as visible on their kymograph. We have actually simulated a moderate bulk cell excess in our work which is also transiently visible at 3 h in Figure 1B. Such an inner cell mass transfer has to be taken into account to establish a correct mass balance equation, and the only LR quantity tested by Biondo et al. is clearly not sufficient to draw a conclusion on cell divisions. Author Contributions All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual contribution to the work, and approved it for publication. Funding This study was supported by the CNRS - Mission pour les Initiatives Transverses et Interdisciplinaires' “Défis Modélisation du vivant - 2019”, by the European Research Council under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program and by the International Human Frontier Science Program Organization, Grant Number RGP0051/2021. Conflict of Interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Publisher’s Note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Article information Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022; 10: 844812. Published online 2022 Mar 2. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.844812 PMCID: PMC8924511 PMID: 35309919 Jean-Paul Rieu, 1, * Olivier Cochet-Escartin, 1 Christophe Anjard, 1 Mete Demircigil, 2 and Vincent Calvez 2 Jean-Paul Rieu 1 Institut Lumière Matière, UMR5306, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Jean-Paul Rieu Olivier Cochet-Escartin 1 Institut Lumière Matière, UMR5306, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Olivier Cochet-Escartin Christophe Anjard 1 Institut Lumière Matière, UMR5306, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Christophe Anjard Mete Demircigil 2 Institut Camille Jordan, UMR5208, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Mete Demircigil Vincent Calvez 2 Institut Camille Jordan, UMR5208, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Vincent Calvez 1 Institut Lumière Matière, UMR5306, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France 2 Institut Camille Jordan, UMR5208, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France Corresponding author. Edited by: Verena Ruprecht, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Spain Reviewed by: Jean Clairambault, Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique, France *Correspondence: Jean-Paul Rieu, rf.1noyl-vinu@ueir.luap-naej This article was submitted to Molecular and Cellular Pathology, a section of the journal Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology Received 2021 Dec 28; Accepted 2022 Jan 20. Keywords: Self-generated gradients, Aerotaxis, Collective migration, Oxygen sensing, Dictyostelium discoideum Copyright © 2022 Rieu, Cochet-Escartin, Anjard, Demircigil and Calvez. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License. The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author and the copyright owner are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. Articles from Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology are provided here courtesy of Frontiers Media SA 