 The abundant homohexameric AAA + ATPase p97 is highly conserved from Dictyostelium discoideum to human and a pivotal factor of cellular protein homeostasis as it catalyzes the unfolding of proteins. Owing to its fundamental function in protein quality control pathways, it is regulated by more than 30 cofactors, including the UBXD protein family, whose members all carry an Ubiquitin Regulatory X domain that enables binding to p97. One member of this latter protein family is the largely uncharacterized UBX domain containing protein 9. Here, we analyzed protein-protein interactions of D. discoideum UBXD9 with p97 using a series of N- and C-terminal truncation constructs and probed the UBXD9 interactome in D. discoideum. Pull-down assays revealed that the UBX domain is necessary and sufficient for p97 interactions and that the N-terminal extension of the UBX domain, which folds into a β 0 -α – 1 -α 0 lariat structure, is required for the dissociation of p97 hexamers. Functionally, this finding is reflected by strongly reduced ATPase activity of p97 upon addition of full length UBXD9 or UBXD9 261–573. Results from Blue Native PAGE as well as structural model prediction suggest that hexamers of UBXD9 or UBXD9 261–573 interact with p97 hexamers and disrupt the p97 subunit interactions via insertion of a helical lariat structure, presumably by destabilizing the p97 D1:D1’ intermolecular interface. We thus propose that UBXD9 regulates p97 activity in vivo by shifting the quaternary structure equilibrium from hexamers to monomers. Using three independent approaches, we further identified novel interaction partners of UBXD9, including glutamine synthetase type III as well as several actin-binding proteins. These findings suggest a role of UBXD9 in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton, and are in line with the hypothesized oligomerization-dependent mechanism of p97 regulation. Keywords: p97/VCP/CDC48/TER/VAT ATPase, UBX domain containing protein 9, IBMPFD, ALS, Dictyostelium discoideum, hexamer disassembly Introduction The AAA + ATPase p97, also known as valosin-containing protein, is a very abundant protein and evolutionarily highly conserved. It was first described in 1982 and has since emerged as a fundamental player in a plethora of cellular processes and signaling pathways. The protein has a tripartite structure comprising a globular N domain followed by the D1 and D2 domains that bind and hydrolyze ATP. p97 assembles into a ring shaped hexameric complex of six identical subunits, where the D1 and D2 domains form stacked rings with a “cis” and a “trans” side. The “cis” D1 domain is surrounded by the globular N domain. Depending on nucleotide binding in the D1 domain, the N domain adopts an up- or down conformation. FIGURE 1 Domain organization and model of H. sapiens p97. p97 domain organization. N, N domain ; D1, ATPase domain D1 ; D2, ATPase domain D2. Numbers indicate amino acid positions. Schematic representation of the structure of the... For a long time, p97 was considered only as a segregase that extracts target proteins from complexes or membranes by ATP hydrolysis, so that they can be degraded by the proteasome. However, now it is clear that the fundamental function of p97 is the unfolding of proteins in numerous protein quality control pathways such as chromatin-associated degradation, the ubiquitin-proteasome system, mitochondria-associated degradation, endo-lysosomal damage response, macroautophagy, and endoplasmic-reticulum associated degradation. The critical importance of p97 for cellular homeostasis is demonstrated by the lethality of knock-out mutations in unicellular and multicellular organisms. Furthermore, an increasing number of p97 missense mutations have been associated with various human diseases. Prominent examples include the late-onset and slowly progressive multi-system disorder Inclusion Body Myopathy associated with Paget disease of bone and Fronto temporal Dementia and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Since cancer cells have a heightened dependence on mechanisms of protein homeostasis, p97 is also a promising target for anti-cancer therapy. To exert its locally, functionally and mechanically different tasks, p97 interacts with more than 30 different cofactors, most of which associate with the N domain. The p97 cofactors can be divided into three major classes, substrate-recruiting cofactors, as e.g., the well-studied Ufd1/Npl4 heterodimer, substrate-processing cofactors as e.g., ubiquitin E3 ligases, and regulatory cofactors. The largest family of regulatory cofactors is the Ubiquitin Regulatory X domain containing protein family, which has thirteen members in human and eleven in D. discoideum. All members possess the eponymous, highly conserved UBX domain in their C-terminal region, which adopts a ubiquitin-like fold and is critical for the interaction with the N domain of p97. Five of the D. discoideum UBXD family members, among them UBX domain containing protein 9, are orthologs of human UBXD proteins. Human UBXD9, also known as ASPL or TUG, was originally identified in a genetic screen as part of an oncogenic fusion protein with the transcription factor TFE3 in alveolar soft part sarcoma cells. The latter name, TUG, reflects its function in the redistribution of the glucose transporter GLUT4 in adipocytes. In the basal state, UBXD9 traps GLUT4 storage vesicles at the Golgi apparatus. In response to insulin, UBXD9 is endoproteolytically cleaved by Usp25b, resulting in the release of the GSVs and their transport to the plasma membrane by the kinesin motor protein KIF5B. Furthermore, it was shown that UBXD9 is required for the efficient re-assembly of the Golgi complex after brefeldin A removal. A further UBXD9 homolog, PUX1, has been described in Arabidopsis thaliana. PUX1 is only about half the size and lacks the N-terminal half of UBXD9. Among all p97 cofactors described so far, D. discoideum UBXD9, human TUG and A. thaliana PUX1 are unique as they possess p97 hexamer disassembly activity. In the following parts, we will refer to D. discoideum UBXD9 mostly just as UBXD9 and specify the orthologouss UBXD9 proteins by adding species names. Here, we further analyzed UBXD9 by the characterization of the full-length protein and a series of N- and C-terminal truncation constructs with respect to their interactions with p97. Furthermore, to shed light on the UBXD9 interactome and further possible functions of UBXD9, we applied three different approaches to identify new interacting proteins. Materials and Methods Molecular Modeling A search for D. discoideum UBXD9 orthologs with known 3D structure using pGenThreader identified human ASPL, also known as TUG, UBXD9 and RCC17 as the best candidate. Therefore, a 3D model of Dd-UBXD9 was generated by comparative modeling using the software MODELLER and the structure-based amino acid sequence alignment of Dd-UBXD9 and Hs-ASPL. Twenty different models were computed and the best one selected. Next, the modeled structures of D. discoideum p97 and of D. discoideum UBXD9 were used to generate a complex by aligning the partners to the structure of the human VCP :ASPL complex and adding ADP and Mg 2+. The helical lariat of Dd-UBXD9 was manually adjusted by rigid body movements to remove any clashes with D. discoideum p97. The modeled complex was solvated and subjected to a molecular dynamics simulation for ∼5 ns simulation time using Gromacs. Analysis of environmental as well as spatial parameters showed that the model was stable throughout the simulation. Structure-based amino acid sequence alignments were generated with SBAL based on predictions of secondary structure elements with PSIPRED. Vector Construction To generate GST-tagged UBXD9 polypeptides, the corresponding UBXD9 sequences were amplified by standard PCR technique from either AX2 cDNA or full-length UBXD9 cloned into the pBsr-C1-GFP vector using UBXD9 specific primers. The PCR products were cloned into the pGEX-6P-1 expression vector and the sequences verified by sequencing. To generate the BirA-UBXD9 expression vector, the full-length UBXD9 coding sequence was amplified from AX2 cDNA and cloned into the previously described D. discoideum BirA expression vector via the Sac I and Bam HI restriction sites. The construct contained a linker encoding YKGGSGGSGGSRLREL between BirA and UBXD9. The insert of the resulting expression plasmid was verified by sequencing. D. discoideum Culture and Transformation D. discoideum strains were grown in AX2 medium at 21°C either on Petri dishes or in suspension in Erlenmeyer flasks with shaking at 160 rpm or on a lawn of Klebsiella aerogenes on SM agar plates. Recombinant strains were cultured under selective pressure in the presence of 5 μg/ml blasticidin S. For cell biological and biochemical experiments, log phase cells at 2–4 × 10 6 cells/ml were used. The BirA-UBXD9 expression plasmid was transformed into wild-type AX2 cells by electroporation and transformants were selected with 5 μg/ml blasticidin S. Stable transformants expressing BirA-UBXD9 were verified by PCR and Western blot analysis. The strains expressing GFP-UBXD9 or UBXD9-GFP have been described previously. Purification of Recombinant Proteins and Immunoblotting Purification of GST-tagged full-length and truncated UBXD9 proteins and of p97 from either E. coli XL1 Blue cells or ArcticExpress cells was performed as described previously. For biochemical assays, the purified GST-fusion proteins were either used bound to Glutathione-Agarose 4B beads or the recombinant protein was liberated from the beads by cleavage with 5 U/ml PreScission protease for 16 h at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford assay. For quality control of purified proteins and GST-fusion protein bound beads, SDS-PAGE followed by Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining or Western blotting was performed. Full-length and truncated UBXD9 proteins were detected with rabbit polyclonal } UBX23520 antibody at a 1:20,000 dilution, p97 was detected with rabbit polyclonal p97_8_6841 antibody at 1:10,000 dilution, GFP with mouse monoclonal K3-184-2 antibody at a 1:50 dilution, actin with the monoclonal Act1-7 antibody at a 1:40 dilution, ubiquitin with mouse monoclonal P4D1 antibody at a 1:1,000 dilution, and BirA with a rabbit polyclonal antibody at a 1:5,000 dilution. Secondary antibodies used were anti-rabbit and anti-mouse IgG conjugated with horseradish peroxidase at a 1:10,000 dilution. Detection was done by chemiluminescence using the SuperSignal West Pico PLUS chemiluminescent substrate in conjunction with the Intas ECL Chemostar documentation system. The software LabImage 1D L-340 was used for the determination of molecular masses and the quantification of the detected proteins. Co-immunoprecipitation Co-immunoprecipitation experiments for the identification of novel UBXD9 interaction partners were performed with log phase AX2 cells ectopically expressing UBXD9-GFP, GFP-UBXD9, or GFP. 1 × 10 8 cells were harvested, washed twice with Soerensen phosphate buffer and the cell pellet shock frozen with liquid nitrogen. Pellets were resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer, 1:100 PEFA block) followed by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 10 min. The supernatant, containing soluble proteins, was incubated with GFP-trap beads for 2 h at 4°C. Beads were washed four times with wash buffer I and twice with wash buffer II. Bound proteins were either analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining or further processed for mass spectrometry. Proximity-Dependent Biotin Identification The BioID method was essentially performed as described. Briefly, log phase BirA-UBXD9 expressing AX2 cells were cultured in the presence of 50 μM Biotin for 16 h. 2 × 10 8 cells were harvested and the cells further processed as for co-immunoprecipitation. Soluble proteins were incubated with streptavidin-coupled sepharose beads for 2 h at 4°C. After washing of the beads bound proteins were either analyzed by Western blot analysis or further processed for mass spectrometry. Mass Spectrometry Mass spectrometry was carried out at the CECAD/CMMC Proteomics Facility. Samples were prepared by the in-solution digestion of proteins and StageTip purification of peptides according to the protocol of the facility 1. The samples were analyzed using an EASY nLC 1,000 UPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded with solvent A onto an in-house packed analytical column and were chromatographically separated. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, where the Orbitrap acquired full MS scans at a resolution of 70,000 with an automated gain control target of 3 × 10 6 ions collected with 20 ms. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20 s. The ten most intense peaks were subjected to HCD fragmentation. All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant and its implemented Andromeda search engine. Two-sample two-tailed Student’s t -test were performed in Perseus for pairwise comparisons. Proteins with a fold change > 1.4 and a p < 0.05 in the experiment versus negative control were considered to represent putative UBXD9 interacting proteins. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium 2 via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD027160 and PXD027162. Four independent biological replicates were performed. Miscellaneous Methods Blue Native-PAGE was performed for the analysis of native protein complexes. Purified recombinant proteins in 1 × PBS, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM ATP were mixed with 4 × NativePAGE Sample Buffer followed by separation in Invitrogen Novex Native-PAGE 4–16% Bis-Tris Protein-Gels. Electrophoresis was performed in the cold-room with pre-chilled buffers at 150 V for 4 h. Gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue and protein molecular masses were determined based on the NativeMark protein standard. The ATPase activity assay for p97 either alone or in the presence of full-length or truncated UBXD9 proteins was carried out in phosphate-free sample buffer in the presence of 1 mM ATP according to the instructions of the manufacturer. The ATPase activity of p97 was calculated based on the amount of the generated free phosphate. Sucrose density gradient sedimentation and pull-down assays were performed as described. Results Ubiquitin Regulatory X Domain Containing Protein 9 Is Highly Conserved UBXD9 is a member of the ubiquitin X domain protein family, which makes up the largest subgroup of p97 cofactors. The UBXD9 domain structure is highly conserved across different eukaryotes and is composed of the N-terminal ubiquitin-like and the low homology UBX domains followed by a coiled coil domain in the middle part. The C-terminal region harbors the eponymous UBX domain, which is present in and characteristic for all members of the UBXD protein family. In addition, we identified in D. discoideum UBXD9 a low complexity region located between the LHU and coiled coil domains, and a second coiled coil domain in the C-terminal region. The SHP box, a further p97 binding motif, which was identified in human and mouse UBXD9, is not present in Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and D. discoideum UBXD9. We previously reported the direct interaction of UBXD9 with p97. To analyze the contribution of the different domains of UBXD9 to the interaction with p97 and to narrow down interacting regions, we generated a series of C- and/or N-terminal UBXD9 truncation constructs. The domain structures of full-length D. discoideum UBXD9 and of the generated truncation constructs are displayed in Figure 3A. FIGURE 2 Sequence alignment of UBXD9 proteins from different model organisms. A multiple sequence alignment of UBXD9 protein sequences from D. discoideum, H. sapiens, Mus musculus, Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, and S.... FIGURE 3 The UBX domain is necessary and sufficient to bind to p97. Schematic representation of the D. discoideum UBXD9 domain organization and of the analyzed UBXD9 truncation constructs. N, N-terminus; C, C-terminus; LCR, Low complexity region, UBL1, Ubiquitin-like... The Ubiquitin Regulatory X Domain Is Necessary and Sufficient for the Interaction With p97 To elucidate the p97 binding region of UBXD9 we performed pull-down experiments with recombinant p97 and full-length UBXD9 and the different UBXD9 truncation constructs tagged with GST. In the presence of full-length UBXD9 most of p97 was found in the pellet fraction of glutathione sepharose beads, while most of p97 remained in the supernatant in the presence of GST. This result confirmed the specific binding of full-length UBXD9 to p97. Deletion of the C-terminal part of UBXD9 in the N-terminal constructs, UBXD9 1–336 and UBXD9 1–164, resulted in a loss of p97 binding activity. Similarly, the truncation constructs UBXD9 467–573, UBXD9 165–383, and UBXD9 165–342, which all lack the UBX domain, were also not able to bind p97 and almost all p97 remained in the supernatant. In contrast, the UBXD9 truncation constructs UBXD9 165–573, UBXD9 261–573, UBXD9 331–573, UBXD9 384–573, and UBXD9 384–466, which all harbor the UBX domain, were all able to bind p97. The shortest construct sufficient to bind p97 was UBXD9 384–466, which comprises the UBX domain only. SDS-PAGE followed by Coomassie staining showed the presence of GST, GST-tagged full-length UBXD9, and all GST-UBXD9 truncation constructs in the pellet fraction. Quantification of p97 in the supernatant and pellet fractions of three independent experiments revealed strongest binding by full length UBXD9, followed by UBXD9 261–573, UBXD9 384–466, UBXD9 165–573, and UBXD9 384–573. Quantification also revealed that the interaction of UBXD9 331–573 with p97 was not significant, although the shorter UBXD9 384–573 and UBXD9 384–466 clearly pulled down p97. We assume that the amino acids 331–383 in this construct somehow interfere with binding of the UBX domain to p97. In summary, these results confirm the interaction of UBXD9 with p97 and show that the UBX domain is necessary and sufficient for binding to p97. The Presence of a UBX Domain Containing Protein 9 Lariat Structure Is Required for the Disassembly of p97 Hexamers We used sucrose density gradient centrifugation in combination with SDS-PAGE to monitor the oligomeric status of p97 alone or in the presence of full-length UBXD9 and various UBXD9 truncation constructs. It has previously been shown that full length D. discoideum UBXD9, human UBXD9 and A. thaliana UBXD9 have the ability to disassemble p97 hexamers. Analysis of p97 alone showed the presence of most p97 in higher sucrose density fractions, representing p97 hexamers. Only a small amount of p97 was present in lower sucrose density fractions, representing monomers or dimers. A similar result as for p97 alone was obtained when p97 was incubated with either UBXD9 1–336, UBXD9 331–573, or UBXD9 384–573. In contrast, full-length UBXD9 as well as UBXD9 261–573 were able to disassemble p97 hexamers, as represented by the shift of p97 from high to low molar sucrose fractions. Quantification of three independent experiments confirmed that the p97 distribution in the presence of UBXD9 331–573 and UBXD9 384–573 was comparable to p97 alone and that only full-length UBXD9 and UBXD9 261–573 were able to disassemble p97 hexamers. Of note, the ATPase activity of p97 is high in the hexameric state and low for p97 monomers. In support of the p97 hexamer disassembly activity of UBXD9 and UBXD9 261–573, we measured in their presence a strong reduction of the p97 ATPase activity. FIGURE 4 The helical lariat structure of UBXD9 is pivotal for its disassembly activity. Sucrose density gradient sedimentation with p97 alone or with equimolar amounts of p97 and full-length UBXD9 or p97 and UBXD9 261–573... As the three UBXD9 truncation constructs UBXD9 261–573, UBXD9 331–573, and UBXD9 384–573 had the ability to bind p97, we next were interested in their structural differences. Recently, the crystal structure of a H. sapiens UBXD9 truncation construct encompassing amino acids 317–497 in complex with the N and D1 domains of p97 was solved. The 3D structure of the UBXD9 truncation construct revealed a helical lariat, comprising the α-helices α – 1, and α 0 and an unordered region, which embraces the N domain of p97. Upstream of the unordered region a short beta strand closes the helical lariat. Only a construct with the extended UBX domain harboring the complete β 0 -α – 1 -α 0 lariat, as present in H. sapiens UBXD9 317–497, had the ability to disassemble p97 hexamers. A structure-based amino acid sequence alignment of D. discoideum UBXD9 and H. sapiens UBXD9 revealed that the secondary structure elements of the helical lariat are conserved in D. discoideum UBXD9. We next performed comparative modeling with the D. discoideum N and D1 domains of p97 and the UBXD9 truncation constructs UBXD9 320–522, UBXD9 331–522, and UBXD9 384–522, respectively. Since our modeling was based on the published H. sapiens UBXD9 317–497 structure, we could not model the regions encompassing amino acids 261–319 and 523–573 of the constructs UBXD9 261–573, UBXD9 331–573, and UBXD9 384–573, which we had analyzed for p97 hexamer disassembling activity. The results showed that only UBXD9 261–573 carries the complete lariat, whereas UBXD9 331–573 lacks the closing beta-strand β 0 and UBXD9 384–573 the complete lariat. Thus, we conclude that the complete lariat is required for the dissociation of p97 hexamers. The N-terminal β 0 strand appears to be crucial as it mediates the closure of the helical lariat. Its absence likely weakens the lariat structure and results in an inability to disassemble the p97 hexamer. UBX Domain Containing Protein 9 Forms Oligomers Since D. discoideum UBXD9 contains two coiled coil regions and interacts with the hexameric p97, we analyzed by Blue Native PAGE whether UBXD9 forms multimers. We used p97 as positive control and, as expected, we observed a band of about 600 kDa, representing the p97 hexamer. In addition, a band of about 200 kDa was visible, corresponding in size to a p97 dimer. Analysis of UBXD9, UBXD9 261–573, UBXD9 331–573, and UBXD9 384–573 revealed for each protein two major bands. Based on the calculated molecular masses of approximately 65 kDa for UBXD9, 37 kDa for UBXD9 261–573, 29 kDa for UBXD9 331–573, and 23 kDa for UBXD9 384–573, the upper band of each protein corresponds in size to a hexamer and the lower band to either a dimer or trimer. For UBXD9 331–573 we detected a third band of approximately 30 kDa, which corresponds in size to a monomer. We also analyzed the N-terminal construct UBXD9 1–336 and detected only a single band of around 120 kDa, corresponding in size to a trimer. We do not have an explanation for the possible trimer formation of this construct, as it does not contain the N-terminal coiled coil moiety and as the complete N-terminal region of UBXD9 was dispensable for hexamer formation of the other constructs. In summary, our results show, that full-length UBXD9 and the analyzed truncation constructs form dimers or trimers and hexamers. Since all constructs for which multimer formation was observed contained the C-terminal coiled coil domain, we conclude that this domain is responsible for the formation of UBXD9 hexamers. The results of our biochemical analyses of full-length UBXD9 and UBXD9 truncation constructs are summarized in Table 1. FIGURE 5 Blue Native PAGE analysis of p97, full-length UBXD9 as well as UBXD9 truncation constructs. Representative Blue Native PAGE gels of purified recombinant non-tagged D. discoideum proteins. Specific bands are marked by asterisks. p97, UBXD9, UBXD9 1–336... TABLE 1 Summary of biochemical properties of full length UBXD9 and UBXD9 truncation constructs. UBX Domain Containing Protein 9 Interactome Mapping Confirms Interaction With p97 and Identifies Novel Interaction Partners In order to map the UBXD9 interactome, we employed two experimental approaches. We used AX2 strains that express GFP-UBXD9 or UBXD9-GFP and generated a new BirA-UBXD9 expressing strain for the identification of UBXD9 interacting proteins. The latter strain was used for proximity-dependent biotin identification, which has become a powerful tool to identify protein-protein interactions. In this assay, the bait protein is fused to the R118G-mutated BirA biotinylase from E. coli. Interacting proteins will get biotinylated and can then be isolated through binding to streptavidin-coupled sepharose beads. We first confirmed expression of UBXD9 and the respective fusion proteins in our strains by Western blot analysis of total cell lysates with antibodies against UBXD9, BirA, and GFP. Equal loading was verified by staining with an actin antibody. Next, we performed immune-precipitation experiments and analyzed the proteins bound to the GFP-trap or streptavidin-sepharose beads by silver staining and Western blotting. Silver staining revealed weak bands corresponding in size to GFP-UBXD9 and BirA-UBXD9. The identity of these bands was confirmed by immunodetection with the UBXD9 antibody. It also revealed the presence of endogenous UBXD9 in the precipitates via binding to the fusion proteins, supporting the conclusion from Blue Native PAGE that UBXD9 can undergo homo-oligomerization. For mass-spectrometric identification of bound proteins we performed for each approach four independent experiments. To visualize differentially expressed proteins we generated volcano plots of the identified proteins in AX2 versus AX2/BirA-UBXD9, and AX2/GFP versus AX2/UBXD9-GFP and AX2/GFP-UBXD9. Proteins with a fold change ≥ 1.4 and a p ≤ 0.05 were defined as significantly enriched in the BirA-UBXD9, GFP-UBXD9, or UBXD9-GFP expressing strains and are depicted as red, blue or green dots, respectively. Using these criteria we identified 35 putative UBXD9 interacting proteins in the BioID approach, 69 with N-terminally tagged UBXD9 and 120 with C-terminally tagged UBXD9. We applied Venny to identify common enriched proteins in our three approaches and found 32 common proteins between GFP-UBXD9 and UBXD9-GFP, five between GFP-UBXD9 and BirA-UBXD9, and five between UBXD9-GFP and BirA-UBXD9 expressing strains. Only three proteins, namely p97, UBXD9 and the putative glutamine synthetase type III were found in all three approaches. The mode of interaction between UBXD9 and GSIII and its cellular function is currently unknown. Those proteins which were identified in at least two of the three approaches are of particular interest as they are strong candidates for further novel UBXD9 interacting proteins. Among these proteins, we found the ER resident Grp78, which could link UBXD9 to the ER stress response. To elucidate possible enrichments of biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components among these proteins, we performed a gene ontology analysis with PANTHER. In the biological process category, we found “cytoskeleton” and “actin filament-based organization” significantly enriched. This was reflected in the molecular function and cellular component categories by an enrichment of “actin filament binding” and “actin cytoskeleton” as well as “phagocytic vesicle”. Thus, GO analysis points to a connection of UBXD9 with the actin cytoskeleton. Indeed, of the 36 proteins that were found enriched in at least two of our approaches seven are classified as cytoskeletal proteins. The nature of this observation will have to be investigated in future studies. FIGURE 6 Interaction proteomics. Verification of the BirA-UBXD9, GFP, GFP-UBXD9, and UBXD9-GFP expressing strains by western blotting using the polyclonal UBXD9, the polyclonal BirA, and the monoclonal GFP... TABLE 2 List of putative interacting proteins, which were identified in at least two different approaches. FIGURE 7 Gene ontology term enrichment analysis of proteins identified as putative interaction partners of UBXD9 in at least two experimental setups. The proteins, which were identified in at least two experimental approaches, were used... Discussion The ubiquitin X regulatory domain containing protein family is present in all eukaryotes and is the largest subgroup of p97 cofactors. In A. thaliana fifteen, in human thirteen and in D. discoideum eleven largely undescribed UBXD proteins have been identified. The UBXD9 subfamily is particularly interesting as its members are so far the only identified p97 interacting proteins, which are able to regulate the oligomeric status of p97. Prominent members are ASPL in H. sapiens, PUX1 in A. thaliana, and UBXD9 in D. discoideum. UBXD9 orthologs are also present in flies, worms, fungi and other eukaryotes. The goal of the present study was the characterization of the functional regions in D. discoideum UBXD9 through analysis of full-length and truncated UBXD9 and the identification of novel UBXD9 interaction partners through IP experiments and proximity labeling proteomics. The multiple sequence alignment showed significant homology between all UBXD9 members in the N-terminal UBL1 and LHU domains, in the middle coiled coil region and in the C-terminal UBX domain. All regions in between are not well conserved. A. thaliana UBXD9 was omitted from the alignment, because this protein has only about half the size of the other UBXD9 orthologs and lacks the UBL1 and LHU domains. The UBL domain is commonly found in proteins that can interact with the proteasome. All UBXD9 proteins harbor the eponymous UBX domain in the C-terminal part, which comprises about 80 amino acids. For A. thaliana UBXD9 it was shown that a C-terminal construct harboring the UBX domain and the complete C-terminus was able to interact with p97, while the UBX domain alone was not. For human UBXD9 two p97 binding regions have been proposed: a region which contains a central SHP box and another region which harbors the conserved central coiled coil domain, the UBX domain and the C-terminal region. The SHP box is composed of eight amino acid with the sequence and was originally identified in the yeast Derlin-1 homolog as p97 binding motif. The SHP box was identified in human and mouse UBXD9 but is not detectable in D. melanogaster, C. elegans, S. cerevisiae, and D. discoideum UBXD9. The interpretation of the published interactions of human UBXD9 truncation constructs with p97 is complicated, as also an N-terminal construct harboring amino acids 1–237, which neither contained the SHP box nor the UBX domain, was found to bind to p97. On the other hand, a construct equivalent to A. thaliana UBX-C did not interact with p97. Recent structural studies suggest that the SHP box is dispensable for binding of human UBXD9 to p97 and confirm the importance of the UBX domain for the interaction of H. sapiens and A. thaliana UBXD9 with p97. The UBX domain adopts the common β 1 -β 2 -α 1 -β 3 -β 4 -α 2 -β 5 secondary structure, as originally described for ubiquitin. The structures of the ND1 domains of p97 in complex with truncated human and A. thaliana UBXD9 revealed, that the highly conserved β 3 /β 4 loop of the UBX domain inserts into a gap between the p97 N a and N b subdomains. The loop forms a β-turn containing four residues with two proline residues in position two and three, which are also conserved in D. discoideum UBXD9. The loop adopts a rare cis -Pro touch-turn motif in human and A. thaliana UBXD9 which is critical for the interaction with the p97 N domain. We found, that all D. discoideum UBXD9 truncation constructs, that contained the UBX domain were able to bind to p97 and that, in contrast to results obtained with human and A. thaliana UBXD9, the UBX domain is necessary and sufficient for the interaction of D. discoideum UBXD9 with p97. Site directed mutagenesis followed by interaction studies will show whether the two proline residues in the β 3 /β 4 loop of D. discoideum UBXD9 are pivotal for the interaction of this protein with p97. The 3D structures of human p97 ND1 with human UBXD9 313–500 and A. thaliana UBXD9 39–212 were also very informative with respect to the hexamer disassembling activity of these proteins. The structures revealed a helical lariat N-terminal of the UBX domain, which embraces the N domain and consists of the α-helices α – 1 and α 0, an unordered region, and the closing beta strand β 0. It was found, that the extended H. sapiens UBX domain with the complete β 0 -α – 1 -α 0 lariat encompassing amino acids 313–500 was sufficient to trigger the disassembly of p97 hexamers. Notably, this construct did not contain the SHP box which was previously suggested to be important for interaction with p97. Our analyses showed that only full-length UBXD9 and UBXD9 261–573 had p97 hexamer disassembly activity, while UBXD9 331–573 and UBXD9 384–573 could bind to but failed to disassemble p97 hexamers. Structure based modeling of D. discoideum p97 ND1 in complex with these three truncation constructs revealed that only UBXD9 261–573 contains the complete helical lariat, while UBXD9 331–573 lacks the closing β 0 strand and UBXD9 384–573 misses the complete β 0 -α – 1 -α 0 lariat. Since UBXD9 family proteins regulate the oligomeric status of p97, it is feasible that they interact with p97 as oligomers. This possibility is still largely unexplored. Based on velocity sedimentation centrifugation A. thaliana UBXD9 was reported to be likely monomeric. This protein is a short version of UBXD9 family members, it lacks the complete N-terminal half and does not contain the conserved coiled coil domain of other UBXD9 family members. We found, that full-length D. discoideum UBXD9 as well as UBXD9 261–573, UBXD9 331–573, and UBXD9 384–573, the latter harboring only the second, C-terminal coiled coil domain, oligomerize into dimers or trimers and hexamers. Oligomerization is often mediated by coiled coil domains and these proteins contain with exception of UBXD9 384–573 the conserved coiled coil domain in the central part and a second coiled coil domain in the C-terminal region downstream of the UBX domain. Since the conserved coiled coil domain in the central part is absent in UBXD9 384–573, we propose that the C-terminal coiled coil domain is responsible for the oligomerization of D. discoideum UBXD9. Notably, this domain appears to be absent from the other UBXD9 family members and it is at present not clear whether these other members interact with p97 as monomers, whether they oligomerize via a different region or whether the C-terminal region mediates oligomerization despite the lack of a coiled coil element. Based on published structures of truncated human and A. thaliana UBXD9 in complex with p97 ND1, our structural modeling, and biochemical results, we propose a model for the interaction with and the disassembly of p97 by D. discoideum UBXD9. The protein has the capacity to oligomerize and likely interacts as a hexamer with the p97 hexamer, leading to the formation of a hetero-dodecamer. Binding is mediated by the UBX domain and the N-terminal extension of the UBX domain, a β 0 -α – 1 -α 0 lariat structure, embraces the N-domain of p97 and presumably destabilizes the D1:D1’ intermonomeric interface. The course of the dissociation of this complex is still unclear; however, one can speculate that dissociation proceeds via intermediate steps, as it is apparently the case in H. sapiens and A. thaliana, where hetero-tetramers and hetero-dimers have been observed. Thus, dissociation could result in hetero-hexamers or hetero-tetramers, then hetero-dimers and finally UBXD9 and p97 monomers will be released. These are then free for another round of oligomerization. To date, nothing is known about the regulation of UBXD9 in these complex interactions with p97. FIGURE 8 Structure-based model for the disassembly of the p97 hexamer by UBXD9. We propose, that a D. discoideum UBXD9 hexamer binds to a p97 hexamer and forms in the first step a hetero-dodecamer. The course of the dissociation of this complex is still unclear... Little is also known so far about UBXD9 interacting proteins other than p97. For A. thaliana UBXD9 it was even speculated that p97 might be the only interaction partner. We applied three different experimental approaches to identify UBXD9 interacting proteins, immune-precipitations with i) UBXD9-GFP and ii) GFP-UBXD9 expressing cells followed by mass spectrometry and iii) proximity labeling proteomics. Our results confirmed the self-association of UBXD9 and its interaction with p97, supporting the functionality, specificity, and efficacy of our approach. In total, we identified 185 potential UBXD9 binding proteins. We detected only three proteins, namely p97, UBXD9 and the putative glutamine synthetase type III, in each of the three approaches. In this context, it has recently been reported that p97 promotes the degradation of glutamine synthetase, a homodecamer, in human cells. We currently do not know which functional consequence direct or indirect binding of D. discoideum UBXD9 to GSIII, a homododecamer, may have. An attractive possibility is that it may be involved in its turnover together with p97. Of particular interest are also the 33 proteins, which we identified in two of our three experimental approaches. GO analysis revealed a strong enrichment of the actin cytoskeleton, the phagosome and the lysosome. Among these 33 proteins are myosin J heavy chain, a processive F-actin motor protein, dynamin A, involved in phagosome maturation, and five additional actin cytoskeletal proteins; thus, UBXD9 appears to be involved in dynamic actin cytoskeletal processes—a notion that is further supported by the involvement of human UBXD9 in dynamic cellular processes, in Golgi reassembly and the redistribution of GLUT4 storage vesicles. A further UBXD9 interacting protein of interest was the ER chaperone Grp78. Their interaction may be doubtful, as Grp78 localizes to the ER lumen and UBXD9 to the nucleus and cytoplasm. However, in response to ER stress a fraction of Grp78 escapes the ER and translocates to the cytoplasm and the plasma membrane, providing an opportunity for the interaction with UBXD9. Recently, it was shown that D. discoideum Grp78 and p97 were up-regulated in response to ER stress. Thus, it is conceivable that UBXD9 plays a role in the ER stress response together with p97, Grp78 and possible additional factors. Conclusion p97, an abundant homohexameric AAA + ATPase, is highly conserved from D. discoideum to man and plays a central role in cellular protein homeostasis. Its regulation is subject to more than 30 cofactors. The largest family of cofactors is the Ubiquitin Regulatory X domain protein family. Members of the UBXD9 subfamily are so far the only identified p97 interacting proteins, which are able to regulate the oligomeric status of p97. We could show that the UBX domain of D. discoideum UBXD9 is necessary and sufficient for the interaction with p97. An N-terminal extension of the UBX domain, which folds into a β 0 -α – 1 -α 0 lariat structure, is required for the dissociation of p97 hexamers. We propose that hexamers of UBXD9 interact with p97 hexamers and disrupt the p97 subunit interactions via destabilization of the p97 D1:D1’ intermolecular interface. Immune-precipitations with UBXD9-GFP and GFP-UBXD9 expressing cells as well as proximity labeling proteomics confirmed the self-association of UBXD9 and its interaction with p97. In addition, we identified through this approach 183 novel putative UBXD9 interacting proteins, among them are several cytoskeletal proteins, the glutamine synthetase type III and the ER luminal binding protein 2. Data Availability Statement The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and accession number can be found below: ;. Author Contributions JR designed and performed experiments, analyzed the data, and drafted the manuscript and figures. RR and LN performed experiments and contributed to reagents. AH performed secondary structure predictions and the molecular modeling. LE and CC designed the experiments. LE analyzed and reviewed all data, and prepared the final version of the manuscript. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript. Conflict of Interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Publisher’s Note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. 