Correction to: Electric signals counterbalanced posterior vs anterior PTEN signaling in directed migration of Dictyostelium You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Correction to: Electric signals counterbalanced posterior vs anterior PTEN signaling in directed migration of Dictyostelium Cell Biosci. 2021; 11: 139. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Cell Biosci v.11; 2021 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay This corrects the article " Electric signals counterbalanced posterior vs anterior PTEN signaling in directed migration of Dictyostelium " in volume 11, 111. Correction to: Electric signals counterbalanced posterior vs anterior PTEN signaling in directed migration of Dictyostelium Bing Song, Yu Gu,, and Min Zhao Additional article information Correction to: Cell Biosci 11:111 In this article, the affiliation ‘Department of Ophthalmology & Vision Science, UC Davis, School of Medicine, Davis CA 95618, USA’ for Author Min Zhao was missing. The affiliation has been updated above and the original article has been corrected. Footnotes Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Contributor Information Bing Song, Email: ku.ca.ffidrac@3BgnoS. Min Zhao, Email: ude.sivadcu@oahznim. Article information Cell Biosci. 2021; 11: 139. Published online 2021 Jul 21. doi: 10.1186/s13578-021-00653-x PMCID: PMC8296524 PMID: 34289909 Bing Song, 1, 2 Yu Gu, 1 Wenkai Jiang, 1, 2 Ying Li, 1, 3 Wayne Nishio Ayre, 1 Zhipeng Liu, 3 Tao Yin, 3 Christopher Janetopoulos, 4 Miho Iijima, 5 Peter Devreotes, 5 and Min Zhao 6, 7 Bing Song 1 School of Dentistry, College of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Cardiff University, CF14 4XY Cardiff, UK 2 State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology, Department of Operative Dentistry & Endodontics, School of Stomatology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’an, China Find articles by Bing Song Yu Gu 1 School of Dentistry, College of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Cardiff University, CF14 4XY Cardiff, UK Find articles by Yu Gu Wenkai Jiang 1 School of Dentistry, College of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Cardiff University, CF14 4XY Cardiff, UK 2 State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology, Department of Operative Dentistry & Endodontics, School of Stomatology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’an, China Find articles by Wenkai Jiang Ying Li 1 School of Dentistry, College of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Cardiff University, CF14 4XY Cardiff, UK 3 Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Tianjin, China Find articles by Ying Li Wayne Nishio Ayre 1 School of Dentistry, College of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Cardiff University, CF14 4XY Cardiff, UK Find articles by Wayne Nishio Ayre Zhipeng Liu 3 Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Tianjin, China Find articles by Zhipeng Liu Tao Yin 3 Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Tianjin, China Find articles by Tao Yin Christopher Janetopoulos 4 BioImaging Core Facility, University of Sciences, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA Find articles by Christopher Janetopoulos Miho Iijima 5 School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205 USA Find articles by Miho Iijima Peter Devreotes 5 School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205 USA Find articles by Peter Devreotes Min Zhao 6 Department of Ophthalmology & Vision Science, School of Medicine, UC Davis, CA 95618 Davis, USA 7 Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95618 USA Find articles by Min Zhao 1 School of Dentistry, College of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Cardiff University, CF14 4XY Cardiff, UK 2 State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology, Department of Operative Dentistry & Endodontics, School of Stomatology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’an, China 3 Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Tianjin, China 4 BioImaging Core Facility, University of Sciences, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA 5 School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205 USA 6 Department of Ophthalmology & Vision Science, School of Medicine, UC Davis, CA 95618 Davis, USA 7 Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95618 USA Bing Song, Email: ku.ca.ffidrac@3BgnoS. Contributor Information. Corresponding author. Accepted 2021 Jul 8. Copyright © The Author 2021 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. This corrects the article " Electric signals counterbalanced posterior vs anterior PTEN signaling in directed migration of Dictyostelium " in volume 11, 111. Articles from Cell & Bioscience are provided here courtesy of BMC Reference 1. Song B, Gu Y, Jiang W, Li Y, Ayre WN, Liu Z, Yin T, Janetopolous C, Iijima M, Devreotes P, Zhao M. Electric signals counterbalanced posterior vs anterior PTEN signaling in directed migration of Dictyostelium. Cell Biosci. 2021; 11 :111. doi: 10.1186/s13578-021-00580-x. 