 Filopodia are thin, actin-based structures that cells use to interact with their environments. Filopodia initiation requires a suite of conserved proteins but the mechanism remains poorly understood. The actin polymerase VASP and a MyTH-FERM myosin, DdMyo7 in amoeba, are essential for filopodia initiation. DdMyo7 is localized to dynamic regions of the actin-rich cortex. Analysis of VASP mutants and treatment of cells with anti-actin drugs shows that myosin recruitment and activation in Dictyostelium requires localized VASP-dependent actin polymerization. Targeting of DdMyo7 to the cortex alone is not sufficient for filopodia initiation; VASP activity is also required. The actin regulator locally produces a cortical actin network that activates myosin and together they shape the actin network to promote extension of parallel bundles of actin during filopodia formation. This work reveals how filopodia initiation requires close collaboration between an actin-binding protein, the state of the actin cytoskeleton and MF myosin activity. Research organism: Dictyostelium Introduction The efficient and directed migration of cells depends on their ability to detect and respond to chemical signals and physical cues in the environment. Filopodia are dynamic, thin membrane projections supported by a parallel bundle of actin filaments. They detect extracellular cues and play roles in processes such as neuronal growth cone guidance, durotaxis, cell-cell junction formation during development, and metastasis. Although most intensely studied in animal cells, filopodia are ubiquitous in moving cells and have been observed in various Rhizaria, including predatory vampire amoebae, Discoba, Apusoza, Amoeboza, and Holozoa. Filopodia formation is orchestrated by a conserved core set of proteins that drive the formation and extension of actin bundles. These include a Rho family GTPase, an actin polymerase, an actin cross-linker and a MyTH4-FERM Myosin. MF myosin motors regulate the formation of filopodia and other parallel actin based structures. Dictyostelium amoebae null for DdMyo7 do not produce filopodia or any filopodia-like protrusions, and expression of Myo10 in various mammalian cell types induces filopodia formation, implicating these myosins in filopodia initiation. These MF myosins are strikingly localized to filopodia tips, yet their function during filopodia initiation remains poorly defined. Filopodia are slender, actin-filled projections that extend from the cell cortex. Actin polymerization aided by VASP or formin facilitates the formation of a critical bundle size of 15–20 filaments which overcomes membrane tension and extends outwards as the actin filaments are cross-linked together. Two models have been proposed for how these parallel actin bundles are formed. In one case, the branched actin network is reorganized into a parallel array by the polymerase and bundler VASP. In an alternative model, a linear actin polymerase such as formin nucleates new filaments that are rapidly bundled together and grow perpendicular to the plasma membrane. MF myosins are thought to act during initiation by cross-linking actin filaments, perhaps zipping them together as the motors walk up the filament toward the cortex. Support for this model comes from the observation that forced dimers of motors can induce filopodia or filopodia-like protrusions in cells. Myo10 has also been implicated in elongation by transporting VASP toward the tip of the growing filopodium to promote continued growth. The mechanism by which MF myosins are recruited to filopodial initiation sites is not well-understood. These myosins are regulated by head-tail autoinhibition, with the myosin folded into a compact conformation whereby binding of the C-terminal MF domain to the motor domain inhibits its activity. Opening up of the myosin followed by dimerization is required for activation of the myosin. Partner binding mediated by their MyTH4-FERM domains can typically stabilize the open, activated form of these myosins as well as promote dimerization. The MF domains in these myosins can indeed mediate interaction with partner proteins such as microtubules and the cytoplasmic tails of adhesion and signaling receptors. Myo10 has a unique tail among MF myosins with PH domains that bind to PIP3 rich membranes, which facilitates autoinhibition release and subsequent dimerization via a coiled-coil domain. DdMyo7, like mammalian microvilli and stereocilia myosins Myo7 and Myo15, lacks PH domains and it is not clear if activation is regulated by the concentration of some partners, or additional cellular signals. MF myosin and the actin regulators VASP and formin have been observed to coalesce into punctae during the initiation step that precedes extension. The mechanism by which Myo7s are targeted to such sites is unknown, but the first step of this process is likely to be regulated via relief of autoinhibition. Characterization of filopodia formation in Dictyostelium allows for a systematic examination of how DdMyo7 is recruited to the cell cortex through identification of the essential features of this myosin. The mechanism of DdMyo7 recruitment to the cortex and its potential functional relationship with the actin polymerase and bundler VASP were investigated to gain new insights into motor activation and the early steps of filopodia formation. Results The DdMyo7 motor restricts cortical localization of the tail Disruption of the Dictyostelium myoi gene encoding DdMyo7 results in a significant defect in filopodia formation that is rescued by expression of GFP-DdMyo7. Most strikingly localized to filopodia tips, DdMyo7 is also in the cytosol and localized to the leading edge of cells. In the course of characterizing functionally important regions of DdMyo7, it was observed that the tail domain is localized all around the cell periphery in contrast to the full-length myosin which is often restricted at one edge of the cell cortex,. This was unexpected as the myosin tail region is largely regarded as playing a key, even determining, role in targeting myosins. DdMyo7-mCherry and GFP-DdMyo7 tail were co-expressed in Dictyostelium cells and a line scan through the cell showed that while both are present at a region of the cell that is extending outwards and producing filopodia, the tail is also strongly enriched in the cell rear. The extent of co-localization of the full-length myosin with the tail domain was assessed using cytofluorograms. This method quantifies co-localization of two proteins by comparing the intensity of the two fluorescent signals on a pixel-wise basis for a field of cells with r representing the correlation coefficient. Quantification revealed less correlation between DdMyo7 and the tail than is seen for the two full-length myosins. Due to the transient polarity of vegetative cells, a second measure of distribution of DdMyo7 on the cortex was carried out. To quantify the localized enrichment of DdMyo7 without any bias for manually identifying the leading edge, the intensity all around the cortex of cells was measured using a high throughput automated image analysis FIJI macro, Seven. Actin is typically enriched at the leading edge with high intensity at one edge and lower intensity elsewhere. The standard deviation of intensities values around the periphery was calculated for each cell. This analysis shows that actin and GFP-DdMyo7 are localized asymmetrically with a high standard deviation of cortical intensity. In contrast, the tail appears uniformly localized around the periphery and has a lower average SD for the cortical intensity around the cell periphery. Interestingly, a tail-less forced dimer of the motor that is capable of inducing filopodial protrusions is also localized asymmetrically with a high standard deviation of intensity. Together, these data establish that restricted localization of full-length DdMyo7 is dependent on its motor domain. Figure 1. DdMyo7 has a distinct cortical localization from its tail domain. DdMyo7 is localized to dynamic cortical actin The apparent asymmetrical distribution of DdMyo7 to the leading edge suggested that the actin at the cortex has a role in the recruitment and localization of DdMyo7. DdMyo7 and actin appear to colocalize at the leading edge in cells expressing both GFP-DdMyo7 and an actin marker. Linescans show that indeed there is strong correlation of Lifeact and DdMyo7 fluorescence around the cell periphery. Cytofluorogram analysis also revealed strong correlation of the DdMyo7 and actin fluorescence intensities. A line scan taken perpendicular to an extending leading edge showed a steady accumulation of DdMyo7 intensity at the same time as an increase in actin intensity. DdMyo7 and actin normalized intensities during leading edge extension were measured for 10 independent cells and a spline fit shows a robust correlation with actin intensity. Figure 2. Actin dynamics regulate DdMyo7 recruitment to the cortex. The dependence of DdMyo7 localization on actin polymerization at the cortex was tested by treating cells with actin modulating drugs. CytochalasinA binds to the fast-growing end of actin filaments and blocks incorporation of actin monomers, capping and stabilizing filaments. LatrunculinA sequesters monomers and prevents actin filament growth, and CK-666 blocks the Arp2/3 complex and actin branching. Cells were incubated with each of these drugs and the impact on DdMyo7 cortical targeting was assessed by measuring the intensity ratio of DdMyo7 in a 0.8 μm band around the perimeter versus the cytoplasm. Control cells have a cortex:cytoplasm ratio of about ~1.2, indicating an overall 20% enrichment of DdMyo7 on the cell cortex. Treatment of cells with either cytoA or latA reduced the ratio to ~1 indicating a total loss of cortical localization of DdMyo7. CK-666 also significantly reduced DdMyo7 cortical recruitment. Consistent with the reduction or loss of polymerized actin and cortical DdMyo7, filopodia formation was significantly reduced with these actin modulating drugs. Cells were also treated with jasplakinolide that promotes monomer nucleation and stabilizes ADP-Pi actin filaments. Jasp treatment had the opposite effect, resulting in increased recruitment of DdMyo7 to the cortex and increased filopodia formation. The addition of PI3Kinase inhibitors did not disrupt DdMyo7 cortical targeting or filopodia formation, but did disrupt the localization of a PIP3 reporter. Microtubules have been implicated in regulating filopodia in melanoma cells, modulating their localization, density and merging. Treatment of Dictyostelium cells with the microtubule depolymerizing compound nocodazole disrupts cytosolic microtubules. Nocodazole reduced DdMyo7 cortical targeting and partially inhibited filopodia formation, particularly at higher concentrations. Interestingly, cortical targeting of the DdMyo7 tail fragment is not reduced in cells treated with nocodazole in spite of the presence of two MF domains with micromolar affinity for microtubules in the DdMyo7 tail. Additionally, DdMyo7 is not strongly localized to microtubules. Together, the data suggest that microtubule-actin crosstalk may impact the dynamics of the cortical actin network and thus indirectly control the cortical recruitment of full-length DdMyo7. Table 1. Cortical recruitment ratio of DdMyo7 and filopodia per cell for GFP-DdMyo7/ myo7 null cells treated with various pharmacological compounds. The role of VASP in DdMyo7 cortical recruitment Filopodia initiation and extension is driven by regulators of actin polymerization such as VASP and formin. The actin bundler/polymerase DdVASP accumulates at the leading edge of cells and is important for filopodia formation. Interestingly, the Dictyostelium vasp null mutant phenocopies the myo7 null mutant - it lacks filopodia, has reduced adhesion and smaller cell size. This is of particular note as mammalian Myo10 and VASP are observed to co-transport in filopodia and co-immunoprecipitate, suggesting a role for Myo10 in the transport of VASP to filopodia tips to promote filopodia growth. There is currently no evidence that DdMyo7 and Dictyostelium VASP interact with each other and co-immunoprecipitation experiments in Dictyostelium did not detect any interaction. Surprisingly, in spite of this lack of interaction, DdMyo7 fails to target efficiently to the cortex of vasp - cells. In contrast, DdVASP localizes to the cortex regardless of the presence of DdMyo7. Figure 3. VASP is required for DdMyo7 cortical recruitment. Formins are localized to the leading edge of migrating cells and play an important role in filopodia formation. Formins promote actin polymerization by incorporating actin monomers at the barbed end of actin filaments and elongate parallel actin filaments. The Dictyostelium diaphanous related formin dDia2 makes significant contributions to filopodia formation and is required for normal filopodia length. Formin activity is not required for cortical recruitment of DdMyo7 as it is found to localize normally to the cortex of dDia2 null. These data reveal that DdVASP or its actin polymerization activity is critical for DdMyo7 recruitment and suggests that this bundler/polymerase acts upstream of DdMyo7. Selective recruitment of DdMyo7 requires specific actin polymerization factors The finding that DdVASP is critical for DdMyo7 cortical targeting raises the question of how it is acting to recruit this myosin. One simple explanation is that DdMyo7 is targeting to regions of the cell cortex where dynamic actin polymerization occurs. This hypothesis was tested by examining if robust recruitment of DdMyo7 could occur in the absence of DdVASP when actin polymerization was stimulated using different manipulations. Treatment of Dictyostelium with latrunculinA treatment followed by washout produces robust actin waves. These waves are made of a dense Arp2/3 branched actin meshwork and class I myosins. Control or vasp null cells expressing both RFP-LimEΔcoil and GFP-DdMyo7 were induced to form waves that are readily apparent as broad circles of actin that emanate outwards toward the cell periphery. Robust actin waves marked by RFP-LimEΔcoil were observed but DdMyo7 was not observed in the waves in either cell line. Next, vasp- cells were treated with jasplakinolide to stimulate actin polymerization. No increase in cortical targeting of DdMyo7 was observed in vasp nulls treated with jasplakinolide when compared to untreated cells. Blocking capping protein by overexpressing the capping protein inhibitor V-1 stimulates filopodia formation in Dictyostelium. V-1 also stimulates cortical actin network formation in vasp null Dictyostelium. However, no increase in targeting was observed in vasp nulls with induced overexpression of V-1, nor was filopodia formation restored. Figure 4. Linear actin polymerization drives DdMyo7 to the cortex. Activation of formins can also result in robust polymerization of actin filaments that are organized into linear bundles. These polymerases are tightly controlled by autoinhibition with the conserved DAD domain binding to the N-terminal DID domain, blocking actin nucleation activity. Mutation of conserved basic residues in the C-terminal DAD domain creates a constitutively activated formin. A pair of charged residues are present in the dDia2 DAD domain and these were mutated - R1035A, R1036A - to create a CA formin. Either dDia2 or dDia2-CA overexpressing vasp null cells exhibit restored and increased DdMyo7 cortical targeting. Overexpression of dDia2-CA also promoted a modest rescue of filopodia formation. Linescans of cells stained with phalloidin show that while vasp nulls have less cortical F-actin than wild type cells, expression of dDia2-CA in vasp nulls resulted in increased cortical F-actin. In summary, stimulation of actin polymerization by inducing actin waves, treating cells with jasplakinolide, or blocking capping protein is not sufficient to promote DdMyo7 cortical recruitment in vasp null cells. In contrast, expression of activated formin is sufficient for cortical recruitment in vasp null cells. This strongly suggests that DdMyo7 cortical targeting specifically requires the activity of actin regulators that generate parallel actin filaments. Table 2. Quantification of filopodia number and cortical targeting. Mechanism of VASP-mediated actin polymerization required for DdMyo7 recruitment The properties of VASP critical for DdMyo7 recruitment were investigated using separation of function mutations. VASP accelerates the rate of actin polymerization, bundles actin filaments and blocks capping protein from binding to the barbed ends of actin filaments. VASP is a constitutive tetramer that can bundle actin by binding to the sides of filaments. DdVASP F-actin binding is mediated by a region within the EVH2 domain and tetramerization by a region at the C-terminus. Two different mutants were used to test if the VASP bundling activity is required for DdMyo7 recruitment. A monomeric VASP was created by deleting the tetramerization domain ) and an F-actin binding mutant was generated in which conserved lysines were mutated to glutamate. The FAB K-E mutations are predicted to slow but not eliminate actin polymerization. Co-expression of either DdVASP-∆tet or DdVASP-FAB K-E with DdMyo7 in vasp null cells cannot fully restore DdMyo7 cortical recruitment. The monomeric VASP-∆tet mutant partially rescues filopodia formation while the FAB K-E mutant does not. The residual filopodia forming activity of the VASP-∆tet monomer could be attributed to its remaining anti-capping activity that is lost in the F-actin binding mutant. Both mutants are predicted to lack any bundling activity and show decreased recruitment of DdMyo7 to the cortex. These data indicate that bundling linear F-actin at the membrane could promote DdMyo7 targeting. Figure 5. Reduced cortical recruitment of DdMyo7 by VASP mutants. Release of DdMyo7 autoinhibition dictates the spatial restriction of its recruitment DdMyo7 is enriched at the leading edge of cells, in contrast to the tail alone that localizes all around the cortex. This difference suggests that head-tail autoinhibition restricts DdMyo7 localization. DdVASP is required for cortical localization but the apparent lack of interaction between DdMyo7 and DdVASP suggests an indirect role. Furthermore, the GFP-DdMyo7 tail domain in vasp null cells targets to the cortex efficiently. This confirms that direct DdMyo7 tail - DdVASP binding is not required for localization to the cortex. Together these results suggested that VASP mediated actin networks release autoinhibition of DdMyo7. If so, then loss of autoinhibition regulation of DdMyo7 should eliminate the requirement of VASP for DdMyo7 to target to the cortex. To test this, two highly conserved charged residues at the extreme C-terminus of DdMyo7 essential for head-tail autoinhibition were mutated. Overexpression of this constitutively active mutant stimulates filopodia formation and increases cortical localization in wild-type cells. DdMyo7-KKAA was expressed in vasp null cells where it targets to the cortex. The cortical targeting of DdMyo7-KKAA in vasp nulls is not as robust as seen in control cells, and it is localized more uniformly around the cortex in vasp nulls compared to controls. These observations are consistent with VASP-mediated actin assembly having a role in local activation and recruitment of DdMyo7 to the cortex. Figure 6. VASP-mediated actin assembly relieves DdMyo7 head-tail autoinhibition to promote targeting and filopodia formation. VASP and cortical DdMyo7 are both required for filopodia formation The finding that loss of head-tail autoinhibition restores cortical recruitment of DdMyo7 raised the question of whether an autoactivated motor is sufficient to rescue the filopodia formation defect seen in the vasp null cells. Expression of DdMyo7-KKAA in vasp nulls did not rescue their filopodia formation defect, indicating that a specific DdVASP activity is required for filopodia initiation. The requirement for both cortical DdVASP and DdMyo7 for filopodia formation was further tested by targeting of the myosin to the cortex or membrane by fusing a prenylation sequence to its C-terminus. DdMyo7-CAAX was robustly localized to the cortex in myo7 null, wild type and vasp null cells. Expression of DdMyo7-CAAX in wildtype or myo7 nulls cells significantly stimulated filopodia formation. However, filopodia are not formed when DdMyo7-CAAX was expressed in vasp null cells. These results establish that targeting DdMyo7 to the membrane alone is not sufficient for filopodia initiation and that DdVASP must also be present. Role of myosin motor activity in targeting and filopodia formation The data suggest that activation of autoinhibited DdMyo7 is promoted at the front of the cell in regions rich in newly polymerized F-actin. Actin binding by myosin involves conformational changes in the myosin head and could destabilize the interactions between the motor head and the tail. To test this, two DdMyo7 mutants were designed, each with mutations in highly conserved connectors of the motor domain. Their functions are established by studies performed on the highly conserved motor domain of DdMyo2. The non-hydrolyzer mutant binds ATP but cannot hydrolyze it, and thus stays in weak actin-binding state, while the uncoupler mutant can undergo conformational changes allowing strong interactions with F-actin but these conformational changes are not transmitted to the lever arm to produce force. Figure 7. DdMyo7 motor activity is required to release autoinhibition. The non-hydrolyzer has a mutated glutamate in Switch II that is required to assist hydrolysis. The non-hydrolyzer failed to efficiently cosediment with the actin cytoskeleton upon centrifugation indicating that it was indeed a weak actin binding mutant. The DdMyo7-E386V mutant does not target efficiently to the cell periphery or rescue filopodia formation. The lack of cortical localization by the non-hydrolyzer suggests that the tail remains bound to the motor, favoring an autoinhibited conformation, and is not free to bind to the cortex. To test this, the autoinhibition point mutations were introduced into the non-hydrolyzer to disrupt the head/tail interface. Blocking autoinhibition in the non-hydrolysis mutant strikingly restores cortical targeting but not filopodia formation. A second motor mutation, I426A, resides in the relay helix and disrupts the interface with the converter that is critical to direct the swing of the lever arm during force generation. This mutant uncouples ATP hydrolysis from force generation. Thus, the uncoupler undergoes actin-activated ATP hydrolysis, likely due to conformational changes directed from binding to actin, but it cannot exert force. DdMyo7-I426A cortical targeting is similar to what is seen for wild-type DdMyo7. This indicates that actin binding destabilizes the autoinhibited form in this mutant. DdMyo7-I426A fails to efficiently rescue the filopodia formation defect of myo7 null cells despite its targeting to the cortex, establishing that force generation by DdMyo7 is essential for filopodia initiation. The uncoupler mutant motor is predicted to have normal actin binding and indeed its cortical asymmetry is similar to wild-type DdMyo7. In contrast, the motor of the non-hydrolyzer DdMyo7-E386A + KKAA mutant has weak actin binding so interaction with the cortex would be directed by the tail. As predicted, the DdMyo7-E386A + KKAA mutant is localized more uniformly around the cortex. These observations provide support for the model that while the tail aids overall cortical localization, motor-actin binding refines leading edge targeting of DdMyo7. Discussion Filopodia formation in amoeba requires both an MF myosin and VASP. The motor domain of the MF myosin DdMyo7, not the tail, targets it to actin-rich dynamic regions of the cortex where filopodia emerge. Actin network dynamics generated by DdVASP activity in vivo are important for myosin localization, promoting release of head-tail autoinhibition, freeing and activating the motor domain for binding to actin at the leading edge. 7 ). This controlled activation of MF myosin leads to tuned activity at the right time and the right place to concentrate motors and facilitate filopodia formation, mainly from the leading edge of the cell. The role of DdVASP goes beyond simple recruitment of the motor since targeting of DdMyo7 at the membrane is not sufficient for filopodia initiation in vasp null cells. Thus, both MF myosin and DdVASP together are needed to reorganize and polymerize actin at the cell cortex for filopodia to form. 4 ). The data presented here support a model that DdMyo7 is mostly in a closed confirmation or OFF state. VASP activity, possibly bundling or polymerizing unbranched actin at the leading edge is upstream of DdMyo7 activation. DdMyo7 is activated by motor binding to a DdVASP generated actin network, specifically the open state is stabilized by motor binding to the linear, bundles of actin resulting from DdVASP activity. Together, DdVASP and DdMyo7 drive filopodia initiation by further bundling and polymerizing actin. Figure 8. Model of DdMyo7 and VASP mediated filopodia initiation. The role of DdVASP in myosin recruitment Disruption of the dynamic actin network at the cortex that occurs by loss of vasp or by treatment with anti-actin drugs such as cytoA or latA results in loss of cortical localization of DdMyo7. Dictyostelium VASP is a potent actin polymerase, its activity speeds actin elongation, bundles filaments and blocks capping proteins from binding to the growing ends of actin filaments. Both its actin polymerization and bundling activities could be important for DdMyo7 recruitment. In the absence of DdVASP, increased cortical actin generated by the formin dDia2 can also recruit and activate DdMyo7. However, recruitment is not restored by several other means of increasing actin polymerization, including generating actin waves, polymerizing actin with jasplakinolide or blocking capping protein by overexpression of V-1. Thus, DdVASP does not simply recruit DdMyo7 by generating new actin polymers, but rather it is the nature of the network that DdVASP builds, likely growing linear actin filaments that are bundled together in parallel, that is critical for activation of DdMyo7. The actin cortex of vasp nulls is less dense than found for wild-type cells as revealed by phalloidin staining, suggesting that a robust leading edge actin network collapses without VASP. Interestingly, evidence for VASP-dependent changes in the cortical actin network has recently been shown in B16 melanoma cells. Their cortical actin network is normally dense and with many filaments oriented perpendicular to the membrane but in the absence of VASP, the network is more disperse and actin filaments are oriented in shallower angles with respect to the membrane. Thus, the formation of a VASP-mediated actin network at the cortex is likely to be important in this context as well as in other cell types. Motor-dependent release of autoinhibition and leading edge targeting The motor domain of DdMyo7 and not the tail localizes this myosin to the dynamic leading edge of the cell. The tail alone is uniformly localized all around the cortex suggesting that it only provides general cortical targeting while the motor-FD is enriched at the front of the cell. Cortical targeting requires DdVASP or activated formin activity, suggesting an enrichment of parallel actin filaments in the cortex is needed for normal DdMyo7 activation. Mutation of DdMyo7 to lock the motor in a weak actin-binding state, even in the absence of autoinhibition such as in the case of the double non-hydrolyzer/autoinhibition mutant, does not promote leading edge targeting. In contrast, a mutant that can bind actin but uncouples force generation from ATP hydrolysis is localized more similarly to wild-type DdMyo7. Together these observations reveal that a functional motor that can hydrolyze ATP and bind actin is necessary for targeted, cortical recruitment of DdMyo7 to a DdVASP generated actin network, predominantly at the leading edge of the cell. The motor is typically sequestered by interaction with the tail in the autoinhibited state, a widely used mechanism for controlling myosin activity and reducing unnecessary energy expenditure. DdMyo7 head/tail autoinhibition is mediated by charged residues in the FERM domain, similar to fly myosin 7a, and this regulates both cortical targeting and filopodia number. Preventing autoinhibition results in enhanced targeting to actin and, in the presence of DdVASP, filopodia formation. It also bypasses the loss of cortical targeting observed in the absence of DdVASP, as the tail is now free to bind to any target sites in the cortex. The autoinhibited off state occurs when the equilibrium is biased toward the closed conformation. In this state, the motor has reduced affinity for actin and the partner binding sites in the tail are occluded. The results here lead to the following appealing model for how the motor specifies targeting of DdMyo7 to the leading edge. The compact, autoinhibited DdMyo7 freely diffuses throughout the cell. High local concentrations of actin in the cortical region facilitate interactions with actin, which destabilizes the inactive myosin, shifting the conformational equilibrium toward the open state. This makes the tail available to interact with partners and dimerize, and allows an active motor domain to engage with the actin network. If the motor does not dimerize, then DdMyo7 likely returns to a closed, off state, which diffuses and can be recycled back into the cytoplasm. It is tempting to speculate that the closely apposed actin filament bundles generated by VASP favor stabilizing the open state because of the high local concentration of actin. This would promote dimerization, either because the tails could interact with each other more readily or because a dimerization partner is also present in the network. Once dimerized, this likely processive motor can productively engage with the cortex in collaboration with VASP to promote filopodia extension. Thus, motor domain mediated binding to a specific actin network is a key means of restricting localization of DdMyo7 during filopodia formation. Conserved and divergent models of filopodia myosin function The mechanism of autoinhibition via motor-tail stabilizing interactions has been conserved throughout the evolution of myosins. Mechanisms to overcome autoinhibition likely developed to restrict the recruitment and activation of myosins in time and space, allowing cells to fine-tune their activity. Here it is shown that DdMyo7 autoinhibition is relieved by the cortical actin network generated by DdVASP. While this differs from the PIP3-mediated recruitment of metazoan Myo10, once activated these two evolutionarily distant filopodia myosins use similar mechanisms to generate filopodia. They both dimerize upon recruitment to the actin-rich cortex where they likely contribute to the reorganization of the Arp2/3 branched actin network to orient actin filaments perpendicular to the membrane. Interestingly, both DdMyo7 and Myo10 work in cooperation with VASP, although they appear to do so in different ways. In the case of Myo10, it is seen to co-transport with VASP along the length of filopodia during extension and co-immunoprecipitate with VASP, although it is not known if the two proteins interact directly in vivo. In contrast, the activity of DdVASP generates an actin-rich leading edge that recruits and activates DdMyo7 and there is no evidence that the two proteins interact with each other at present. Dictyostelium filopodia have actin filaments that are loosely bundled. They lack an obvious fascin homologue, a bundling protein localized to filopodia in many cell types. However, there is a calcium-sensitive bundler ABP-34 with three actin binding sites, similar to fascin. ABP-34 is selectively localized to filopodia and has been suggested to play a role in filopodia formation in Dictyostelium but its exact function remains unclear. In the absence of a clear filopodia bundling protein, it is possible that DdMyo7 dimers contribute to actin bundling. Dictyostelium are highly motile cells with dynamic, short lived filopodia. Given the early origins of Amoebozoa, a simple mechanism of coupling motor activation to actin dynamics at the pseudopod suggests that amoeboid filopodia formation is driven by a minimal regulatory circuit. It is tempting to speculate that VASP-dependent recruitment of an MF myosin represents an early form of cooperation between these two proteins. Perhaps as filopodia played wider roles in development and migration as multicellularity evolved, a signaling-based mechanism of MF myosin recruitment emerged with PIP3 binding to the three PH domain motif of Myo10 that replaced the first MF domain in present in other MF myosins. Thus, once Myo10 activation became dependent on PIP3, its motor activity was then used to promote VASP transport and filopodia extension. The evolution of the functional relationship between VASP and MF myosin would be interesting to explore in organisms such as Drosophila that make filopodia but lack Myo10 and in the earliest organisms that have Myo7, Myo22, and Myo10 such as the filasterean Capsaspora and choanoflagellate Salpingoeca. It is possible that VASP plays a role in the recruitment of Myo10 to initiation sites or its activation in some systems, but this remains to be determined. The development of genetic tools in several evolutionarily significant organisms such as Capsaspora and Salpingoeca, unicellular organisms at the onset of multicellularity, should now allow for the study of the evolution of the VASP-filopodial MF myosin relationship in the targeting and activation of filopodial myosins. Materials and methods Cell lines, cell maintenance, and transformations Dictyostelium control/wild-type, myo7 null, vasp null, and dDia2 null cells were cultured in HL5 media. Transgenic lines were generated by methods similar to those described. Briefly, axenic lines grown in HL5 cells were harvested, washed twice with ice cold H50. Cells were resuspended at 5e7 cells/mL and 100 µL of cells was combined with 10 or 15 µg DNA in a 0.1 cm gap cuvette. Cells were electroporated by pulsing twice, 5 s apart with a Bio-Rad Gene-Pulser set to 0.85 kV, 25 µF, and 200 Ω. Cells were recovered 10 min on ice and plated in a 10 cm dish for 24 hr before moving to selection media, either 10 µg/mL G418, 35 µg/mL HygromycinB or both. Expression of the fusion proteins or null backgrounds was verified by western blotting using either anti-Myo7, anti-GFP, or anti-VASP with anti-MyoB used as a loading control. Bands were detected using fluorescent secondary antibodies imaged with the LiCor Odyssey. Generation of expression plasmids The GFP-DdMyo7 expression plasmid was created by fusing gfp to the 5' end of the myoi gene then cloning it into the pDXA backbone with the actin-15 promotor and a NeoR cassette as described. Plasmids used for the expression of the full length tail, the KKAA autoinhibition mutant, motor forced dimer Arthur et al., 2019 have been described previously. An expression clone for the full-length GFP-DdMyo7 with a C-terminal prenylation site was generated using Q5 mutagenesis to add codons encoding the CTLL* prenylation motif from Dictyostelium RasG to the 3' end of the myoi gene. A DdMyo7-mCherry expression plasmid was generated by first TA cloning a PCR product encompassing the 3' region of the myoi gene minus the stop codon using StrataClone. This fragment was then cloned into pDMCCherry, a modified pDM358 with the mCherry gene inserted for C-terminal fusions, generating pDTi299. The 5' end of myoi was then inserted by restriction cloning to create pDTi340. A motor mutant that cannot hydrolyze MgATP, the non-hydrolyzer E386V was designed based on a characterized Dictyostelium Myo2 mutant. The combined non-hydrolyzer + KKAA was made by standard ligation cloning to introduce the motor domain sequence from the non-hydrolyzer mutant into KKAA full-length expression plasmid by restriction enzyme digest with BsiWI and BstEII. The uncoupler mutant based on a characterized Dictyostelium Myo2 mutant was cloned by Q5 mutagenesis. Fluorescent protein fusions of DdMyo7 were made using a combination of Q5 mutagenesis, Gibson assembly and restriction enzyme cloning. A DdMyo7-Scarlet I expression plasmid, pDTi517, was generated by first cloning a full-length myoi gene that has a BglII site at the 5' end, lacks its internal BglII site and also its 3' stop codon, pDTi515 +2, using a combination of Q5 mutagenesis, Gibson assembly and restriction enzyme cloning. The base Scarlet I-pDM304 expression plasmid for C-terminal fusions was generated by restriction enzyme cloning a codon-optimized synthesized Scarlet I gene into the extrachromosomal expression plasmid pDM304. The myoi gene was then cloned into mScarlet I-pDM304. Restriction cloning was used to create wild type and non-hydrolyzer mNeon DdMyo7 expression plasmids. First, the base mNeon-pDM304 expression plasmid for N-terminal fusions was generated by restriction enzyme cloning a codon-optimized synthesized mNeon gene into the extrachromosomal expression plasmid pDM304. Then a full-length myoi gene that has a BglII site at the 5' end and lacks its internal Bgl II site was generated and cloned into either pDM448 for GFP-DdMyo7 expression or mNeon-pDM304 for mNeon-DdMyo7 expression. Restriction cloning was used to exchange the 5' region of the gene carrying the E386V mutation into the wild type pDTi516 expression plasmid, creating pDTi527. The dDia2-CA mutant was created by first PCR-amplifying the forH gene from GFP-dDia2 then TA cloning the product using StrataClone to generate dDia2-SC. Mutations to generate a double R1035A, R1036A mutation were introduced dDia2-SC by Q5 mutagenesis. The wild type or mutant genes were restriction cloned into the extrachromosomal expression plasmid pDM449 to generate mRFPmars-dDia2-CA. An inducible V-1 expression plasmid was created by first PCR-amplifying the mtpn gene with V-1 F and V-1 R oligos using Ax2 genomic DNA then TA cloning the product using StrataClone to generateV-1 SC. The V-1 insert was then restriction cloned into the extrachromosomal expression plasmid pDM334 to generate GFP-inducible V-1. The sequence of all PCR generated clones was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The GFP-VASP expression plasmid was a gift from Dr. Richard Firtel. The VASP tetramer and FAB, Δtet mutants were not fused to GFP to avoid any steric hindrance with the fluorescent protein. The full-length VASP cDNA was cloned into the pDM344 shuttle vector and the NgoM-IV fragment from this plasmid was ligated into pDM358-mApple that has the mApple gene cloned in between the act6 promoter and act15 terminator of pDM358. VASP-∆tet was created by introducing a SmaI site and stop codon into the vasp gene, altering the coding sequence from 334 PSLSAPL to 334 PSLSAPG* using Q5 mutagenesis. The F-actin-binding mutant was based on mutating previously identified critical F-actin binding residues ; to glutamic acid by Q5 mutagenesis. The sequence of all PCR generated clones was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Oligonucleotides used are in the key resource table. Microscopy and imaging experiments Live-cell imaging Microscopy of live cells was carried out as previously described. Briefly, cells were adhered to glass bottom imaging dishes and starved for 45–75 min in nutrient-free buffer, and then imaged at 1–4 Hz on a spinning disk confocal with a 63 X / 1.4NA Plan Apo oil-immersion objective. The sample temperature was maintained at 19–21°C. Samples were illuminated with 50 mW lasers with Semrock filters for 488- or 561-nm excitation and a Yokogawa CSU-X1 spinning disk, and captured with a Photometrics Evolve 512 EMCCD camera. 4–6 Z sections of 0.28–0.5 microns were taken with a 50–250 ms exposure with 10–40% laser power. Cells were imaged for 10 s – 10 min or longer depending on experiment. Cells were plated at a density of 5 × 10 5 per mL. Ten fields of view were collected from each imaging dish, with 2–20 cells per field of view. All data sets represent cells from at least three independent experiments and two independently transformed cell lines. Drug treatments Cells were washed free of media, adhered to glass bottom dishes and starved in nutrient-free buffer for 40 min. The buffer was replaced by buffer supplemented with the noted concentration of jasplakinolide, cytochalasinA, latrunculin A, CK666, nocodazole, LY294002, wortmannin or just DMSO alone. Jasplakinolide treatment was for 5–20 min, cells were incubated with all other compounds for 15–20 min, prior to imaging for 10–30 min. Additional drug concentration data are in Table 1. Cells expressing mApple-DdMyo7 and inducible GFP-V1 were induced overnight with 10 μg/mL doxycycline to turn on expression of V-1 prior to imaging as above. Cells were treated with 0.25 μg/mL FM4-64 for 2–5 min to image filopodia with a membrane marker. LatrunculinA-induced actin waves Cells expressing GFP-DdMyo7 and the actin reporter RFP-LimE∆coil were induced to generate travelling actin waves using a modified protocol. Cells rinsed with 16 mM phosphate buffer pH 6.4 were seeded on glass bottom dishes at 5 × 10 5 cell/mL, incubated in phosphate buffer for 30 min and then supplemented with 5 µM latrunculinA for 20 min. The solution was diluted to 0.5 µM latA and cells incubated for an additional 30 min, then imaged for up to 2 hr. Images were captured in 5–10 0.3 µm Z sections by spinning disk confocal microscopy every 5 s to make 10–30 min movies. Actin intensity linescans Cells were seeded as above and fixed using picric acid. Cells were incubated with 568- or 647- Alexa phalloidin for 45 min, rinsed with PBS-glycine, then water and mounted using ProLong-Diamond. Slides were imaged using a Nikon Widefield Eclipse NiE microscope with a 40X/1.3 NA Plan Fluor oil objective, CoolSNAP ES2 CCD camera and SOLA light source. Maximum Z projections were analyzed by manually drawing a linescan perpendicular to the long axis and compiled with the FIJI/ImageJ macro and RStudio scripts. Cytoskeleton association Log phase cells expressing wildtype or E386V mNeon-DdMyo7 were grown on bacteriological plastic plates were rinsed twice in PB then resuspended, counted and 5 × 10 7 cells collected by centrifugation. The pellet was resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer, washed once then lysed with Lysis Buffer +1% Tx-100, 1 mM TLCK, 1 mM TPCK, 1X HALT protease inhibitor cocktail at room temperature. The 0.5 ml sample was spun immediately at 20,000 x g, 4 °C for 20 min. The supernatant was collected and pellet resuspended and homogenized in 0.25 ml of lysis buffer. An equal volume of ULSB gel sample buffer was added to aliquots from the sup and pellet and the samples run on a 4–15% gradient TGX SDS PAGE gel then transferred to nitrocellulose. The blot was probed for the presence of DdMyo7 and actin followed by fluorescent secondary antibodies and then imaged with the LiCor Odyssey. Quantification of the DdMyo7 band was performed using Image Studio Lite. Data analysis Protein alignments Myosin motor domain sequences were aligned using T-Coffee algorithm ‘Expresso’. These included Uniprot sequence entries: } P54697, } Q9U1M8, } P08799, } P19524, K4JEU1, } Q9V3Z6, } Q9HD67, } Q13402, } Q6PIF6. Diaphanous related formins were aligned using Clustal Omega, using Uniprot entries: } Q54N00, } O70566, } O60879, } P41832, } P48608 and the DAD domain basic residue highlighted is based on Wallar et al., 2006 ; Lammers et al., 2005. VASP mutations were made by first creating a structural alignment with DdVASP and Human VASP in T-Coffee algorithm ‘Expresso’. Image analysis Cortex to cell ratio, cortical asymmetry and filopodia per cell were quantified using a custom FIJI plugin ‘Seven’. Raw data for all experiments is provided. Cells not expressing transgenic proteins were excluded from the analysis. Analysis was done on maximum intensity projections. First, the image is thresholded to mask the cell. This mask excludes the nucleus, which is devoid of DdMyo7 signal, and filopodia tips extended from the cell body. The cortical band intensity, standard deviation of intensity in the cortical band was measured for each cell. Next, a radial tip search identifies filopodia and registers them to each cell to count the number of filopodia per cell. Extending pseudopodia and actin correlation were done in FIJI by reslicing through extending pseudopodia and making plot profiles of the edge of the cell. Intensity profiles were normalized between 0 and 1, and multiple cells were averaged by fitting a restricted cubic spline. Statistical analysis Statistics were calculated in Prism 8. One-way ANOVA analysis with post hoc Tukey test or Dunnett’s multiple comparison to wild-type control was used to compare groups; Student’s t test was used when only comparing two datasets. Statistical tests were calculated on full datasets, experimental means are shown on graphs to demonstrate experimental variability. Data points deemed definite outliers by Rout method were excluded for cortex:cytoplasm ratio. Error bars are SEM, unless noted. Significance differences are in comparison to control, unless noted. Tables have filopodia number as average number of filopodia in cells with at least one filopod. SEM is standard error of the mean. Capitalized ‘N’ indicates number of experiments lowercase n is number of cells. Full statistical analysis is included in the source data tables accompanying each figure. Acknowledgements We thank Livia Songster, Annika Schroder and Casey Eddington for many helpful discussions and assistance with experiments and analysis. We also thank Dr. Karl Petersen for the initial characterization of the motor mutations and for support with SEVEN. We are grateful to Professor Robert Insall for stimulating discussions, Dr. John Cooper, Dr. Volodya Gelfand, Dr. Lil Fritz-Laylin and members of the Fritz-Laylin lab for helpful comments and critical reading of the manuscript. Thanks to Dr. Jan Faix for providing the dDia2 nulls and VASP antibody and Dr Brad Nolen for supplying the CK666, Dr. Günther Gerisch for the GFP-tubulin plasmid, Dr. GW Gant Luxton for use of the spinning disk confocal microscope and also to the University of Minnesota Imaging Center for additional imaging support. Our thanks to Dictybase.org for providing the Veltman plasmids and maintaining this valuable community resource. The AH team is part of the LabexCelTisPhyBio:11-LBX-0038, which is part of the Initiatives of Excellence of Université Paris Sciences et Lettres. This work was supported by the CNRS, ANR-17-CE11-0029-01, and ANR-19-CE11-0015-02 and the NIH National Institute of General Medical Sciences. Appendix 1 Appendix 1—key resources table Reagent type or resource Designation Source or reference Identifiers Additional information cell line control wild type Provided by Dr. Günther Gerisch Ax2 Available at Dictybase.org cell line control wild type Provided by Dr. Rick Firtel Ax3 Available at Dictybase.org cell line myo7 null Titus Lab Tuxworth et al., 2001 myo7 null HTD17-1 Ax3 background cell line control non-homologous recombinant - myo7 null Titus Lab Tuxworth et al., 2001 G1-21 Ax3 background cell line vasp null Firtel Lab Han et al., 2002 vasp - Ax3 background cell line dDia2 null Provided by Dr. Jan Faix Schirenbeck et al., 2005 dia - Ax2 background Other HL5 Medium including Glucose Formedium HLG0103 Dictyostelium growth medium Database Dictybase.org Fey et al., 2013 Software Prism 8.0 Graphpad Statistical Analysis graph preparation, statistical analysis Software Seven Petersen et al., 2016 Antibody Rabbit anti-DdMyo7 UMN-87 Tuxworth et al., 2005 1:2000 Antibody mouse monoclonal anti-GFP, clone B34 Biolegend 902602 1:5000 Antibody Rabbit polyclonal anti-vasp Provided by Dr. Jan Faix Breitsprecher et al., 2008 1:500 Antibody Rabbit polyclonal anti myoB Titus Lab Novak et al., 1995 1:2000 Antibody Rabbit polyclonal anti-mCherry Proteintech 26765–1-AP 1:500 Antibody Goat anti rabbit secondary Licor IR680 1:2500-1:10,000 Antibody Goat anti mouse secondary Licor IR800 1:2500-1:10,000 Antibody Mouse monoclonal anti- Dictyostelium actin Provided by Dr. Günther Gerisch Westphal et al., 1997 1:4000 Chemical compound G418 Fisher Scientific BP-673 antibiotic Chemical compound G418 Gold Biotechnology G-418 antibiotic Chemical compound Hygromycin B Gold Biotechnology H-270 antibiotic Chemical compound Doxycycline Hyclate Sigma D9891 antibiotic Chemical compound Pencillin G Sodium Salt Sigma P3032 antibiotic Chemical compound Streptomycin Sulfate Sigma S9137 antibiotic Chemical compound, drug Cytochalasin A Sigma C-6637 Chemical compound, drug Jasplakinolide Sigma J4580 Chemical compound, drug Latrunculin A Sigma L5163 Chemical compound, drug LY294002 EMD Millipore 440204 Chemical compound, drug Nocodazole Sigma M1404 Chemical compound, drug Wortmannin Sigma W1628 Chemical compound, drug CK666 Gift from Dr. Brad Nolen Nolen et al., 2009 Chemical compound, drug Alexa Fluor 568 Phalloidin Invitrogen A12380 Chemical compound, drug Alexa Fluor 647 Phalloidin Invitrogen A22287 Chemical compound, drug FM 4-64 Dye ThermoFisher } T13320 other Q5 polymerase New England Biolabs M049L commercial assay or kit NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly New England Biolabs E5520S Recombinant DNA reagent synthesized gene - mScarlet I Genscript actagtggtggttcaggaGTTTCAAAAGGTGAAGCCGTTATTAAAGAATTTATGAGATTCAAGGTTCACATGGAAGGAAGTATGAACGGTCATGAATTTGAGATTGAAGGAGAAGGTGAAGGTAGACCATATGAAGGCACCCAAACAGCTAAATTAAAAGTAACTAAAGGTGGTCCATTACCATTTAGTTGGGATATTTTATCTCCACAATTTATGTATGGTTCACGTGCTTTCAttAAACATCCAGCAGATATTCCAGATTATTATAAACAATCATTTCCAGAA GGTTTTAAATGGGAACGTGTCATGAACTTTGAAGATGGTGGAGCAGTTACAGTCACACAAGATACCTCATTAGAAGATGGTACATTAATATATAAAGTTAAATTACGTGGTACTAATTTTCCACCAGACGGTCCAGTAATGCAAAAAAAAACAATGGGCTGGGAAGCTAGT ACAGAACGTTTATATCCTGAAGATGGTGTCCTTAAAGGCGATATAAAAATGGCCTTGAGATTAAAGGATGGTGGTAGGTATTTAGCAGATTTCAAAACCACTTATAAAGCAAAAAAACCAGTTCAAATGCCAGGTGCATATAATGTTGATAGAAAACTTGATATTACCAGTCATAATGAAGATTACACAGTTGTCGAACAATACGAACGTTCTGAAGGTCGTCATAGCACTGGTGGTATGGATGAATTATACAAATAAgctagc Recombinant DNA reagent synthesized gene - mNeon Genscript ggatccATGGTGAGTAAAGGTGAAGAAGATAATATGGCATCGTTACCAGCTACACATGAGTTACATATATTCGGTAGCATTAATGGTGTTGATTTTGATATGGTGGGACAAGGTACCGGTAATCCTAATGATGGTTACGAAGAACTAAATTTAAAATCGACTAAAGGTGACTTACAATTTTCTCCATGGATTTTAGTGCCACATATAGGGTATGGTTTTCATCAATACTTACCATATCCAGATGGTATGTCACCATTTCAAGCTGCAATGGTTGATGGATCAGGTTATCAAGTTCATAGAACAATGCAATTTGAAGATGGTGCTTCATTAACTGTTAATTATAGATACACATATGAAGGCTCACATATTAAAGGTGAAGCTCAAGTTAAAGGTACTGGTTTCCCAGCCGATGGCCCAGTTATGACAAATAGTTTAACAGCAGCAGATTGGTGTAGATCCAAAAAAACTTATCCAAATGATAAAACAATTATTTCAACTTTTAAATGGTCATATACAACCGGTAATGGTAAACGTTATCGTTCAACAGCCCGTACAACATATACTTTTGCTAAACCAATGGCAGCTAATTATTTAAAAAATCAACCAATGTATGTTTTTCGTAAAACAGAGTTAAAACATTCAAAAACAGAACTTAATTTTAAAGAATGGCAAAAAGCATTTACAGACGTTATGGGTATGGATGAACTTTATAAGagatct Sequence-based reagent CAAX F IDTDNA PCR Primer ttattaTAAAAAAATTAAAATAAAATAAAATCTCGTG Sequence-based reagent CAAX R IDTDNA PCR Primer tgtacaTTGAGAAGAATAAAATTGATAAACTG Sequence-based reagent E386V F IDTDNA PCR Primer ttttgtAAATTTTAAAAAGAATAGTTTTGAACAATTTTG Sequence-based reagent E386V R IDTDNA PCR Primer ccaaagATATCCAATACACCAATAAATGTTG Sequence-based reagent I426A F IDTDNA PCR Primer AAAAGAAAAAgctAATTGGAGTAAGATCGTATATAATG Sequence-based reagent I426A R IDTDNA PCR Primer TCATATTCTTCTTGTTCTAATTTAAAAATATG Sequence-based reagent myi42 in-house synthesis PCR Primer catgccatggcagcagcagcaACCTTAAAGAGAAAAGCACCAGTCG Sequence-based reagent myi185 + 2 IDTDNA PCR primer gctagcaaTTGAGAAGAATAAAATTGATAAACTGAAGC Sequence-based reagent VASP339* F IDTDNA related to pVASP29 plasmid taataaAGAGCATCTCAACATTAACTAG Sequence-based reagent VASP339* R IDTDNA PCR Primer cccgggAGCTGATAAGGATGGTGAAG Sequence-based reagent FAB K-E F IDTDNA PCR Primer gaaatggagGCAGCAGCATCTCAACCAA Sequence-based reagent FAB K-E R IDTDNA PCR primer ggcttcctcGGCCATAACTTCGGCCAT - Sequence-based reagent forH4L F IDTDNA PCR primer AATTGACCAGATCTAATTTGAG Sequence-based reagent forH8 R IDTDNA PCR primer actagtTTATTTTTTTAATTGGCCTGATGG Sequence-based reagent forH9 F IDTDNA PCR primer ggatccATGTCTTTTGATTTAGAGAGTAATAGTAGTGG Sequence-based reagent forH10 R IDTDNA PCR primer ATTCAAAGATagaagaGTTGGTGATTCTGTCATTG Sequence-based reagent V1 F IDTDNA PCR primer agatctATGGAAGAACAAAATGATTTCAC Sequence-based reagent V1 R IDTDNA PCR primer actagtTTATTTTAATAATGCTTTAATATCAGC Transformed construct GFP-DdMyo7-Tail Titus Lab Tuxworth et al., 2005 pDTi35 pSmall, G418, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct GFP-DdMyo7 Titus Lab Tuxworth et al., 2001 pDTi74 pBS, G418, Integrating Transformed construct GFP-DdMyo7motor-FD Titus Lab Arthur et al., 2019 pDTi490 pDXA, G418, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct GFP-DdMyo7-KKAA Titus Lab Arthur et al., 2019 pDTi321 pBS, G418, Integrating Transformed construct GFP-DdMyo7-E386V Titus Lab this paper pDTi364 pBS, G418, Integrating Transformed construct GFP-DdMyo7-E386V; KKAA Titus Lab this paper pDTi386 pBS, G418, Integrating Transformed construct GFP-DdMyo7-CAAX Titus Lab this paper pDTi346 pBS, G418, Integrating Transformed construct GFP-DdMyo7-I426A Titus Lab this paper pDTi435 pTX-GFP, G418, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct GFP-DdMyo7 Titus Lab this paper pDTi504 pDM317, G418, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct mNeon-DdMyo7 Titus Lab, this paper pDTi516 pDM304, G418, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct mNeon-DdMyo7-E386V Titus Lab, this paper pDTi527 pDM304, G418, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct DdMyo7-mCherry Titus Lab, this paper pDTi340 pDM358, Hyg, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct mApple-DdMyo7 Titus Lab pDTi512 pDM358, Hyg, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct GFP-VASP Provided by Dr. Rick Firtel Han et al., 2002 GFP-VASP EXP4+, G418, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct VASP Titus Lab, this paper VASP pDM358, Hyg, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct VASP-∆TET Titus Lab, this paper VASP-∆TET pDM358, Hyg, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct VASP-FAB Titus Lab, this paper VASP-FAB pDM358, Hyg, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct diaWT Provided by Dr. Jan Faix Schirenbeck et al., 2005 GFP-dDia2 pDGFP-MCS, G418, Integrating Transformed construct diaCA Titus Lab, this paper mRFP-mars-diaCA pDM449, Hyg, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct GFP-V1 Titus Lab, this paper Tetracycline -Inducible GFP-V1 pDM334, G418, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct RFP-Lifeact Brzeska et al., 2014 pDM358, Hyg, Extrachromosomal Transformed construct RFP-LimEΔcoil Gerisch et al., 2004 Transformed construct GFP-tubulin Provided by Dr. Günther Gerisch Neujahr et al., 1998 pDEXRH, G418, Integrating Open in a separate window Funding Statement The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication. Contributor Information Derek Applewhite, Reed College, United States. Anna Akhmanova, Utrecht University, Netherlands. Funding Information This paper was supported by the following grants: Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique to Anne Houdusse. Agence Nationale de la Recherche ANR-17-CE11-0029-01 to Anne Houdusse. Agence Nationale de la Recherche LabexCelTisPhyBio 11-LBX-0038 to Anne Houdusse. Agence Nationale de la Recherche ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02PSL to Anne Houdusse. National Institutes of Health F31GM128325 to Ashley L Arthur. National Institutes of Health R01GM122917 to Margaret A Titus. Additional information Competing interests No competing interests declared. Author contributions Conceptualization, Resources, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing. Resources, Formal analysis, Investigation. Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing - review and editing. Conceptualization, Resources, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Project administration, Writing - review and editing. Additional files Transparent reporting form Click here to view. Data availability All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files. Article information eLife. 2021; 10: e68082. Published online 2021 May 27. doi: 10.7554/eLife.68082 PMCID: PMC8352590 PMID: 34042588 Ashley L Arthur, 1 † Amy Crawford, 1 Anne Houdusse, 2 and Margaret A Titus 1 Ashley L Arthur 1 Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, United States Find articles by Ashley L Arthur Amy Crawford 1 Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, United States Find articles by Amy Crawford Anne Houdusse 2 Structural Motility, Institut Curie, Paris Université Sciences et Lettres, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France Find articles by Anne Houdusse Margaret A Titus 1 Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, United States Find articles by Margaret A Titus Derek Applewhite, Reviewing Editor and Anna Akhmanova, Senior Editor Derek Applewhite, Reed College, United States ; Contributor Information. 1 Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, United States 2 Structural Motility, Institut Curie, Paris Université Sciences et Lettres, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France Margaret A Titus: ude.nmu@400sutit † Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, United States. Received 2021 Mar 4; Accepted 2021 May 20. Copyright © 2021, Arthur et al This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use and redistribution provided that the original author and source are credited. Articles from eLife are provided here courtesy of eLife Sciences Publications, Ltd 