 The cytoskeleton network of eukaryotic cells is essential for diverse cellular processes, including vesicle trafficking, cell motility, and immunity, thus is a common target for bacterial virulence factors. A number of effectors from the bacterial pathogen Legionella pneumophila have been shown to modulate the function of host actin cytoskeleton to construct the Legionella -containing vacuole permissive for its intracellular replication. In this study, we found that the Dot/Icm effector Lem8 is a protease whose activity is catalyzed by a Cys-His-Asp motif known to be associated with diverse biochemical activities. Intriguingly, we found that Lem8 interacts with the host regulatory protein 14-3-3ζ, which activates its protease activity. Furthermore, Lem8 undergoes self-cleavage in a process that requires 14-3-3ζ. We identified the Pleckstrin homology-like domain-containing protein Phldb2 involved in cytoskeleton organization as a target of Lem8 and demonstrated that Lem8 plays a role in the inhibition of host cell migration by attacking Phldb2. Research organism: Human Introduction Legionella pneumophila is a Gram-negative intracellular bacterial pathogen ubiquitously found in freshwater habitats, where it replicates in a wide range of amoebae. It is believed that these natural hosts serve as the main replication niches for L. pneumophila in the environment and provide the primary evolutionary pressure for the acquisition and maintenance of virulence factors necessary for its intracellular lifecycle. Infection of humans by L. pneumophila occurs when susceptible individuals inhale aerosols generated from contaminated water, which introduces the bacterium to the lungs where it is phagocytosed by alveolar macrophages. Instead of being digested and cleared, internalized bacteria replicate within a membrane-bound compartment termed Legionella -containing vacuole, leading to the development of Legionnaires’ disease, a form of severe pneumonia. One feature associated with the LCV is its ability to evade fusion with the lysosomal network in the early phase of its development and the quick acquisition of proteins originating from the endoplasmic reticulum. Biogenesis of the LCV requires the Dot/Icm type IV secretion system that injects more than 300 effector proteins into host cells. These effectors function to modulate a wide cohort of host processes, including vesicle trafficking, protein synthesis, lipid metabolism, and autophagy by diverse biochemical mechanisms. Coordinated activity of these effectors leads to the formation of the LCV which largely resembles the ER in its morphology and protein composition. The cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells is composed of microfilaments derived from actin polymers, intermediate filaments and microtubules, which play distinct roles in maintaining cell shape, migration, endocytosis, intracellular transport, and the association of cells with the extracellular matrix and cell–cell interactions. Due to its essential role in these cellular processes, components of the cytoskeleton, particularly the actin cytoskeleton is a common target for infectious agents. For example, Salmonella enterica Typhimurium utilizes a set of type III effectors, including SipC, SopE, and SptP to reversibly regulate the rearrangement of the host actin cytoskeleton to facilitate its entry into nonphagocytic cells. Other bacterial pathogens such as Chlamydia, Orientia tsutsugamushi, and Listeria also exploit the actin cytoskeleton and microtubule networks to promote their movement in the cytoplasm of host cells and cell to cell spread. Growing evidence indicates that manipulation of the actin cytoskeleton dynamics plays an important role in the intracellular lifecycle of L. pneumophila. It has been documented that chemical interference of the actin cytoskeleton structure impedes bacterial entry and replication. A number of Dot/Icm effectors have been shown to impose complex modulation of the host actin cytoskeleton. Among these, VipA promotes actin polymerization by functioning as a nucleator. LegK2 appears to inhibit actin nucleation by phosphorylating the Arp2/3 complex. The protein phosphatase WipA participate in this regulation by dephosphorylating several proteins involved in actin polymerization, including N-WASP, NCK1, ARP3, and ACK1, leading to dysregulation of actin polymerization. RavK is a metalloprotease that cleaves actin in host cells, abolishing its ability to form polymers. Ceg14 also appears to inhibit actin polymerization by a yet unrecognized mechanism. Interestingly, LegG1 has been demonstrated to promote microtubule polymerization and host cell migration by functioning as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the Ran GTPase. Counterintuitive to the role of LegG1, cells infected by L. pneumophila display defects in migration in a way that requires a functional Dot/Icm system, suggesting the existence of effectors that function to block cell migration. Herein, we demonstrate that the L. pneumophila effector Lem8 is a cysteine protease that functions to inhibit host cell migration by targeting the microtubule-associated protein Phldb2 via a mechanism that requires the regulatory protein 14-3-3ζ. Results Lem8 is a Legionella effector with putative cysteine protease activities One major challenge in the study of bacterial effectors is their unique primary sequences that share little similarity with proteins of known function. Bioinformatics analysis has been proven useful in the identification of putative cryptic functional motifs embedded in their structures. We used PSI-BLAST to analyze a library of the L. pneumophila Dot/Icm effectors and found that Lem8 harbors a putative Cys 280 –His 391 –Asp 412 catalytic triad present in a variety of cysteine proteases. Further analysis by HHpred revealed that Lem8 has high probability to have structural similarity with HopN1 and AvrPphB from Pseudomonas syringae, as well as YopT from Yersinia enterocolitica and PfhB1 from Pasteurella multocida. Figure 1. Lem8 is a cysteine protease-like Dot/Icm effector toxic to yeast. Lem8 is a protein of 528 residues coded for by the gene lpg1290 in L. pneumophila strain Philadelphia 1, it was first identified as a substrate of the Dot/Icm transporter by a machine learning approach. The translocation of Lem8 by the Dot/Icm system into host cells during L. pneumophila infection was later validated by two independent reporter systems. Consistent with these results, we observed Dot/Icm-dependent translocation of Lem8 into host cells using the β-lactamase- and CCF2-based reporter assay. Approximately 60% of the cells infected with a Dot/Icm-competent strain expressing the β-lactamase-fusion emitted blue fluorescence signals. No translocation was detected when the same fusion was expressed in the dotA − mutant defective in the Dot/Icm system. The expression of many Dot/Icm substrates peaks in the postexponential phase, probably due to the demand for high quantity of effectors to thwart host defense in the initial phase of LCV construction. Thus, we evaluated the expression pattern of lem8 throughout the entire growth cycle of L. pneumophila in broth. Intriguingly, unlike most of effectors, the expression of lem8 is detected at high levels in the lag phase of its growth cycle in bacteriological medium. A decrease in protein abundance is detected 9 hr after the subcultures have started and is maintained constant throughout the remaining 15-hr experimental duration. These results suggest that Lem8 may play a role in the entire intracellular lifecycle of L. pneumophila. Next, we attempted to determine whether the putative cysteine protease motif is important for the effects of Lem8 on eukaryotic cells. We first tested whether Lem8 is toxic to yeast and if so, whether the Cys 280 –His 391 –Asp 412 motif is required for such toxicity. Expression of Lem8 from the galactose-inducibe promoter caused cell growth arrest. Mutations in Cys 280, His 391, or Asp 412 did not affect the stability of the protein in yeast, but abolished such toxicity. Thus, the putative cysteine protease activity conferred by the predicted Cys 280 –His 391 –Asp 412 catalytic triad very likely is important for the effects of Lem8 on eukaryotic cells. Genomic analysis reveals that Lem8 orthologs are present in several different isolates of L. pneumophila, including serogroup one strains Thunder Bay, LPE509, Paris, HL06041035, and strain ATCC 43290. In addition, a lem8 homolog is also present in L. waltersii, one of the 40 Legionella species whose genomes had been fully sequenced. Such a low prevalence suggests that Lem8 plays a role in the survival of the bacteria in specific inhabits, or its role in other Legionella species is substituted by genes of little sequence similarity that may have arisen by convergent evolution. We probed the role of lem8 in L. pneumophila virulence by examining intracellular replication of the ∆ lem8 mutant in the protozoan host Dictyostelium discoideum and in BMDMs. In both host cells, intracellular growth of the ∆ lem8 mutant was indistinguishable to that of the wild-type strain, which is akin to most mutants lacking one single Dot/Icm substrate gene. Lem8 directly interacts with the regulatory protein 14-3-3ζ To identify the host target of Lem8, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screening against a human cDNA Library using Lem8 C280S fused to the DNA-binding domain of the transcriptional factor GAL4 as bait. Plasmid DNA of the library was introduced into the yeast strain PJ69-4A expressing the bait fusion and colonies that appeared on selective medium were isolated and the inserts of the rescued plasmids capable of conferring the interactions were sequenced. We found that 50 out of the 93 independent clones analyzed harbored portions of the gene coding for 14-3-3ζ, a member of a chaperone family important for the activity of a wide variety of proteins in eukaryotic cells. Robust interactions occurred in the yeast two-hybrid system when full-length 14-3-3ζ was fused to the AD domain of Gal4. The remaining clones were not pursued further as the interactions cannot be confirmed by immunoprecipitation or the proteins are common false-positive hits in yeast two-hybrid screenings and/or appeared not relevant to the lifecycle of L. pneumophila. Figure 2. The interactions between Lem8 and 14-3-3ζ. We further explored the interactions between 14-3-3ζ and Lem8 by immunoprecipitation assays. Flag-tagged 14-3-3ζ was coexpressed with GFP-tagged Lem8 or GFP in HEK293 cells. IP using the Flag antibody specifically precipitated GFP-Lem8, whereas GFP was not detectable in similar experiments. Reciprocally, IP with GFP antibodies specifically pulled down Flag-14-3-3ζ. These results suggest that Lem8 forms a complex with 14-3-3ζ in mammalian cells. To determine whether Lem8 directly binds to 14-3-3ζ, we purified recombinant proteins and used GST pulldown assays to analyze their interactions. We found that mixing His 6 -Lem8 and GST-14-3-3ζ in reactions led to the formation of stable protein complexes that can be retained by GST beads. Members of the 14-3-3 family commonly recognize phospho-serine and/or phospho-threonine sites of client proteins for binding. Yet, we did not detect phosphorylation on Lem8 purified from mammalian cells or Escherichia coli using a pan phospho-serine/threonine antibody. As a control, this antibody detected phosphorylation on CTNNB1, an established phosphorylated target of 14-3-3ζ. To determine the region in Lem8 involved in binding 14-3-3ζ, we constructed a series of Lem8 deletion mutants and examined their interactions with 14-3-3ζ by immunoprecipitation. Whereas removing as few as 25 residues from the amino terminal end of Lem8 abolished its ability to bind 14-3-3ζ, a Lem8 mutant lacking the last 50 residues can still robustly interact with 14-3-3ζ, and deleting an additional 50 residues from this end abolished the binding. Thus, either 14-3-3ζ recognizes a large region of Lem8 or deletion from either end of this protein caused significant disruptions in its structure and abolished its ability to interact with 14-3-3ζ. Lem8 undergoes 14-3-3ζ-dependent autocleavage Since Lem8 harbors the predicted Cys 280 –His 391 –Asp 412 catalytic triad associated with proteases from diverse bacterial pathogens, we next investigated whether it cleaves 14-3-3ζ. Incubation of recombinant His 6 -Lem8 with His 6 -14-3-3ζ at room temperature for 2 hr did not lead to detectable cleavage of 14-3-3ζ. Unexpectedly, a protein with a molecular weight slightly smaller than that of Lem8 was detected in this reaction. The production of this smaller protein did not occur in reactions that contained the Lem8 C280S mutant or when the cysteine protease-specific inhibitor E64 was included in the reactions, suggesting that this band represents a fragment of Lem8 produced by self-cleavage. Intriguingly, the self-cleavage did not occur in samples containing only Lem8, suggesting that the self-cleavage activity of Lem8 requires 14-3-3ζ as a cofactor. Figure 3. 14-3-3ζ induces Lem8 to undergo self-cleavage. Dictyostelium discoideum, the protozoan host of L. pneumophila codes for one 14-3-3 protein with 66% identity and 78% similarity to that of human 14-3-3ζ, we investigated whether the D. discoideum 14-3-3 can activate Lem8 by incubating His 6 -Lem8 with GST-14-3-3Dd or human 14-3-3ζ. In each case, we observed the production of a protein with a size clearly smaller than Lem8 as early as 2 hr after the reaction has started. Thus, Lem8 can be activated by 14-3-3 from both humans and a protist. To determine the self-cleavage site of Lem8, we incubated His 6 -Lem8 with His 6 -14-3-3ζ at room temperature for 16 hr. Proteins resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue and bands corresponding to full-length and cleaved Lem8 were excised, digested with trypsin and sequenced by mass spectrometry, respectively. To determine the potential self-cleavage site, we compared the abundance of identified tryptic peptides from full-length and cleaved Lem8 and found that the abundance of -A 468 PQPTPQR 475 - was similar between two sets of samples, whereas peptide -A 478 QSLSAETER 487 - was present only in full-length samples but not in the cleaved ones, suggesting that the cleavage site was between R475 and R487. Further analysis of the tryptic fragments identified a semitryptic fragment -L 464 CEKAPQPTPQRQ 476 - present in the cleaved protein but not in the full-length protein, indicating that the cleavage occurs between Gln476 and Arg477. We further examined the self-cleavage of Lem8 by fusing GFP to the carboxyl end of Lem8, Lem8 C280S and Lem8 ∆C52, respectively. These fusion proteins were expressed in HEK293T cells and the cleavage was probed by immunoblotting with GFP-specific antibodies. We found that a fraction of Lem8-GFP and Lem8 △C52 -GFP has lost the GFP portion of the fusions, an event that did not occur in Lem8 C280S -GFP. To determine whether Lem8 undergoes autocleavage via the recognition of the protein sequence around Gln 476, we introduced mutations to replace residues Pro 473, Gln 474, Arg 475, and Gln 476 with alanine and incubated this Lem8 mutant with 14-3-3ζ. Unexpectedly, although at a lower rate, self-cleavage still occurred in this mutant. Thus, although the amino acids adjacent to Gln476 play a role in its self-cleavage, other factors such as the overall structure of Lem8 may contribute to the recognition of the cleavage site. We next analyzed the self-cleaved products of the 4A mutant and found that the cleavage site in this protein lies between Lys467 and Ala468, which is in close proximity to the one found in the wild-type protein. Thus, the self-cleavage of Lem8 may occur at at least two sites that locate at approximately 50 residues from its carboxyl end. Lem8 targets Phldb2 for cleavage It has been reported that some bacterial cysteine proteases cleave both themselves and their substrates in host cells by recognizing sites with similar sequences. For instance, AvrpphB and Avrrpt2, two type III effectors from P. syringae cleave themselves as well as their host targets PBS1 and RIN4, respectively. Importantly, in each case, the sequences of the recognition sites for both self-cleavage and cellular target cleavage are very similar. In fact, this feature has been exploited to predict the potential host substrates of these effectors by bioinformatic analyses. Therefore, we performed BLAST searches and obtained 10 candidate proteins that contain sequence elements resembling the self-cleavage site of Lem8, including Phldb2, Rasgrp2, Pak6, Exoc8, Ankrd13B, Chkb, Ppp6R1, Kiaa1033, Gnal, and Gpr61. The predicted recognition sites in these proteins locate in the middle or at sites close to either their amino or carboxyl ends. Further experiments revealed that one of the candidates, the Pleckstrin homology-like domain family B member 2 can be cleaved by Lem8 in a process that requires an intact Cys 280 –His 391 –Asp 412 catalytic triad. In contrast, no detectable cleavage occurred in reactions containing recombinant proteins of other candidates purified from mammalian cells. We cannot detect the expression of Flag- or HA-GPR61 using multiple constructs and this protein was not analyzed further. The predicted Lem8 recognition site locates between the 1106th residue and the 1119th residue in this protein of 1253 amino acids. In HEK293T cells, expression of Lem8 led to a considerable reduction of endogenous Phldb2. To confirm this finding, we added an HA and a Flag tag to the amino and carboxyl end of Phldb2, respectively, and coexpressed the double tagged protein in HEK293T cells with Lem8 or each of the mutants with mutations in one of the three sites predicted to be critical for catalysis. Detection of tagged Phldb2 by immunoblotting with the Flag-specific antibody indicated that the protein levels in cells expressing Lem8 were reduced comparing to samples in which the catalytically inactive mutants were expressed. Athough to a lesser extent, reduction in Phldb2 was also observed in experiments in which the tagged protein was detected with the HA antibody. Figure 4. Lem8 cleaves Phldb2 in a manner that requires 14-3-3ζ. Phldb2 is plasma membrane-associated protein that contains a phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate -binding domain located at its carboxyl terminus, we next examined how Lem8-mediated cleavage impacts its cellular localization. In HEK293T cells, when GFP-Phldb2 was ectopically expressed, the GFP signals mainly were associated with the plasma membrane, and this pattern of distribution remains unchanged in cells coexpressing enzymatically inactive Lem8 mutants. In constrast, in cells coexpressing wild-type Lem8, the GFP signals redistributed to occupy the entire cytoplasm, including the nuclei of transfected cells, a pattern similar to that of GFP itself. These observations suggest that the GFP tag had been cleaved from the GFP-Phldb2 fusion to assume its typical localization in these cells. We also analyzed how Lem8 impacts the subcellular localization of endogenous Phldb2. In cells expressing mCherry-Lem8 C280S, Phldb2 is mainly associated with the plasma membrane. In contrast, in cells expressing mCherry-Lem8, the association of Phldb2 with the plasma membrane almost became undetectable. We next examined whether the cleavage of Phldb2 by Lem8 occurs in a cell-free reaction. HA-Phldb2-Flag expressed in HEK293T cells isolated by immunoprecipitation was incubated with Lem8 or its inactive mutants with or without 14-3-3ζ. Cleavage of Phldb2 occurred only in reactions containing wild-type Lem8 and 14-3-3ζ. Taken together, these results establish Phldb2 as a target of Lem8. Our results using the double tagged Phldb2 suggest that Lem8 likely cleaves Phldb2 not only at the predicted site located in the carboxyl end of the protein, but also targets its amino terminal portion. To test this hypothesis, we constructed two Phldb2 mutants by replacing residues Arg 1111 and Gln 1112 or Gln 1112 and Arg 1113 within the predicted recognition sequence with alanine. Each of these mutants was coexpressed with Lem8 in HEK293T cells by transfection. Comparing to samples expressing enzymatically inactive Lem8, the amounts of protein detected by the amino terminal Flag epitope and the carboxyl end HA tag both decreased in cells coexpressing wild-type Lem8. We validated this conclusion by making constructs in which GFP was fused to the amino terminal end of Phldb2 and three of its truncation mutants, Phldb2 △N50, Phldb2 △N100, and Phldb2 △N200, respectively. Each of these fusion proteins was coexpressed with Lem8 or Lem8 C280S in HEK293T cells and the protein level of these fusions was probed by immunoblotting with GFP-specific antibodies. In each case, a fraction of the protein has lost the GFP portion of the fusions when coexpressed with Lem8 but not with Lem8 C280S. Intriguingly, the cleavage also occurred in fusion proteins in which the GFP is fused to the carboxyl terminus of Phldb2 ∆C100 or Phldb2 ∆C153. These results are consistent with the notion that Lem8 targets Phldb2 at multiple sites. We also attempted to detect Lem8-mediated cleavage of endogenous Phldb2 in cells infected with L. pneumophila. Although Lem8 translocated into infected cells by a Dot/Icm-competent strain expressing Lem8 from a multicopy plasmid is readily detetable, we were unable to detect Phldb2 cleavage in these samples. The most likely reason for the inability to detect Lem8 activity against Phldb2 in infected cells is the low abundance or instability of the cleaved protein or a combination of both. A coiled coil motif in the amino terminal region of Lem8 is important for its interactions with 14-3-3ζ Using the online MARCOIL sequence analysis software, we identified a putative coiled coil motif located in the amino region of Lem8. Coiled coil is a common structural element in proteins, particularly those of eukaryotic origin; it is formed by two to seven supercoiled alpha-helices, and often is involved in protein–protein interactions, thus playing important roles in the formation of protein complexes. To determine the role of this region in the activity of Lem8, we introduced mutations to replace Leu 58 and Glu 59, the two sites predicted to be essential for the coiled coil structure in Lem8, with glycine. When tested in yeast, these mutations have completely abolished the toxicity of Lem8 without affecting its expression or stability. These mutations may affect the cysteine protease acitivity of Lem8, its interaction with the regulatory protein 14-3-3ζ or its ability to recognize substrates. Figure 5. A coiled coil motif in Lem8 is important for its interactions with 14-3-3ζ. We examined the ability of Lem8 GG to cleave Phldb2 by coexpressing them in HEK293T cells. Whereas wild-type Lem8 consistently cleaves this substrate, Lem8 GG has lost such activity despite a similar expression level. To test the self-cleavage of Lem8 GG, we expressed Lem8-GFP or Lem8 GG -GFP in HEK293T cells and probed the fusion proteins by immunoblotting with GFP-specific antibodies. Comparing to Lem8-GFP, the levels of full-length proteins of Lem8-GFP and Lem8 C280S -GFP were similar, both were slightly higher than that of Lem8 GG -GFP and loss of the GFP portion of the protein occurred in the wild-type fusion but not in either of the two mutants, indicating that the putative coiled coil domain is important for the self-cleavage activity of Lem8. Finally, we examined the impact of these mutations on the interaction between Lem8 and 14-3-3ζ. Albeit Lem8 GG expressed similar to the wild-type, it has largely lost the ability to bind 14-3-3ζ in immunoprecipitation assays. Together with the observation that Lem8 mutants lacking as few as 25 residues from its amino terminal end are unable to bind 14-3-3ζ, these results suggest that the regulatory protein most likely binds Lem8 by recognizing the coiled coil motif located in its amino end region. Autocleaved Lem8 maintains the cysteine protease activity It has been well established that some proteins, particularly enzymes are made as precursors or zymogens that need either autoprocessing or cleavage by other enzymes to exhibit their biological functions. One such example is caspases involved in cell death regulation and other important cellular functions. These enzymes are synthesized as zymogens before being activated by proteolytic cleavage in response to stimulation. In some cases, autoprocessing leads to changes or even loss of their enzymatic activity. To investigate whether Lem8 that has undergone self-cleavage still possesses the cysteine protease activity, we tested the cleavage of Phldb2 by Lem8 ∆C52, its self-processed form. Similar to full-length Lem8, Lem8 ∆C52 was able to reduce the protein levels of Phldb2. In contrast, other truncation mutants, including Lem8 N25 and Lem8 ∆N50 have lost the capacity to cleave Phldb2, while Lem8 ∆C100 is poorly expressed in cells. In addition, Lem8 ∆C52, but not Lem8 ∆N25 or Lem8 ∆C100, cleaved the GFP tag from from the GFP-Phldb2 fusion and released the GFP signals from the plasma membrane. Intriguigingly, although their ability to cleave Phldb2 appears similar, under our experimental conditions, the protein level of Lem8 ∆C52 is considerably lower than that of Lem8, suggesting that the self-processed form has higher activity. Figure 6. Autoprocessed Lem8 retains the cysteine protease activity. We next examined whether the protease activity of Lem8 ∆C52 still requires 14-3-3ζ binding. Results from immunoprecipitation and pulldown assays with purified protiens clearly showed that Lem8 ∆C52 robustly binds 14-3-3ζ. Furthermore, incubation of Lem8 ∆C52 with Phldb2 isolated from cells did not lead to its cleavage, but the inclusion of 14-3-3ζ in this reaction led to cleavage, indicating that Lem8 ∆C52 still requires 14-3-3ζ for its protease activity. Lem8 inhibits mammalian cell migration Phldb2 is a PIP3-binding protein involved in microtubule stabilization, thus playing a pivotal role in cell motility. Depletion of Phldb2 significantly reduces the migration of MDA-231 cells in the haptotactic migration assay. As Lem8 cleaves Phldb2, we hypothesized that Lem8 may affect cell migration. To test this, we first established HEK293T-derived cell lines that stably express GFP, GFP-Lem8, or GFP-Lem8 C280S. Immunoblotting confirmed that Lem8 and Lem8 C280S robustly expressed in the respective cell lines. Furthermore, in the cell line expressing Lem8, the level of Phldb2 was drastically reduced comparing to that in the line expressing GFP or Lem8 C280S. We then used the wound-healing scratch assay to examine the impact of ectopic Lem8 expression on cell motility. Confluent monolayers of each cell line were scratched using a pipette tip and the migration of cells into the gap was monitored over a period of 24 hr. Results from this experiment showed that the percentage of wound closure at 24 hr after wounding was around 50% in samples using cells expressing GFP or GFP-Lem8 C280S. In the same experimental duration, cells expressing GFP-Lem8 only filled the gap by 26%, which was significantly slower than that of the controls. Thus, ectopic expression of Lem8 inhibits mammalian cell migration. Figure 7. Lem8 contributes to cell migration inhibition by L. pneumophila. An earlier study has shown that in the under-agarose migration assay, L. pneumophila inhibits the chemotaxis of mouse macrophages toward cytokines CCL5 and TNF-α in a Dot/Icm-dependent manner. Yet, the Dot/Icm substrates responsible for this inhibition remain elusive. We further studied whether Lem8 contributes to the inhibition of infected cell migration. To test this, we performed the scratch assay with 293T cells and Raw264.7 cells infected with relevant L. pneumophila strains. The percentage of wound closure by cells infected with wild-type L. pneumophila or Δ lem8 was significantly lower than that with cells infected with the Δ lem8 mutant. Consistent with its lack of the protease activity, Lem8 C280S and Lem8 GG were unable to complement the defects displayed by the Δ lem8 mutant. Thus, the inhibition of cell migration by L. pneumophila during infection is caused at least in part by the activity of Lem8. To confirm the notion that Lem8 inhibits cell migration by attacking Phldb2, we performed the cell scratch assays using Lem8 expressing cells that had been transfected to ectopically express Phldb2. The level of Phldb2 in these cells considerably increased comparing to those transfected with a vector. Importantly, the closure of the gap by cells overexpressing Phldb2 occurred significantly faster than those transfected with the vector, validating our conclusion that Lem8 inhibits cell migration by attacking Phldb2. Discussion Intracellular bacteria manipulate cellular processes to create a niche that supports their survival and replication in host cells by virulence factors that target proteins important for the regulation of these processes. These virulence factors often attack host regulatory proteins by diverse posttranslational modifications such as phosphorylation, ubiquitination, AMPylation, acetylation, and ADP-ribosylation. Proteolytic processing is a type of PTM that can lead to the activation, inactivation, or destruction of target proteins, causing alterations in cellular structure or signaling that benefit the pathogen. For instance, the type III effector EspL from enteropathogenic E. coli functions as a cysteine protease that antagonizes host inflammatory response by degrading several proteins involved in necroptotic signalling. Our results herein establish Lem8 as a cysteine protease that directly targets the microtubule-associated protein Phldb2, therefore contributing to the inhibition of host cell migration by L. pneumophila. Lem8 joins a growing list of Legionella effectors with protease activity, including the serine protease Lpg1137 that inhibits autophagy by cleaving syntaxin 17 and the metalloprotease RavK that attacks actin to disrupt the actin cytoskeleton of host cells. One interesting feature associated with Lem8 is the requirement of 14-3-3ζ for its activity. In line with the notion that amoebae are the primary host of L. pneumophila, the sole 14-3-3 protein from D. discoideum similarly activates Lem8. Due to extremely low bacterial uptake rates by D. discoideum, we were unable to examine the impact of Lem8 on the motility of this host. Nevertheless, despite Lem8 is not required for intracellular bacterial replication, it plays a role in L. pneumophila virulence by inhibiting host cell motility, this finding thus provides a molecular explanation for this phenotype observed earlier. It is worth noting that a close homolog of Phldb2 is not present in amoebae species such as D. discoideum. The fact that lem8 is only present in a few isolates of the many sequenced L. pneumophila strains implies that these bacteria may have coevolved with higher eukaryotes. Several L. pneumophila Dot/Icm effectors that attacks host signaling mechanisms not known to exist in amoebae have been reported. For example, the activation of the NF-κB pathway by LegK1 and the specific attack of linear polyubiquitin chains by RavD. These two signaing mechanisms are not present in lower eukaryotes such as amoebae. It is tempting to speculate that Lem8 has been acquired by strains of L. pneumophila that have coevolved with hosts that use Phldb2 or its close homologs to control cell motility. In mammals, members of the 14-3-3 family, including 14-3-3ζ often bind their client proteins by recognizing phosphorylated pockets with relatively conserved sequences such as RSXXP and RXXXXP. Intriguingly, neither of these two motifs is present in Lem8. Consistently, recombinant Lem8 from mammalian cells or E. coli was not detectably phosphorylated. The binding of 14-3-3 proteins to unmodified clients is not unprecedented. All isoforms of 14-3-3 bind nonphosphorylated ExoS of P. aeruginosa by recongnizing the DALDL element, which bears sequence similarity to the unphosphorylated target WLDLE, an artificial R18 peptide inhibitor derived from a phage display library. Elements with a sequence similar to these established recognition sites are not present in Lem8 nor is there one resembling those in other nonphosphorylated binding targets of 14-3-3 such as GPIb-α, p75NTR-associated cell death executor or CLIC4. Two lines of evidence suggest that 14-3-3ζ recognizes a coiled coil motif in the amino terminal portion of Lem8. First, deletion of as few as 25 residues from the amino terminus end of Lem8 abolished its interaction with 14-3-3ζ. Second, the integrity of a predicted coiled coil motif in the amino terminal portion of Lem8 is required for its binding to the regulatory protein. Coiled coil motifs have long been known to be important for protein–protein interaction but its involvement in binding 14-3-3 has not yet been established. The binding of 14-3-3 to TRIM25 had been suggested to be mediated by recognizing a coiled coil domain, but the mechanism of such binding or whether phosphorylation is required remains unclear. Future study, particularly structural analysis of the Lem8-14-3-3ζ complex may allow a definite identification of the region in Lem8 recognized by 14-3-3ζ, which will surely shed light on the additional features of the sequences recognizable by this imporant regulatory protein. The self-cleavage of Lem8 has allowed us to identify its recognition sequence and several candidate cellular targets. One unexpected observation is that mutations in the identified recognition element reduced but did not abolish self-cleavage. Thus, the primary sequence may not the only factor that dictates the specificity of Lem8 in substrate recognition. Other factors such as the overall structure of substrates may contribute to the configuration of the recognition site. The low level of specificity in cleavage site selection may allow Lem8 to more effectively bring down the cellular level of its targets, which may explain the requirement of 14-3-3ζ for its activity. If a host cofactor is not needed for its activity, Lem8 may cleave itself or even other proteins in L. pneumophila cells. For Lem8, self-cleavage in the absence of 14-3-3ζ in bacterial cells will be disastrous because the cleaved product will lose the portion of the protein that harbors translocation signals recognized by the Dot/Icm system. Likewise, the requirement of CaM by the Dot/Icm effector SidJ to inhibit the activity of members of the SidE family is to ensure that such inhibition does not occur in bacterial cells. The promiscuity in cleavage site recognition by Lem8 is also supported by the observation that this protease appears to cleave Phldb2 at multiple sites. Interference with host cell motility appears to be a common strategy used by bacterial pathogens. For example, S. enterica Typhimurium inhibits the migration of infected macrophages and dendritic cells in a process that requires its type III effector SseI, which binds to IQGAP1, an important regulator of cell migration. Similarly, the phosphatidylinositol phosphatase IpgD from Shigella flexneri contributes to the inhibition of chemokine-induced migration of human T cells. The observation that cells infected with the wild-type L. pneumophila or strain Δ lem8 migrated significantly slower than those infected with the Δ lem8 mutant or its complementation strain expressing the Lem8 C280A mutant suggests a role of Lem8 in cell mobility inhibition. Migration permits phagocytes including amoebae to move in response to chemotaxis cues, which likely will increase their chance to encounter cells that can recognize and engulf infected cells. Thus, cells with impaired motility are more likely to allow pathogens to complete their intracellular lifecycle. Akin to most L. pneumophila Dot/Icm effectors, Lem8 is not required for proficient bacterial intracellular growth in commonly used laboratory hosts such as D. discoideum. Lem8 may be required for the survival of the bacteria in some specific inhabits or other Dot/Icm effectors may substitute its role by distinct mechanisms, thus contributing to such inhibition. Future studies aiming at the identification and characterization of Dot/Icm effectors involved in attacking host cells motility will continue to provide insights into the mechanisms of not only bacterial virulence but also the regulation of eukaryotic cell migration. Materials and methods Bacterial strains, plasmids, and cell culture E. coli strain DH5α was used for plasmid construction and strain BL21 or XL1blue was used for recombinant protein production and purification. All E. coli strains were grown on LB agar plates or in LB broth at 37°C. For maintenance of plasmids in E. coli, antibiotics were added in media at the following concentrations: ampicillin, 100 μg/ml; kanamycin, 30 μg/ml. All L. pneumophila strains were derived from the Philadelphia one strain Lp02 and the dotA − mutant strain Lp03 and are listed in Supplementary file 2. L. pneumophila was cultured in N--2-aminoethanesulfonic acid buffered yeast extract medium or on charcoal buffered yeast extract plates. When necessary, thymidine was added into AYE at a final concentration of 0.2 mg/ml. pZL507 and its derivatives which allow expression of His 6 -tagged proteins in L. pneumophila were maintained by thymidine autotrophic. Deletion of the Lem8 coding gene lpg1290 from the genome of L. pneumophila was performed as described previously. Plasmids used in this study are listed in Supplementary file 2. Genes were amplified by polymerase chain reactions using Platinum SuperFi II Green PCR mix. The PCR product was digested with restriction enzymes, followed by ligated to linearized plasmid using T4 DNA ligase. For site-directed mutagenesis, plasmid was reacted with primer pairs designed to introduce the desired mutations using Quikchange kit. After digestion with the restriction enzyme Dpn I, the products were transformed into the E. coli strain DH5α. All substitution mutants were verified by double strand DNA sequencing. The sequences of primers used for molecular cloning are listed in Supplementary file 2. HEK293T and Hela cells purchased from ATCC were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified minimal Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. Bone marrow cells were isolated from 6- to 10-week-old female A/J mice and were differentiated into BMDMs using L929-cell conditioned medium as described previously. PCR-based test was used to validate the absence of potential mycoplasma contamination in all mammalian cell lines. pAPH-HA, a plasmid suitable for expressing proteins with an amino HA tag and a carboxyl Flag tag was used to express tagged proteins in mammalian cells. β-Lactamase translocation assay To test the Dot/Icm-dependent translocation into host cells, Lem8 was cloned intro pXDC61m to generate s β-lactamase-Lem8 fusion. This plasmid was introduced wild-type or the dotA − mutant of L. pneumophila and the resulting strains were used to infect U937 cells at an multiplicity of infection of 20 after 0.5 mM isopropyl-β- D -thiogalactopyranoside induction. One hour after infection, the CCF4-AM substrates were added into the medium and the cells were incubated for another 2 hr at 25°C, followed by image acquisition using an Olympus IX-83 fluorescence microscope. The translocation of Lem8 was assessed by calculating the percentage of cells emitting blue fluorescence. Yeast manipulation Unless otherwise indicated, yeast strains used in this study were derived from W303 ; yeast was grown at 30°C in yeast extract, peptone, dextrose medium medium, or in appropriate amino acid dropout synthetic media supplemented with 2% of glucose or galactose as the sole carbon source. For assessment of inducible protein toxicity, Lem8 or its derivatives were cloned into pYES2/NTA in which their expression is driven by the galactose-inducible promoter. Yeast transformation was performed using the lithium acetate method. After growing in selective liquid medium with 2% raffinose, yeast cultures were serially diluted and 10 μl of each dilution was spotted onto selective plates containing glucose or galactose. Plates were incubated at 30°C for 3 days before image acquisition. To screen Lem8-interacting protein, Gal4-based two-hybrid screening against the mouse cDNA library was performed as described before. Briefly, Lem8 C280S was inserted into pGBKT7 to give pGBKLem8, which was transformed into the yeast strain PJ-64A and the resulting strain was used for yeast two-hybrid screening. The mouse cDNA library was amplified in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and the plasmid DNA was transformed into strain PJ-64A. Transformants were plated onto a selective synthetic medium lacking adenine, tryptophan, leucine, and histidine, colonies appeared on the selective medium were verified for interactions by reintroducing into strain PJ-64A and inserts of those that maintained the interaction phenotype were sequenced to identify the interacting proteins. To validate the interactions between 14-3-3ζ and Lem8, its full-length gene was inserted into pGADGH and the plasmids were introduced yeast strain PJ-64A. Yeast strains harboring the indicated plasmid combinations were streaked on Leu − and Trp − synthetic medium to select for plasmids and the transformants were transferred to Leu −, Trp −, Ade −, and His − medium to examine protein–protein interactions measured by cell growth. Antibodies and immunoblotting Polyclonal antibody against Lem8 were generated according to the protocol described before. Briefly, 1 mg of emulsified His 6 -Lem8 with complete Freund’s adjuvant was injected intracutaneously into a rabbit four times at 10-day intervals. Sera of the immunized rabbit containing Lem8-specific antibodies were used for affinity purification of IgG with an established protocol. Samples from cells or bacterial lysates were prepared by adding 5× SDS loading buffer and heated at 95°C for 10 min. The soluble fraction of the lysates was resolved by SDS–PAGE, proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride membranes. The membranes were blocking with 5% nonfat milk for 30 min, followed by incubated with primary antibodies at the indicated dilutions: α-Phldb2, α-HA, α-Flag, α-GFP, α-GST, α-His, α-ICDH, α-Lem8, α-PGK, and α-Tubulin. After washed three times, the membranes were incubated with appropriate HRP-labeled secondary antibodies and the signals were taken and analyzed by Tanon 5200 Chemiluminescent Imaging System. Transfection and immunoprecipitation When grown to approximately 80% confluence, HEK293T cells were transfected using Lipofectamine 3000 according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Twenty-four hours after transfection, cells were lysed using a lysis buffer for 10 min on ice, followed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g at 4°C for 10 min. Beads coated with Flag-, HA-, or GFP-specific antibodies were washed twice with lysis buffer and then mixed with the prepared cell supernatant. The mixture was incubated on a rotatory shaker at 4°C overnight. The resin was washed with the lysis buffer for five times, followed by boiling in the Laemmli buffer at 95°C for 10 min to release the bound Flag- or HA-tagged proteins. For proteins used in biochemical reactions, the Flag- or HA-tagged proteins were eluted with Flag peptide or HA peptide, respectively. Protein expression and purification Lem8 and its mutants were amplified by PCR and cloned into pQE30 to express His 6 -tagged proteins. The plasmids were transformed into in E. coli strain XL1blue and grown in LB broth. When the cell density reached an OD 600 of 0.8, IPTG was added into the cultures at a final concentration of 0.2 mM to induce the expression of target proteins for 14 hr at 16°C. Cells collected by centrifugation were resuspended in a lysis buffer, and were lysed with a cell homogenizer. The lysates were centrifugated at 20,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C twice to remove cell debris. The supernatant was incubated with Ni 2+ -NTA beads at 4°C for 1 hr, followed by washed with 50× bed volumes of 20 mM imidazole to remove unbound proteins. The His 6 -tagged proteins were eluted with 250 mM imidazole in PBS buffer. Purified proteins were dialyzed in a storage buffer overnight at 4°C and then stored at −80°C. 14-3-3ζ and its homologous genes were cloned into pGEX6p-1 to express GST-tagged proteins. The plasmids were transformed into E. coli strain BL21. Protein expression induction and purification were carried out similarly with Glutathione Sepharose 4B beads. The resin was collected and washed for with wash buffer. The GST-tagged proteins were eluted with 10 mM glutathione and stored at −80°C after dialysis. In vitro cleavage assays For autocleavage assays, 5 μg His 6 -Lem8 or its mutants was incubated with or without 2.5 μg 14-3-3ζ in 50 μl reaction buffer at room temperature for the indicated time points. For substrate candidates cleavage, Flag- or HA-tagged proteins purified from HEK293T cells were added into reactions with or without Lem8 and 14-3-3ζ at room temperature for the indicated time. In each case, samples were analyzed by SDS–PAGE followed by immunoblotting or Coomassie brilliant blue staining. GST pulldown assay GST-14-3-3ζ or GST bound to Glutathione Sepharose 4B was incubated with His 6 -Lem8 in a binding buffer for 2 hr at 4°C. After washing three times with the binding buffer, beads were boiled in the Laemmli buffer at 95°C for 10 min and the samples were resolved by SDS–PAGE. Proteins were detected by Coomassie brilliant blue staining. Bacterial infection, immunostaining, and image analysis For infection experiments, L. pneumophila strains were grown in AYE broth to the postexponential growth phase. When necessary, complementation strains were induced by 0.1 mM IPTG for another 4 hr at 37°C before infection. To determine intracellular bacterial growth, D. discoideum or BMDMs of A/J mice were infected with relevant L. pneumophila at an MOI of 0.1. 2 hr after adding the bacteria, the cells were washed using warm PBS to remove the extracellular bacteria. D. discoideum and BMDMs were maintained in 22 and 37°C, respectively. At the indicated time points, cells were lysed with 0.2% saponin and appropriately diluted lysates were plated on CYE plates. After 4-day incubation at 37°C, the counts of bacterial colonies were calculated to evaluate the growth. To determine the impact of the infection on cell migration, HEK293T cells transfected to express FcγRII receptor were infected with the indicated bacterial strains. Two hours after infection, cells were washed using warm PBS and were used for the wound-healing assay. To determine the cellular localization of Lem8 in infected cells, BMDMs were infected with relevant L. pneumophila strains at an MOI of 10 for 2 hr. The samples were immunostained as described earlier. Briefly, we washed the samples three times with PBS to remove extracellular bacteria, and fixed the cells with 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 10 min. After three times washes, cells were permeabilized using 0.1% Triton X-100 and then were blocked with 4% goat serum for 1 hr. Samples were incubated with rat anti- Legionella antibodies and rabbit anti-Lem8 antibodies at 4°C overnight followed by incubated with appropriate fluorescence-labeled secondary antibodies at room temperature for 1 hr. After stained by Hoechst 33,342, samples were inspected using an Olympus IX-83 fluorescence microscope. To detect the cleavage of endogenous Phldb2 by Lem8, Hela cells transfected to express mCherry-Lem8 or mCherry-Lem8 C280S were stained with Phldb2-specific antibodies as described above. The images were taken using a Zeiss LSM 880 confocal microscope. The determine the impact on ectopically expressed Phldb2, mCherry-Lem8, or mutants each was cotransfected with GFP-Phldb2 into HEK293T cells seeded onto glass coverslips. Fixed samples were stained with Hoechst, cell images were acquired by a confocal microscope. Production of lentiviral particles and transduction For production of lentiviral particles carrying lem8 or its mutants, the gfp-lem8 fusion was inserted into pCDH-CMV-MCS-EF1a-Puro. The plasmids were cotransfected with pMD2.G and psPAX2 into HEK293T cells grown to about 70% confluence. Supernatant was collected after 48-hr incubation, followed by filtration with 0.45-μm syringe filters. After measuring the titers using qPCR with the Lentivirus Titer Kit, the packed lentiviral particles were used to infect newly prepared HEK293T cells at an MOI of 10. After incubation for 2 days, cells were sorted by BD Influx cell sorter to establish cell lines stably expressing the gene of interest. Mass spectrometry analysis of Lem8 self-cleavage site Recombinant His 6 -Lem8 was incubated with His 6 -14-3-3ζ for 8 hr and the samples were separated by SDS–PAGE. After Coomassie brilliant blue staining, bands corresponding full-length His 6 -Lem8 or cleaved were excised and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. Peptides were loaded into a nano-LC system coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated in a capillary column packed with C18 resin with the following gradient: solvent B was started at 7% for 3 min and gradually raised to 35% in 40 min, then rapidly increased to 90% in 2 min and maintained for 10 min before column equilibration with 100% solvent A. The flow rate was set at 300 nl/min and eluting peptides were directly analyzed in the mass spectrometer. Full-MS spectra were collected in the range of 350–1500 m / z and the top 10 most intense parent ions were submitted to fragmentation in a data-dependent mode using collision-induced dissociation with the max injection time of 10 ms. MS/MS spectra were searched against the L. pneumophila database downloaded from UniProt using Mascot. The signals of Lem8 tryptic peptides were compared between full-length and cleaved samples to narrow down the potential cleavage site within specific peptides, cleaved Lem8 semitryptic peptides were inspected manually. Wound-healing assay Wound-healing assays were performed as previously described. Briefly, HEK293T cells or Raw264.7 cells were seeded into 6-well plates and incubated until the confluency reached about 90%. The cell monolayer was scraped in a straight line using a p200 pipet tip to create a ‘wound’, followed by washing with growth medium to remove the debris. Reduced-serum medium was added and the cells were placed back in a 37°C incubator. 2, 24, and 48 hr after making the scratch, images of the cell monolayer wound were taken using an Olympus IX-83 fluorescence microscope. For each image, distances between one side of the wound and the other were quantitated by Image J. The wound-healing rate was calculated by the following formula: % wound healing = /24 hr distance ×100. Data quantitation and statistical analyses All data were represented as mean ± standard deviation. Student’s t -test was applied to analyze the statistical difference between two groups each with at least three independent samples. Acknowledgements The authors thank Dr. Shaohua Wang for plasmids, the study was funded in part by Jilin Science and Technology Agency grant 20200403117SF, 20200901010SF, National Natural Science Foundation of China grant 21974002, Beijing Municipal Natural Science Foundation grant 5202012, and the National Institutes of Health grant R01AI127465. Funding Statement The funders had no role in study design, data collection, and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication. Contributor Information Christina L Stallings, Washington University School of Medicine, United States. Jos W Van der Meer, Radboud University Medical Centre Netherlands. Funding Information This paper was supported by the following grants: Jilin Scientific and Technological Development Program 20200403117SF to Lei Song, Lei Song. Jilin Scientific and Technological Development Program 20200901010SF to Dan Li. National Natural Science Foundation of China 21974002 to Xiaoyun Liu. Beijing Municipal Natural Science Foundation 5202012 to Xiaoyun Liu. National Institutes of Health R01AI127465 to Zhao-Qing Luo. Additional information Competing interests No competing interests declared. No competing interests declared. Author contributions Conceptualization, Data curation, Project administration, Writing – original draft. Project administration. performed the mass spectrometric analysis. Project administration. Conceptualization, Data curation, Project administration. Conceptualization, Data curation, Project administration. performed the mass spectrometric analysis. KY performed the mass spectrometric analysis. Methodology. XL performed the mass spectrometric analysis. Conceptualization, Data curation, Writing – review and editing. Conceptualization, Data curation, Supervision, Writing – review and editing. Additional files Transparent reporting form Click here to view. Supplementary file 1. Potential Lem8 interacting proteins identified by yeast two-hybrid screenings. Click here to view. Supplementary file 2. Bacterial strains, plasmids and primers used in the study. Click here to view. Source data 1. Source data for figures and figure supplements. Click here to view. Data availability All data generated or analysed during this study are included in the manuscript. Files for original images of blots and gels prior to being cropped for use in the main text have been included in the Supporting file. Article information eLife. 2022; 11: e73220. Published online 2022 Feb 17. doi: 10.7554/eLife.73220 PMCID: PMC8871388 PMID: 35175192 Lei Song, # 1, † Jingjing Luo, # 1, † Hongou Wang, 2 Dan Huang, 1 Yunhao Tan, 3 Yao Liu, 3 Yingwu Wang, 4 Kaiwen Yu, 2 Yong Zhang, 1 Xiaoyun Liu, 2 Dan Li, 1 and Zhao-Qing Luo 3 Lei Song 1 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Center for Pathogen Biology and Infectious Diseases, Key Laboratory of Organ Regeneration and Transplantation of the Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory for Zoonotic Diseases, The First Hospital of Jilin University Changchun, China Find articles by Lei Song Jingjing Luo 1 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Center for Pathogen Biology and Infectious Diseases, Key Laboratory of Organ Regeneration and Transplantation of the Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory for Zoonotic Diseases, The First Hospital of Jilin University Changchun, China Find articles by Jingjing Luo Hongou Wang 2 Department of Microbiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center Beijing, China Find articles by Hongou Wang Dan Huang 1 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Center for Pathogen Biology and Infectious Diseases, Key Laboratory of Organ Regeneration and Transplantation of the Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory for Zoonotic Diseases, The First Hospital of Jilin University Changchun, China Find articles by Dan Huang Yunhao Tan 3 Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University West Lafayette, United States Find articles by Yunhao Tan Yao Liu 3 Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University West Lafayette, United States Find articles by Yao Liu Yingwu Wang 4 School of Life Science, Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of the Ministry of Education, Jilin University Changchun, China Find articles by Yingwu Wang Kaiwen Yu 2 Department of Microbiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center Beijing, China Find articles by Kaiwen Yu Yong Zhang 1 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Center for Pathogen Biology and Infectious Diseases, Key Laboratory of Organ Regeneration and Transplantation of the Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory for Zoonotic Diseases, The First Hospital of Jilin University Changchun, China Find articles by Yong Zhang Xiaoyun Liu 2 Department of Microbiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center Beijing, China Find articles by Xiaoyun Liu Dan Li 1 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Center for Pathogen Biology and Infectious Diseases, Key Laboratory of Organ Regeneration and Transplantation of the Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory for Zoonotic Diseases, The First Hospital of Jilin University Changchun, China Find articles by Dan Li Zhao-Qing Luo 3 Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University West Lafayette, United States Find articles by Zhao-Qing Luo Christina L Stallings, Reviewing Editor and Jos W Van der Meer, Senior Editor Christina L Stallings, Washington University School of Medicine, United States ; Contributor Information. 1 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Center for Pathogen Biology and Infectious Diseases, Key Laboratory of Organ Regeneration and Transplantation of the Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory for Zoonotic Diseases, The First Hospital of Jilin University Changchun, China 2 Department of Microbiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center Beijing, China 3 Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University West Lafayette, United States 4 School of Life Science, Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of the Ministry of Education, Jilin University Changchun, China # Contributed equally. Lei Song: nc.ude.ulj@gnosl ; Dan Li: nc.ude.ulj@nad_il ; Zhao-Qing Luo: ude.eudrup@zoul † These authors contributed equally to this work. Received 2021 Aug 20; Accepted 2022 Feb 16. Copyright © 2022, Song et al This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use and redistribution provided that the original author and source are credited. Articles from eLife are provided here courtesy of eLife Sciences Publications, Ltd 