 Polarity, which refers to the molecular or structural asymmetry in cells, is essential for diverse cellular functions. Dictyostelium has proven to be a valuable system for dissecting the molecular mechanisms of cell polarity. Previous studies in Dictyostelium have revealed a range of signaling and cytoskeletal proteins that function at the leading edge to promote pseudopod extension and migration. In contrast, how proteins are localized to the trailing edge is not well understood. By screening for asymmetrically localized proteins, we identified a novel trailing-edge protein we named Teep1. We show that a charged surface formed by two pleckstrin homology domains in Teep1 is necessary and sufficient for targeting it to the rear of cells. Combining biochemical and imaging analyses, we demonstrate that Teep1 interacts preferentially with PIP 2 and PIP 2 in vitro and simultaneous elimination of these lipid species in cells blocks the membrane association of Teep1. Furthermore, a leading-edge localized myotubularin phosphatase likely mediates the removal of PIP 2 from the front, as well as the formation of a back-to-front gradient of PIP 2. Together our data indicate that PIP 2 and PIP 2 on the plasma membrane jointly participate in shaping the back state of Dictyostelium cells. Keywords: polarity, back state, phosphoinositide signaling, Dictyostelium, migration Introduction Dynamic anterior-posterior polarity is a hallmark of eukaryotic motile cells. Cell polarity can be organized spontaneously or under the guidance of extracellular biochemical and mechanical cues. Study of cell migration in the model system Dictyostelium discoideum has provided important insights into the mechanisms underlying the establishment and maintenance of cell polarity. Moreover, many key signaling or cytoskeletal molecules involved in polarity regulation were originally discovered in Dictyostelium and later found to be conserved in higher eukaryotic cells. In Dictyostelium, signaling and cytoskeletal components responsible for polarity regulation are often localized or activated specifically at the leading edge or trailing edge of migrating cells, creating functionally distinct ends that promote cell migration. Events that occur at the leading edge include the activation of several Ras and Rac family GTPases, activation of mTORC2 and its substrates of the Akt/PKB family kinases, accumulation of the class I PI3-kinases and their product PIP 3, and recruitment of a number of regulators of actin polymerization, such as the Scar/WAVE and Arp2/3 complexes responsible for pseudopod projection. Events that occur at the trailing edge include the recruitment of the PIP 3 phosphatase Pten and the generation of formin and myosin II-dependent actin cortex, which is necessary for back retraction. The polarized activities of these signaling and cytoskeletal molecules have implications beyond cell migration. For example, during macropinocytosis, leading-edge molecules, such as PIP 3 and activated Ras, decorate the forming macropinocytic cups, whereas trailing-edge molecules, such as Pten, are excluded from the cup areas but occupy the rest of the cell membrane. During cytokinesis, leading-edge molecules localize to the poles, whereas trailing-edge molecules are restricted to the cleavage furrow. In response to global chemoattractant stimulation, leading-edge molecules transiently translocate to the cell periphery, whereas the trailing-edge molecules transiently fall off from the cell periphery and into the cytosol before returning to the cell periphery. The same complementary pattern is observed even when the actin cytoskeleton is disrupted by Latrunculin A. In LatA-treated cells, leading- and trailing-edge components distribute in the cytoplasm and on the plasma membrane and respond to stimulation by transiently relocalizing onto or off the plasma membrane, respectively. How different molecules implicated in the regulation of polarity achieve their characteristic distribution during diverse cellular activities remains to be fully elucidated. Previous studies have demonstrated an important role of PIP 3 in determining the front state of cells. Local accumulation of PIP 3 occurs via reciprocally distributed PI3Ks and Pten and is amplified through positive feedback loops involving PI3Ks, Ras and Rac proteins, and the actin network. PIP 3 then serves as binding sites for a number of effectors, including pleckstrin homology domain-containing proteins, which regulate leading edge activities. The diametrically opposed distribution of PI3Ks and Pten and the resulting PIP 3 gradient manifest even in the presence of LatA. When LatA-treated cells are exposed to a chemoattractant gradient, PIP 3 and Pten accumulate toward the high side of the gradient or away from it, respectively. Compared to the well-characterized front state, the molecular definition of the back state remains obscure. PIP 2 has been found to accumulate at the back of migrating cells and the cleavage furrow. In line with this, PI3Ks and PLC have been proposed to remove PIP 2 preferentially at the leading edge, whereas PI5K and Pten, which produce PIP 2, exhibit complementary patterns of localization. Furthermore, PIP 2 depletion has been demonstrated to trigger hyperactivation of cellular protrusions, consistent with its role in determining the back state. However, judging by the distribution of several PIP 2 sensors, gradients of PIP 2 are fairly modest in migrating cells, which suggests the existence of additional regulators of back activities. In addition to PIP 2, PIP 2 has been suggested to regulate back events, largely based on study of the trailing-edge protein CynA and its PH domain-containing region. Evidence was provided for the existence of a mutually inhibitory feedback loop between Ras activities at the leading edge and PIP 2. However, it is not clear whether binding to PIP 2 is a general feature of trailing-edge proteins and whether PIP 2 and PIP 2 act independently or cooperatively. Compared to the number of leading-edge proteins identified thus far, few proteins have been found at the trailing edge, and even fewer have been found to exhibit behavior similar to back proteins in the absence of an intact actin cytoskeleton. This precludes a complete mechanistic understanding of the back state of cells. To gain further insights into how the back state is defined, we performed a microscopy-based screen in Dictyostelium for proteins that localize specifically to the trailing edge. We focused on PH domain-containing proteins because of their known functions in phosphoinositide signaling and polarity regulation. In particular, we selected PH domain-containing proteins predicted to be less likely to bind PIP 3 by a recursive-learning algorithm. Over 50 proteins of unknown function were tagged with GFP and examined for intracellular distribution. This approach uncovered a novel back protein we named trailing edge enriched protein 1. Characterization of the localization mechanism of Teep1 suggests the existence of a back-to-front gradient of PIP 2 on the plasma membrane, which acts together with PIP 2 to modulate the posterior accumulation of Teep1 and to shape the back state of cells. Results Teep1 is a Novel Trailing-Edge Protein We characterized the localization pattern of Teep1 in vegetative and differentiated cells. Vegetative cells produce distinctive leading-edge structures, macropinocytic cups and pseudopods, which drive bulk endocytosis and cell movement, respectively. Teep1-GFP was selectively excluded from these structures, resulting in an apparent back-to-front gradient in its plasma membrane association. Colocalization with well-characterized marker proteins confirmed its trailing-edge enrichment. Teep1 exhibited opposite distribution to the leading edge-localized F-actin reporter LimEΔcoil and PIP 3 /PIP 2 reporter PHcrac, whereas it largely colocalized with back proteins, including Pten and myosin II. Consistent with the observations in vegetative cells, Teep1-GFP localized specifically to the side and rear of differentiated cells migrating along cAMP gradients. Transient relocalization in response to global chemoattractant stimulation is another feature of back proteins. We observed that, upon the addition of cAMP to differentiated cells, Teep1-GFP translocated from the plasma membrane to the cytosol within 5–10 s and then returned to the plasma membrane in approximately 30 s. A similar response was observed when vegetative cells were stimulated with folic acid. As reported for Pten, the chemoattractant-induced translocation of Teep1 did not require an intact actin cytoskeleton. Furthermore, when the LatA-treated cells were exposed to a cAMP gradient, Teep1 exhibited a complementary distribution to PHcrac, forming a crescent away from the higher concentration of cAMP. These experiments verified that Teep1 is a novel trailing-edge protein. FIGURE 1 Teep1 is a novel trailing edge protein. In randomly migrating cells, Teep1-GFP localizes at the trailing edge. Teep1-GFP exhibits opposite distribution to LimE∆coil-RFP and PHcrac-GFP. Colocalization of Teep1-RFP and Pten-GFP.... Several observations revealed that, among the previously characterized back proteins, including Pten, myosin II, PhdB, and CynA, the localization pattern of Teep1 most resembles that of Pten. First, both Teep1 and Pten were absent from pseudopods and macropinocytic cups, whereas the PH domain of CynA and PhdB localized to the base of macropinocytic cups and newly formed macropinosomes, in addition to their posterior distribution. Second, in response to stimulation, both Teep1 and Pten redistributed from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasm, and the response occurred with similar kinetics in the presence of LatA. In contrast, the response of myosin II relied on an intact actin cytoskeleton. Third, in some cells co-expressing Teep1 and Pten, Teep1 appeared to be partially depleted from regions where Pten more strongly accumulated, indicating that the two proteins may share similar binding sites. Despite these similarities, Pten and Teep1 did not depend on each other for trailing-edge localization. The Pleckstrin Homology Domains of Teep1 Determine its Trailing Edge Localization To seek regions of Teep1 that regulate its trailing edge accumulation, we generated a series of GFP-tagged truncation constructs and examined their localization. In addition to the two PH domains at the N-terminus, Teep1 contains two LIM domains at the C-terminus. We found that the truncation containing LIM domains was located in the cytoplasm and nucleus. Deleting the LIM domains did not affect the localization of Teep1. Conversely, deleting the PH domains caused Teep1 to completely dissociate from the plasma membrane. The truncation containing only the PH domains was sufficient to drive the trailing-edge distribution, despite a lower expression level. Including an extension at the C-terminus, which possibly stabilized the PH domains, resulted in a truncated protein with an equivalent level of expression, extent of rear enrichment, and responsiveness to stimulation as the full-length protein. Using this construct, we further examined the role of the PH domains in regulating the localization of Teep1. FIGURE 2 The PH domains of Teep1 determine its trailing-edge localization. Schematic representation of Teep1 and the derived truncations. Localization of GFP-tagged Teep1 and different truncations. Localization of Teep1 N411 -GFP and Teep1 N411 -GFP bearing... Positively charged residues within the β1/β2 loop are often required for membrane-binding PH domains to interact with negatively charged lipids. Sequence alignment with the PH domain from PEPP1 revealed two conserved positively charged residues within each PH domain of Teep1. We mutated these residues individually or in combination to either alanine or amino acid with an opposite charge. The membrane-to-cytosol fluorescent intensity ratios were quantified following LatA treatment, which allowed easier assessment of the membrane-binding capacity of back proteins. We found that single alanine mutations caused a partial reduction in the membrane association of Teep1 N411, and incorporating additional alanine mutation further decreased the association. Teep1 N411 completely lost membrane association when three residues were mutated to alanines simultaneously. In contrast, when these residues were switched to oppositely charged amino acids, a single mutation alone was sufficient to block the membrane localization. In the protein homology/analogy recognition engine 2 modeled structure, the four amino acids are positioned in two positively charged patches oriented to the same side, which could facilitate membrane targeting. These analyses indicate that the PH domains of Teep1 form a charged surface that is necessary and sufficient for sensing the properties of the plasma membrane that determine the back state. PIP 2 or PIP 2 Gradient is not Sufficient for Targeting Teep1 We investigated whether gradient of PIP 2 or PIP 2, which has been implicated in back protein localization, underpins the asymmetric distribution of Teep1. First, we examined the involvement of PIP 2. Lack of the inositol 5-phosphatase Dd5P4, an OCRL homolog in Dictyostelium, was shown to decrease the level of PIP 2 and reduce the membrane-to-cytosol ratio of CynA. We generated Dd5P4 knockout cells. The newly generated Dd5P4 − cells were severely defective in macropinocytosis as the original strain, and the defects were fully rescued by expression of GFP-Dd5P4. As seen in fibroblasts containing OCRL mutation, we observed abnormal actin organization with the presence of numerous actin comets in the cytoplasm of Dd5P4 − cells. In addition, consistent with the proposed function in PIP 2 production, we observed reduced localization of the PIP 2 sensor TAPP1 in Dd5P4 − cells. However, the posterior enrichment and membrane association of Teep1 were not affected, indicating that a PIP 2 gradient is not required to restrict the distribution of Teep1. FIGURE 3 Gradient of PIP 2 or PIP 2 is not sufficient for targeting Teep1. Localization of Teep1-GFP in Dd5P4 − cells. Left: Localization of Teep1-GFP in WT and Dd5P4 − cells treated with 5 μM LatA. Right: Box... Next, we investigated PIP 2. The accumulation of PIP 2 at the back of migrating cells and the cleavage furrow have been observed in Dictyostelium and other systems. Consistent with a role in determining the back states of cells, PIP 2 depletion was shown to trigger hyperactivation of cellular protrusions. However, by comparing Teep1 to two different PIP 2 reporters, PH PLCδ and Nodulin, we noticed that the back-to-front gradient in the plasma membrane association of these reporters was shallower than that of Teep1. A fraction of PH PLCδ and Nodulin was detected at macropinocytic cups or pseudopods of cells migrating under agarose along folic acid gradients, but Teep1 seemed to be completely excluded from these regions. Furthermore, unlike Teep1, PH PLCδ and Nodulin exhibited minimal chemoattractant-induced translocation. Therefore, even if the PIP 2 gradient is required, it is not sufficient for targeting Teep1. Additional regulatory factors likely exist and may cooperate with changes in PIP 2 to guide the dissociation of Teep1 from protrusions and following stimulation. PIP 2 and PIP 2 Jointly Regulate the Localization of Teep1 We performed dot blot assay to investigate the role of membrane lipids in regulating Teep1 localization. Lipid strips were incubated with cell lysates containing Teep1-GFP. Among 30 different lipids, Teep1 was found to bind only a handful of phospholipids, with a preference for PIP 2 and PIP 2. PHcrac-GFP, which was included as a control, bound specifically to PIP 2 and PIP 3 as expected. We purified the N-terminal fragment of Teep1 containing the PH domains as a GST-fusion protein. When applied to lipid strips, it exhibited a similar binding profile as Teep1-GFP from cell lysates, including weak interactions with several negatively charged phospholipids and a slight preference for PIP 2, PIP 2, and PI5P. Using the purified fragment, we further assessed the lipid binding selectivity by liposome flotation assays. Although only a small percentage of Teep1 associated with liposomes, increased interaction was observed with those containing PIP 2 or PIP 2, and a modest increase was observed with those containing PI5P. Including both PIP 2 and PIP 2 in the liposomes further increased the association. Triple alanine mutations, which greatly decreased membrane association of Teep1 in cells, also significantly reduced the binding of purified Teep1 to liposomes containing PIP 2 or PIP 2. Moreover, we found that purified Pten preferentially bound to liposomes containing PIP 2 and PIP 2, suggesting that selectivity for these two lipid species may be a general property of certain back proteins. FIGURE 4 PIP 2 and PIP 2 jointly regulate the localization of Teep1. Lipid dot blot assay using Teep1-GFP cell lysate or purified N-terminal fragment of Teep1. Quantification of PIP binding of Teep1 by liposome flotation assay P 2 is consistent with the existence of a back-to-front gradient of PIP 2 on the plasma membrane, but binding to PIP 2 is rather unexpected. Although PIP 2 on the plasma membrane has been linked to activities such as mTORC1 activation, this lipid is thought to localize primarily to the endolysosomal membrane. Furthermore, PIP 2 is estimated to comprise only a small percentage of total cellular PI. The liposome flotation experiments described above have a risk of using a lipid concentration that is not physiologically relevant. Therefore, we turned to cell experiments to further test whether gradients of PIP 2 and PIP 2 are required to target Teep1. We examined the membrane association of Teep1 in cells lacking the kinases responsible for the production of these lipid species. In Dictyostelium, as in various other systems, most cellular pools of PIP 2 depend on the activity of the phosphoinositide 5-kinase PIKfyve, which produces PIP 2 by phosphorylating PI3P. We generated pikfyve − cells. As reported previously, the mutant cells accumulated enlarged endosomes, especially when being shifted to low osmolarity buffer, and such defects could be rescued by expression of PIKfyve-GFP. In Dictyostelium, PIP 2 is produced mainly by the PIP5 kinase PikI. We expressed Teep1 in WT, pikfyve −, or pikI − cells, treated the cells with LatA, and quantified the membrane-to-cytosol ratio of Teep1. Deleting either kinase partially impaired the plasma membrane association of Teep1. The membrane-to-cytosol ratio decreased from 3.1 ± 0.5 in WT to 1.9 ± 0.3 and 2.6 ± 0.4 in pikI − and pikfyve − cells, respectively. To reduce the levels of PIP 2 and PIP 2 simultaneously, we used a chemically inducible dimerization system. In the system, myristoylated FKBP and a PIP 2 -specific phosphatase, Inp54, fused to mCherry-FRB are co-expressed in cells. Upon the addition of rapamycin, Inp54p is rapidly recruited to the plasma membrane, resulting in a significant reduction in PIP 2 on the plasma membrane within 10–15 min. We transformed the system into WT or pikfyve − cells. Teep1 partially disassociated from the plasma membrane when Inp54 was recruited in WT cells, with the membrane-to-cytosol ratio reduced to 2.3 ± 0.4. In contrast, Inp54 recruitment in pikfyve − cells nearly abolished the membrane association of Teep1, with the membrane-to-cytosol ratio reduced to 1.2 ± 0.2 over a time course of approximately 10–12 min. The magnitude of the response in individual WT and pikfyve − cells varied, but the trend was similar, validating that simultaneous elimination of PIP 2 and PIP 2 blocks the membrane association of Teep1. Using a newly isolated PIP 2 -sensor, we further analyzed the involvement of PIP 2 in back protein localization. The PIP 2 -binding phox homology domain localized to endosomal structures when expressed as a tandem dimer in cells. Interestingly, when fused with Nodulin, the PX dimer-Nodulin chimeric protein was absent from the macropinocytic cups and distributed to the trailing edge. Collectively, these experiments indicate that PIP 2 and PIP 2 regulate the posterior accumulation of proteins, such as Teep1, by jointly shaping the back state of the plasma membrane. A Myotubularin Protein Contributes to Establishing the Potential Back-to-Front Gradient of PIP 2 The above results suggest a potential back-to-front gradient of PIP 2 that acts together with PIP 2 gradient to regulate back events. The gradient of PIP 2 on the plasma membrane is thought to be established by PI5K- and Pten-mediated production at the back, as well as PI3K- and PLC-mediated removal from the front. We speculated that kinases or phosphatases responsible for producing or degrading PIP 2 may also be distributed in a polar matter. We found that PIKfyve-GFP was localized in the cytoplasm and on Rab7A-positive compartments, suggesting that PIP 2 production may not be spatially restricted. We then examined enzymes responsible for PIP 2 turnover. This process is proposed to be catalyzed by the Sac1-related phosphatase Fig4 or myotubularin family of phosphatases. Dictyostelium genome encodes one Fig4 protein and nine putative myotubularins, which we named Mtm1-9. We tagged each of these proteins with GFP and examined their localization. Intriguingly, one of the myotubularin phosphatases, Mtm6, exhibited polarized distribution. Mtm6-GFP localized selectively at the leading edge of migrating cells, as well as macropinocytic cups. When co-expressed with Teep1, Mtm6-GFP and Teep1-RFP exhibited mutually exclusive distribution on the plasma membrane. As with other leading-edge proteins, Mtm6 responded to chemoattractant stimulation, and the translocation could occur in the presence of LatA. The localization pattern of Mtm6 prompted us to examine whether this relies on interaction with the classic leading-edge signal, PIP 3. We found that the plasma membrane localization of Mtm6 was abolished in a quintuple PI3K mutant but greatly enhanced in pten − cells. Furthermore, when incubated with phosphatidylinositol phosphate strips, Mtm6-GFP bound specifically to PIP 3 and PIP 2, with a preference for PIP 3. Considering that PIP 2 -sensing proteins only weakly label the macropinocytic cups and do not change localization in response to stimulation, PIP 3 is likely primarily responsible for recruiting Mtm6 to the plasma membrane at the leading edge. PIP 3 is converted into PIP 2 during macropinosome formation. The ability of Mtm6 to interact with PIP 2 may account for its additional distribution on nascent macropinosomes. FIGURE 5 Mtm6 contributes to the establishment of a potential back-to-front gradient of PIP 2. Localization of Mtm6-GFP in WT cells during macropinocytosis. Localization of Mtm6-GFP and Teep1-RFP in WT cells. Arrow heads point to newly formed macropinosomes.... We reasoned that leading edge-localized Mtm6 may mediate PIP 2 removal from the front and facilitate the establishment of a back-to-front gradient of PIP 2. In line with this model, a malachite-based assay revealed that Mtm6-GFP immunoprecipitated from cell lysates exhibited high activity against PIP 2. Mtm6-GFP also was able to degrade PI3P, and the significance of this activity is unclear. We then examined whether Mtm6 is involved in regulating the localization of Teep1. To this end, we generated mtm6 knockout cells. Opposite to the effect of deleting pikfyve, deleting mtm6 resulted in a modest increase in the membrane targeting efficiency of Teep1. The chemoattractant-induced membrane-to-cytoplasm translocation was also partially affected by mtm6 deletion. Taken together, these experiments reveal a possible mechanism for establishing a reverse PIP 2 gradient on the plasma membrane, which in turn regulates the localization of back proteins. Teep1 Deletion Impairs Cell Motility To analyze the function of Teep1, we generated teep1 knockout cells. When initially assessed on bacterial lawns, we found that plaque growth of teep1 − cells was indistinguishable from that of WT, indicating that bacterial uptake, digestion, and multicellular development were not affected by teep1 deletion. Consistently, when plated on non-nutrient agar, teep1 − cells differentiated and formed streams of migrating cells and fruiting bodies similar to WT. Cell proliferation in liquid medium was similarly unaffected by teep1 deletion. Therefore, teep1 deletion does not grossly affect cell growth or development. We examined the kinetics of cell migration quantitatively. In random motility assays, Teep1 deletion led to a significant decrease in the speed of cell movement. Tracks of individual cells demonstrated that WT cells moved much further from starting points compared to teep1 − cells. The average speed of WT cells was 9.0 ± 1.8 μm/min, whereas that of teep1 − cells was 6.0 ± 2.4 μm/min. Expression of Teep1-GFP, but not GFP, in the null background restored motility to WT level. However, to our surprise, teep1 − cells did not exhibit an apparent defect in directed migration. When cells were exposed to gradients of folic acid or cAMP, the teep1 − cells migrated up the gradients with comparable directness and chemotactic index to WT cells and even exhibited a slight increase in the average speed. Therefore, Teep1 appears to be involved in cell motility regulation, but its function can be bypassed by exposing cells to chemoattractant gradients. FIGURE 6 Deletion of teep1 impairs cell motility. Trajectories of randomly migrating vegetative cells. Quantification of the speed of random movement. The scatter plots show data points with means and SEM. Summary of random motility parameters. To further investigate the function of Teep1, we sought out its binding partners. Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analysis revealed that Teep1 interacted with the membrane-cortex linker protein, TalinB. We verified this interaction by co-immunoprecipitation and colocalization experiments; Teep1-RFP co-precipitated with GFP-TalB. Furthermore, GFP-TalB was recruited to the cell periphery by Teep1-RFP in LatA-treated cells. A newly identified leading-edge protein, Leep1, which was included as a control, did not interact with TalB. Cell adhesion assay did not reveal an apparent defect in teep1 − cells ; therefore, whether the interaction with TalB and the function of TalB in substrate adhesion or force transmission underlie the requirement for Teep1 in random motility needs to be further investigated. Discussion In this study, by screening for PH domain-containing proteins that exhibit polarized distribution, we identified a novel trailing-edge protein, Teep1. We showed that Teep1 exhibits identical dynamic behavior to the well-known trailing-edge marker protein, Pten, including dissociating selectively from protrusions and macropinocytic cups, distributing uniformly on the plasma membrane in LatA-treated cells, and responding to global chemoattractant stimulation by transiently falling off the membrane. Characterization of the molecular mechanisms that control the localization of Teep1 allowed us to gain fresh insights into how the back state is defined and regulated. Several lines of evidence indicate that back-to-front gradients of PIP 2 and PIP 2 regulate the posterior accumulation of proteins, such as Teep1, by jointly shaping the back state of the plasma membrane. First, we found that a potential charged surface formed by the two N-terminal PH domains is both necessary and sufficient for targeting Teep1 to the rear of cells. Second, Teep1 binds to negatively charged phospholipids in vitro, with a preference for PIP 2 and PIP 2. Third, deleting the kinase responsible for producing either PIP 2 or PIP 2 partially impairs the plasma membrane association of Teep1, whereas simultaneous elimination of PIP 2 and PIP 2 nearly blocks its membrane localization. In addition, a chimeric sensor composed of PIP 2 - and PIP 2 -recognition modules exhibits a posterior enrichment. Finally, we showed that a myotubularin phosphatase, Mtm6, which is capable of degrading PIP 2, likely mediates the removal of PIP 2 from the front and the formation of a reverse PIP 2 gradient. Consistently, deleting mtm6 slightly increases the membrane targeting efficiency of Teep1. Mtm6 is recruited to the leading-edge via interaction with PIP 3. This could represent another example of crosstalk between front and back signals, which has been proposed to ensure their spatial separation. Our study raises a few intriguing questions that remain to be answered. First, Teep1 seems to interact with both PIP 2 and PIP 2, suggesting that its localization may be regulated by a coincidence-detection mechanism, but we do not yet understand how this is achieved at the molecular level. We found that PIP 2 or PIP 2 depletion has different impacts on the localization of Teep1 bearing mutations in either of the PH domains. This observation suggests that the two PH domains may have different binding selectivity, providing a means for coincidence detection. Previous studies have revealed that PH domains possess both canonical and non-canonical PIP binding sites, which allow them to associate with more than one PIP molecule. The PH domains of Teep1 contain both types of binding sites. Thus, coincidence detection may be achieved alternatively by using one PH domain to interact with PIP 2 and PIP 2 simultaneously. Assessing the lipid binding specificity of individual PH domain in cells or in vitro assays is needed to distinguish between these possibilities. However, the expression of the two PH domains is poor when expressed separately in cells or as recombinant proteins, precluding further analysis. Second, whether reverse gradients of PIP 2 and PIP 2 provide a general mechanism for targeting proteins to the trailing edge requires further investigation. Using purified proteins, we found that Pten also binds preferentially to liposomes containing PIP 2 and PIP 2, suggesting that such selectivity may be applicable to other back proteins in addition to Teep1. Intriguingly, simultaneous depletion of PIP 2 and PIP 2 by recruitment of Inp54 in pikfyve − cells not only results in Teep1 dissociation but also causes substantially increased blebbing, a phenotype usually associated with increased contractility or defects in membrane-cortex adhesion or cortical integrity. In contrast, recruitment of Inp54 in WT cells causes mainly fan-like or oscillatory behaviors as reported previously. Considering that the blebbing phenotype is not observed in teep1 − cells and that a number of membrane-cortex linkers or proteins involved in cortex assembly exhibit posterior accumulation, the removal of PIP 2 and PIP 2 may have a greater impact on the back state of cells by affecting the membrane association of multiple proteins and reducing the threshold for blebbing. Finally, our study, together with previous findings, indicates that the signaling network that determines the back state of cells likely consists of redundant or parallel pathways. A gradient of PIP 2 /PIP 2 is unlikely to be the only back signal. For example, the back-localized CynA protein has been shown to interact selectively with PIP 2. The localization of some other back proteins, including myosin II and TalA, has been shown to rely on actin cytoskeleton. It will be of great interest in future studies to investigate how different pathways integrate in space and time to regulate the back activities of cells. Materials and Methods Cell Culture, Transformation, and Differentiation WT cells were derived from the Ax2 axenic strain. All gene deletion cell lines were generated in Ax2. WT and gene deletion cells were cultured in HL5 medium supplemented with antibiotics. The pikI − cells were cultured on bacterial lawns and transferred into HL5 before use in experiments. Cells carrying expression constructs were maintained in HL5 containing G418, Hygromycin, or both as needed. Development on non-nutrient agar or with cAMP pulses was performed as described before. Gene Disruption and Plasmid Construction To make knockout constructs for teep1, mtm6, pikfyve, and Dd5P4 deletion, a blasticidin S resistance cassette was inserted into pBlueScript II SK+ to generate pBlueScript-BSR. 5′ and 3′ arms were PCR-amplified from genomic DNA with primers listed in Table 1 and cloned upstream and downstream of the BSR cassette, respectively. The resulting disruption cassette was electroporated into Ax2. Gene disruption was confirmed by resistance to blasticidin, PCR, or Southern Blotting. TABLE 1 Plasmids and primers used in this study. Each primer is designated as forward or reverse. To generate constructs expressing GFP- or RFP-fusion proteins, DNA fragments were PCR-amplified using primers listed in Table 1 and cloned into pDM vectors containing a multiple cloning site. For expression of GST-fusion proteins in bacteria, DNA fragments were cloned into pGEX-6P-1 vector at BamHI and XhoI sites. To express PX-PX dimer, the first PX domain was amplified from Dictyostelium cDNA using primers F1 and R1 and inserted into pDM323 at SacI and NheI sites; the second PX domain was amplified using primers F2 and R2 and inserted at NheI and SpeI sites. A flexible linker was added between the two PX domains. To express the chimeric sensor, the Nodulin domain of Atsfh1 was amplified using primers F3 and R3 and inserted into the PX dimer-GFP construct at the SpeI site. Imaging To image the localization of fluorescent proteins, 10 5 cells were plated in 8-well coverslip chambers filled with HL5 or LoFlo medium and allowed to adhere. Images were acquired on a Zeiss 880 inverted microscope equipped with a 40 ×/.95 or 63 ×/1.4 oil-immersion objective. For LatA treatment, cells were incubated with 5 μM LatA for 5–10 min before imaging. To image the localization of Teep1 in LatA-treated cells in response to cAMP gradient, a μ-Slide Chemotaxis chamber was utilized. Cell loading was conducted following the manufacturer’s instruction. Before imaging, 1 μl of LatA was added via port A. To image protein translocation in response to cAMP stimulation, differentiated cells were stimulated with 1 μM cAMP. To image protein translocation in response to folic acid, vegetative cells were incubated in development buffer for 30 min before the addition of 200–500 μM folic acid. The Inp54 recruitment experiment was performed as described previously. In brief, growth-stage cells were placed in coverslip chamber and allowed to adhere for 10–15 min. After cells adhered, the medium was replaced with 450 μl DB, and 50 μl rapamycin solution was added to a final concentration of 5–10 μM. Image analyses were performed using ImageJ. The membrane-to-cytosol fluorescent intensity ratio was determined by dividing the total fluorescence intensity at the cell periphery by that in the cytosol as described previously. Translocation dynamics was quantified by measuring the changes of cytosolic fluorescent intensity over time. Translocation efficiency in Figure 5H was determined by dividing the cytosolic fluorescent intensity at the peak of translocation by that at the last time point before stimulation. Migration Assays For random motility assay, vegetative cells were seeded in culture plate in HL5 and allowed to adhere for 4 h. Before imaging, the medium was replaced with fresh HL5. Images were acquired at 20 s intervals with phase illumination using a 10×/.45 or 20×/.8 objective. Under-agarose folic acid chemotaxis assay was performed as described before. Briefly, after setting of the agarose containing 10 μM folic acid, one trough of 5 mm wide was cut and filled with vegetative cells. Cells were allowed to migrate for 4–7 h. Images were acquired at 20 s intervals using a 10 ×/.45 phase objective. For under agarose cAMP chemotaxis assay, two troughs were cut after setting of the agarose; one was filled with cells and the other with 4 μM cAMP. 2 mM caffeine was included to prevent cell aggregation. For micropipette chemotaxis assay, differentiated cells were seeded in coverslip chamber filled with DB and allowed to adhere for 15–20 min. A micropipette filled with 1 μM cAMP was placed into the field of view using a micromanipulator. Cell movement was recorded at 15 s intervals using a 40 ×/0.95 oil-immersion objective. To quantify migration parameters, cells were tracked using manual tracking plugin of FIJI ImageJ and analyzed using Ibidi chemotaxis tool software. Protein Purification Escherichia coli BL21 cells transformed with GST-Teep1 N380, GST- Teep1 N380M, or GST-Pten were grown until absorbance at 600 nm of 0.8 and induced with 0.4 mM Isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside for 16–18 h at 20°C. Bacteria pellet was resuspended in ice-cold buffer A and lysed with a high-pressure homogenizer. Cell suspension was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 30 min to pellet the debris. The supernatant was incubated with glutathione sepharose beads for 2 h at 4°C. The protein of interest was eluted with elution buffer followed by gel filtration on a 10/300 G200 Superdex column equilibrated with buffer B. The GST tag was removed by PreScission protease digestion on the column. The cleaved protein was collected and applied to gel filtration column for further purification. Fractions from the gel filtration column were pooled and concentrated. Lipid Dot Blot Assay and Liposome Flotation Assay Lipid strips were obtained from Echelon. Dot blot assay using cell lysates was performed as described before. When the assay was performed using purified proteins, 0.5 mg/ml protein was used to incubate with pre-blocked lipid strips at room temperature for 1 h. POPC, NBD-PE, PI3P, PI4P, PI5P, PIP 2, PIP 2, PIP 2, and PIP 3 were obtained from Avanti Polar Lipids and dissolved in chloroform. POPC, NBD-PE, and variable PIPs were mixed at molar ratio of 97:1:2 or 89:1:10. Mixed lipids were dried under a flow of nitrogen gas and in SpeedVac for 1–2 h. The lipid films were resuspended in Hepes-NaCl buffer to a final concentration of 5 mM and subjected to freeze-thaw cycles 11 times. Unilamellar liposomes were generated via extrusion through a nanopore membrane with a pore size of 100 nm ; the process was repeated 11 times. The liposomes were mixed with purified proteins at molar ratio of 1,000:1 in a 50 μl reaction and incubated at 4°C for 1 h with gentle agitation. 30 μl of the protein-liposome mixture was diluted with 100 μl 1.9 M sucrose, placed at the bottom of a centrifugation tube, and overlaid sequentially with 100 μl 1.25 M sucrose and 20 μl Hepes-NaCl buffer. The sucrose gradient samples were centrifuged at 174,000 g for 1 h at 4°C. Five fractions were collected from the top, mixed with SDS loading buffer, and subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by silver staining. Relative binding was calculated as the sum of band intensities of top two fractions divided by the sum of band intensities of all five fractions. Lipid Phosphatase Assay The phosphatase activity of Mtm6 was determined using a Malachite green assay kit. Cells expressing Mtm6-GFP were starved without cAMP pulses for 3 h. Cells were washed with wash buffer, resuspended in lysis buffer, and incubated on ice for 5 min. Lysates were centrifuged for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was incubated GFP trap beads for 1 h at 4°C. Beads were washed with wash buffer and reaction buffer. Beads containing 200 ng Mtm6-GFP were incubated with 3,000 pmol substrate in a 25 µl reaction for 30 min at 22°C. 20 μl supernatant was mixed with 80 μl Malachite Green solution at room temperature for 30 min. Free phosphate released was measured at 620 nm wavelength. Immunoprecipitation Assay and Immunoblotting For immunoprecipitation assays, cells were starved without cAMP pulses for 3 h. Starved cells were lysed in lysis buffer and incubated for 10 min on ice. Lysates were centrifuged for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatants were incubated with GFP-Trap beads for 1 h at 4°C. Beads were washed with lysis buffer. Sample were eluted with SDS loading buffer and subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by mass spectrometry analysis or immunoblotting. Mass spectrometry analysis and immunoblotting were performed as described before. Anti-GFP antibody and DsRed polyclonal antibody were used for immunoblotting. Adhesion Assay 6×10 5 cells were plated in 6-well tissue-culture plate for 8 h. 2 ml fresh medium was added before the plate was placed on an orbital shaker and rotated at 200 rpm for 1 h. Floating and adherent cells were then counted to calculate the percent of adherent cells. Statistical Analysis Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism. Statistical significance was determined by unpaired t test or one-way ANOVA with Dunnett or Tukey post-test. In all figures, *** indicates p <.001, ** p <.01, * p <.05, ns not significant. 