 The type VI secretion system is a widespread weapon employed by Gram-negative bacteria for interspecies interaction in complex communities. Analogous to a contractile phage tail, the double-tubular T6SS injects toxic effectors into prokaryotic and eukaryotic neighboring cells. Although effectors dictate T6SS functions, their identities remain elusive in many pathogens. Here, we report the lysozyme-like effector TseP in Aeromonas dhakensis, a waterborne pathogen that can cause severe gastroenteritis and systemic infection. Using secretion, competition, and enzymatic assays, we demonstrate that TseP is a T6SS-dependent effector with cell wall-lysing activities, and TsiP is its cognate immunity protein. Triple deletion of tseP and two known effector genes, tseI and tseC, abolished T6SS-mediated secretion, while complementation with any single effector gene partially restored bacterial killing and Hcp secretion. In contrast to whole-gene deletions, the triple-effector inactivation in the 3eff c mutant abolished antibacterial killing but not T6SS secretion. We further demonstrate that the 3eff c mutation abolished T6SS-mediated toxicity of SSU to Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae, suggesting that the T6SS physical puncture is nontoxic to eukaryotic cells. These data highlight not only the necessity of possessing functionally diverse effectors for survival in multispecies communities but also that effector inactivation would be an efficient strategy to detoxify the T6SS while preserving its delivery efficiency, converting the T6SS to a platform for protein delivery to a variety of recipient cells. IMPORTANCE Delivery of cargo proteins via protein secretion systems has been shown to be a promising tool in various applications. However, secretion systems are often used by pathogens to cause disease. Thus, strategies are needed to detoxify secretion systems while preserving their efficiency. The T6SS can translocate proteins through physical puncture of target cells without specific surface receptors and can target a broad range of recipients. In this study, we identified a cell wall-lysing effector, and by inactivating it and the other two known effectors, we have built a detoxified T6SS-active strain that may be used for protein delivery to prokaryotic and eukaryotic recipient cells. KEYWORDS: protein secretion, interspecies interaction, effector, virulence, pathogen INTRODUCTION In Gram-negative bacteria, one of the most effective strategies to compete with neighboring bacteria is delivery of antibacterial toxins by the type VI protein secretion system. Resembling a contractile needle, the T6SS injects multiple toxic effectors directly into a recipient cell, damaging essential cellular targets including the cell wall and membrane. A T6SS has been found in ∼25% of Gram-negative bacteria, including many important human and plant pathogens. In addition to antibacterial toxins, the T6SS can also deliver antieukaryotic effectors to mammalian cells, amoebae, and fungi, highlighting its versatile role in defending bacteria against a variety of competitors in complex communities. The T6SS structure is comprised of a transmembrane complex, a baseplate, and a contractile sheath enclosing an inner Hcp tube. Sitting at the tip of the Hcp tube is a VgrG-PAAR complex that is ejected together with the Hcp tube out of the cell upon sheath contraction. Not only are these secreted Hcp-VgrG-PAAR proteins critical carriers for translocating effectors via direct interaction ; some Hcp, VgrG, and PAAR proteins have acquired additional functional domains acting as toxic effectors. Known T6SS effectors exhibit diverse activities, including actin cross-linking toxins, lysozymes, lipases, pore-forming toxins, and nucleases. Some effectors also require chaperone or adaptor proteins for stability and secretion. Each antimicrobial effector is neutralized by its cognate immunity protein for self-protection, and genes encoding effector-immunity protein pairs are genetically linked in the same operon. In addition to the immunity protein-mediated specific protection, recent studies reveal that cell survival also requires the protection of a number of immunity-independent mechanisms, including envelope stress responses, extracellular polysaccharide production, and general stress response pathways. Although the T6SS could deliver proteins directly into the cytosol of a recipient bacterial cell, this physical penetration is not toxic to the recipient. It remains unclear whether the T6SS penetration is similarly harmless to eukaryotic cells. Aeromonas dhakensis is a waterborne Gram-negative pathogen that can cause gastroenteritis and bacteremia and is considered more virulent than the other Aeromonas species. Its type strain SSU, a clinical isolate previously characterized as Aeromonas hydrophila, is known to possess a plethora of virulence factors for host infection, including multiple toxins and a type III protein secretion system. In addition, SSU has also acquired a T6SS system that not only contributes to virulence in mice but also delivers antibacterial effectors for microbial competition. Two antibacterial effectors have been identified; one possesses a colicin domain, while the other is an Rhs family effector with nuclease activities. Here, we report a new T6SS effector, TseP, that represents a cell wall-targeting effector family with a conserved glyco_hydro_19 chitinase domain. Secretion of TseP requires the upstream protein VgrG2, while its toxicity is neutralized by the downstream protein TsiP, a previously unannotated gene. Deletion of all effector genes abolishes T6SS secretion. In contrast, inactivation of effectors through catalytic mutation and deletion could detoxify the T6SS against its prokaryotic and eukaryotic targets while maintaining active secretion. We also demonstrate that effector inactivation renders the T6SS capable of secretion but nontoxic to recipient Escherichia coli or amoeba cells, paving the way for engineering the T6SS as a general tool for protein delivery to a broad range of target cells. RESULTS TseP-TsiP is a T6SS effector-immunity protein pair. We previously characterized two T6SS antibacterial effectors, TseC and TseI, but their deletion mutants could still efficiently outcompete Escherichia coli, suggesting the existence of other antibacterial effectors. Because effectors are often encoded downstream of vgrG, we hypothesized that the gene HMPREF1171_00947, downstream of PAAR1 and vgrG2, encodes a T6SS effector. We name it TseP for its observed peptidoglycan-hydrolyzing activity shown below. There is also an unannotated gene downstream of tseP, which we name tsiP, encoding the immunity protein for TseP. FIG 1 Characterization of TseP-TsiP effector-immunity pair. Operon structure of tseP. Genes named below correspond to HMPREF1171_00945 to HMPREF1171_00947, respectively. Gene tsiP was not annotated in the genome database. Predicted domain... To determine the biochemical activity of TseP, we first performed bioinformatic analysis using a suite of programs: BLAST, HMMER, and Phyre2. Results collectively show a lysozyme-like C-terminal domain, which belongs to the glyco_hydro_19 chitinase family, that hydrolyzes the beta-1,4- N -acetyl- d- glucosamine linkage with two glutamate residues as catalytic sites. Sequence comparison of TseP with bacteriophage SPN1S endolysin suggests that E655 and E663 are catalytic sites. To test if TseP is an antibacterial effector, we first expressed the C-terminal lysozyme-like domain with and without a twin-arginine periplasmic translocation signal using an arabinose-inducible pBAD vector in E. coli. Results show that Tat-TseP domain, but not TseP domain, was toxic when induced. We next mutated these two E655 and E663 glutamate residues to alanine and tested the toxicity of periplasmic expression of TseP and its mutants in E. coli. Expression of Tat-TseP resulted in reduced survival and smaller colonies while expression of Tat-TseP E655A and Tat-TseP E663A mutants did not. Addition of glucose to repress the arabinose-inducible promoter rescued cells expressing Tat-TseP domain and improved the growth of cells expressing Tat-TseP. Expression of these constructs was confirmed by Western blotting. To test the biochemical activity of TseP in vitro, we purified His-tagged TseP and its catalytic TseP E663A mutant and incubated them with purified cell wall sacculi. Wild-type TseP reduced the optical density of cell wall to the baseline level within 5 min of treatment while TseP E663A had no effect on optical density. Next, we analyzed the soluble contents of cell wall treated with TseP or TseP E663A using ultraperformance liquid chromatography-quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometry analysis. N -Acetylglucosamine and N -acetylmuramic acid with variable lengths of peptides were readily detected in the soluble contents of samples treated with TseP but not TseP E663A, further evidence of the lysozyme-like activity of TseP cleaving the peptidoglycan chain. To determine whether TseP is delivered by the T6SS and neutralized by the TsiP, we constructed the Δ tseP ei mutant, lacking the activity domain of TseP and the tsiP gene. Using competition assays, we found that the Δ tseP ei mutant was efficiently outcompeted by the wild type but not by the T6SS-null Δ vasK mutant, the Δ tseP mutant, or the chromosomal E655A and E663A TseP mutants. Complementation with a plasmid-borne tsiP fully restored survival. To determine whether TseP directly interacts with TsiP, we performed pulldown analysis. Since TsiP is predicted to be localized in the periplasm with an N-terminal signal sequence, we constructed a FLAG-tagged TsiP without the N-terminal signal sequence and tested its interaction with His-SUMO-tagged TseP. Results show direct interaction between TseP and TsiP. These results collectively demonstrate that TseP is a peptidoglycan-degrading T6SS effector and TsiP is its cognate immunity protein. TseP secretion is mediated by the upstream protein VgrG2. The known effectors TseC and TseI require upstream encoded T6SS effector chaperones for delivery. In contrast, immediately upstream of tseP are two genes encoding PAAR1 and VgrG2. We next tested the effect of deleting PAAR1 and vgrG2 on TseP delivery using bacterial competition assays. While the wild type and Δ PAAR1 mutant outcompeted the Δ tseP ei mutant, the Δ vgrG2 mutant and the T6SS-null Δ vasK mutant failed to outcompete the Δ tseP ei mutant prey. Deletion of vgrG1 or vgrG3 attenuated but did not abolish TseP-mediated killing. These results indicate that TseP secretion requires VgrG2. FIG 2 VgrG2-dependent secretion of TseP. Competition analysis of the Δ tseP ei mutant with different vgrG and PAAR mutants. The prey Δ tseP ei mutant was transformed with pBAD18cm, and killer strains were... The genome of SSU encodes two PAAR proteins that are 72% identical. To test whether PAAR2 provides functional redundancy to PAAR1, which might mask the phenotype in the Δ PAAR1 mutant, we constructed single and double PAAR1 and PAAR2 deletion mutants. Competition of these PAAR mutants against the Δ tseP ei mutant prey shows that neither gene is required for TseP delivery. In addition, when a plasmid-borne 3V5-tagged TseP was induced, we failed to detect any secretion. However, when VgrG2 and TseP-3V5 were coexpressed using the pBAD vector, secretion of TseP was readily detected in the wild type and the Δ tseP mutant but not in the T6SS-null Δ vasK mutant. Notably, secretion of plasmid-expressed TseP-3V5 was less efficient in the wild type than in the Δ tseP mutant, suggesting a competition between tagged and nontagged TseP. Nonetheless, these results collectively show that TseP secretion is VgrG2 dependent. TseP homologs are widely distributed in Gram-negative bacteria. Next, we investigated the distribution of TseP homologs. We performed a BLAST analysis with TseP protein sequences and retrieved the top 24 hits after removing redundant species. TseP was found not only in the genus Aeromonas but also in a number of more distant species, including several Pseudomonas species, Yersinia intermedia, Dickeya dadantii, and Erwinia amylovora. Notably, all but the one in D. dadantii have at least one T6SS structural gene upstream in the same operon. Of the identified Aeromonas TseP homologs, all have an upstream-encoded VgrG, suggesting TseP is a conserved VgrG-dependent effector in Aeromonas. Notably, the seemingly smaller homolog in Aeromonas allosaccharophila might result from misannotation since visual inspection of the genome sequence shows that it is in-frame with an unannotated open reading frame starting 9 base pairs downstream of a vgrG gene. Deletion of all effector genes abolishes T6SS secretion. In Vibrio cholerae, effectors play a key role in stabilizing T6SS assembly. Now that we had identified three antibacterial effectors in SSU, we next determined whether combinatorial deletion of effector genes has any effect on T6SS-mediated interbacterial competition and protein secretion. Using E. coli as prey, we found that the mutant lacking all three effector genes, the Δ 3eff mutant, failed to kill E. coli, while complementing this mutant with any of the three effector genes partially restored the killing ability in comparison to the wild type and the T6SS-null Δ vasK control strain. To test whether the triple effector Δ 3eff mutant still has a functional T6SS, we examined the secretion of the inner tube protein Hcp. Western blotting results show that secretion of Hcp was abolished in the Δ 3eff mutant. To test if the Δ 3eff mutant could be complemented, we expressed individual plasmid-borne effector genes. Western blotting shows that induced expression of TseC and TseP was unstable, producing multiple bands, while expression of TseI showed the expected autocleavage. Nonetheless, complementing the Δ 3eff mutant with any of the three effector genes partially restored Hcp secretion and enabled effector secretion. These results indicate that effectors are critical and codependent for T6SS-mediated protein secretion. FIG 3 Deletion of triple effectors abolished T6SS functions. Competition analysis of effector mutants against E. coli prey. The triple effector deletion Δ 3eff mutant was complemented with each effector gene on a pBAD vector as indicated. Survival... T6SS secretion requires the physical presence of effectors but not their activities. Our observation that deleting effector genes abolished T6SS secretion is consistent with what we have reported in V. cholerae. To determine whether effector activity or physical presence is required for T6SS secretion, we constructed chromosomal mutations to inactivate effectors. Of the three effectors, TseC carries a predicted C-terminal colicin domain and shares 33% protein sequence identity with the colicin-like effector VasX in V. cholerae. Similar to VasX, there are multiple predicted transmembrane helices within and next to the colicin domain of TseC. Using a strategy similar to that employed for VasX inactivation, we deleted 14 amino acids in the middle of the colicin domain to create the TseC Δ14 mutant. A competition assay shows that such a deletion abolished TseC-mediated killing of its immunity-defective Δ tseC Δ tsiC mutant. When E. coli was used as prey, the TseC Δ14 mutation reduced T6SS-mediated E. coli killing by approximately 1,000-fold, but the mutant was still capable of outcompeting E. coli by 10-fold in comparison with the Δ vasK mutant. In addition, Western blotting analysis shows that the V5-tagged TseC Δ14 mutant is secreted in a T6SS-dependent manner. Given that the triple effector deletion mutant complemented with TseC showed the most E. coli killing, these results collectively suggest that the TseC Δ14 mutation abolishes its toxicity, and TseC is relatively more effective in killing E. coli than the other two effectors, TseP and TseI. FIG 4 Toxicity of TseC is dependent on its C-terminal colicin domain. Sequence alignment of TseC with its homolog VasX, a T6SS effector in V. cholerae. Sequences were downloaded from UniProt and analyzed using Jalview. A predicted structure of the TseC... Having established an inactivated TseC mutant, we then sequentially introduced catalytic mutations of TseP and TseI to construct the triple effector tseP E663A tseI HFH-AAA tseC Δ14 inactive mutant, named the 3eff c mutant. Competition and secretion analyses show that the 3eff c mutant could still secrete Hcp comparable with the wild type but failed to kill E. coli as prey. B ). These results indicate that the 3eff c mutant has an active T6SS and lacks antimicrobial activities. FIG 5 Effector activities are crucial for T6SS competition but not required for T6SS secretion. Competition analysis of the triple-effector-inactivated 3eff c mutant with E. coli. Killer strains were streptomycin resistant, and E. coli MG1655... Next, we tested whether the 3eff c mutant is toxic to eukaryotic cells using the amoeba phagocytic model Dictyostelium discoideum. We found that wild-type SSU was toxic to D. discoideum, while the 3eff c mutant was similar to the T6SS-null Δ vasK mutant with severely impaired toxicity. These results indicate that the T6SS of SSU displays strong antieukaryotic activities that are dependent on its effectors but not the physical puncture or the secreted structural components Hcp and VgrG. DISCUSSION The T6SS is a crucial weapon for bacteria to survive in complex environments with prokaryotic competitors or eukaryotic predators. Its physiological function relies on secreted effectors, and thus determination of the T6SS effectors has been a major focus of the field. T6SS organisms often carry multiple effector proteins targeting diverse cellular pathways, of which the cell wall seems to be the most common target. For example, the H1-T6SS of Pseudomonas aeruginosa secretes Tse1 and Tse3 effectors to hydrolyze the cell wall, while V. cholerae possesses two cell wall-targeting effectors, VgrG3 and TseH. In this study, we describe the discovery of the novel cell wall-hydrolyzing effector TseP, its immunity protein TsiP, and its VgrG2-dependent secretion pathway. TseP carries the glyco_hydro_19 chitinase domain. Using a bioinformatic approach, a previous study predicted an effector group containing the glyco_hydro_19 chitinase domain in Acinetobacter species. Our findings for TseP provide experimental evidence of the glyco_hydro_19 chitinase family proteins hydrolyzing peptidoglycan and that the conserved E655 and E663 glutamate residues within the domain are required for toxicity. Our analysis also demonstrates that TseP homologs exist in diverse species and are often genetically linked to at least one upstream T6SS structural gene. These data collectively demonstrate that TseP, with the glyco_hydro_19 chitinase domain, represents an important component of cell wall-targeting T6SS effectors. T6SS components Hcp, VgrG, and PAAR can function not only as carriers for effector translocation but also as evolved effectors when they possess extended functional domains, such as the actin-cross-linking domain of VgrG1 and lysozyme domain of VgrG3 in V. cholerae. In contrast to those evolved Hcp and VgrG proteins found in other organisms, all three VgrGs and two Hcps of SSU do not have extended domains. Previous studies have reported additional functions of Hcp and VgrG in SSU in inducing apoptosis and inhibiting phagocytosis of mammalian cells. Here, we found that a triple-effector-inactivated mutant, capable of secreting Hcp and VgrG, failed to kill amoebae. These results suggest that Hcp and VgrG proteins do not possess intrinsic antieukaryotic activities and that effectors dictate the antieukaryotic activities of the T6SS in A. dhakensis SSU. Similarly, V. cholerae employs two effectors, colicin family effector VasX and lipase TseL, for T6SS-mediated killing of D. discoideum. It is possible that the toxicity of SSU also results from concerted effects of multiple effectors. However, how effectors of SSU mediate interaction with amoebae remains to be addressed in future studies. We have recently reported an effector-dependent T6SS assembly mechanism in V. cholerae that prevents futile secretion of T6SS without effectors. This model has also been further supported by similar observations in Agrobacterium tumefaciens and our new findings in A. dhakensis. These studies support a common energy-conserving strategy among T6SS organisms to ensure the onboard loading of effectors prior to T6SS secretion. More importantly, here we reveal that complementing the triple-effector deletion mutant with any effector gene could only partially restore Hcp secretion. These results underline that effector secretion is interdependent so that deletion of a particular effector gene could have profound effects on the whole system beyond the specific effector function. Protein delivery tool development is a key area in the emerging field of synthetic biology. For example, engineered Lactococcus lactis secreting proinsulin and interleukin-10 and E. coli secreting the enzyme myrosinase have been developed to treat diabetes and colorectal cancer, respectively. The T6SS delivery does not require surface receptors, could penetrate both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells by physical puncture, and could deliver multiple proteins. These features demonstrate its great potential to be engineered as a versatile protein cargo delivery tool. We have previously demonstrated that a V. cholerae catalytically inactive effector mutant can deliver a heterologous nuclease. This strategy of inactivating effector functions rather than gene deletion enables us to detoxify the T6SS but maintain its protein-delivery functions. Our new data for A. dhakensis not only provide further support to such a strategy but also show that effector inactivation abolishes the T6SS antiamoeba activity, rendering the T6SS a nontoxic tool for delivery to eukaryotic cells. The detoxified T6SS is conceivably useful for a number of applications, including transiently or permanently modulating the genes and metabolism of recipient cells and eliciting cargo-specific immune response, as an alternative tool to DNA-based technologies. MATERIALS AND METHODS Strains and growth conditions. Plasmids and strains used in this study are listed in Table S1 in the supplemental material. Bacteria were routinely grown aerobically in LB at 37°C unless otherwise stated. The following antibiotics and inducers were used: ampicillin, chloramphenicol, kanamycin, streptomycin, l -arabinose, and isopropyl-β- d -thiogalactopyranoside. All chromosomal mutants were constructed by crossover PCR and homologous recombination using the suicide vector pDS132 as previously described. Gene flanking regions were amplified and joined by crossover PCR and cloned into pDS132 by restriction digestion or Gibson assembly. The suicide vectors carrying deletion sequences were first transferred to donor E. coli WM6026 or SM10 by transformation and then to recipient SSU strains by conjugation. Transconjugants were selected on LB-antibiotic plates, purified, and incubated on 6% sucrose to select for sucrose-resistant colonies. Deletion was confirmed by PCR and sequencing. For expression vectors, genes of interest were PCR amplified and cloned using restriction digestion or Gibson assembly. All constructs were verified by sequencing. All plasmids and primers used in this study are available upon request. Protein secretion assay. Bacteria were grown in LB at 30°C to an optical density at 600 nm of 1 and then centrifuged at 2,500 × g for 8 min. Cells expressing pBAD vectors were then transferred to fresh LB and induced with 0.01% l -arabinose at 30°C for 1 h. Cells were collected again by centrifugation at 2,500 × g for 8 min. The supernatant was centrifuged twice at 10,000 × g to remove residue cells and then precipitated in trichloroacetic acid at −20°C for at least 20 min. Protein precipitates were collected by centrifugation at 15,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C and washed with acetone once. Whole cells and precipitated proteins were then resuspended in SDS-loading dye and boiled for 10 min prior to SDS-PAGE analysis. Western blotting. Proteins were loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel and resolved by electrophoresis, after which proteins were transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. The protein-bound PVDF membrane was blocked with 5% nonfat milk in Tris-buffered saline with Tween 20 buffer for 1 h at room temperature. The membrane was then incubated with primary and secondary antibodies in TBST with 1% milk. Signals were detected using the Clarity ECL solution. Monoclonal antibodies to epitope tags were from ABclonal, Thermo Scientific, and BioLegend. The polyclonal antibody to Hcp was custom-made by Shanghai YouLong Biotech. The horseradish peroxidase -linked secondary antibodies were purchased from ZSGB-Bio. Bacterial competition assay. Competing strains were grown in LB to exponential phase and stationary phase, respectively. Cells were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in fresh LB. Competing strains were mixed together at a ratio of 5:1, spotted on LB agar, and coincubated for 3 h at 37°C. Mixture spots were recovered and resuspended in liquid LB. Survival of competing strains was enumerated by serial dilutions and plating on LB plates with selective antibiotics. The mean log 10 CFU of recovered cells was plotted, and error bars show mean ± standard deviation of three biological replicates. Two-tailed Student's t test was used to determine P values. His-tagged protein purification. Genes were cloned into pETDUET1, pET28a, or pET22b vectors, which were subsequently transformed into E. coli BL21. Cultures were grown in LB with antibiotics to an OD 600 of 0.6 at 37°C and induced for protein expression with 1 mM IPTG at 20°C for 18 h. Cells were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in lysis buffer prior to sonication. Sonicated lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 40 min at 4°C, and supernatants were incubated with Ni-nitrilotriacetic acid resin. Proteins were eluted in elution buffer and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Protein pulldown assays. Genes were cloned with epitope tags into pET vectors for expression. Cells were grown in LB with appropriate antibiotics to an OD 600 of 0.6 and induced with 1 mM IPTG overnight at 20°C. Cells were collected by centrifugation, resuspended in 1 ml of lysis buffer, and lysed by sonication. After removing cell debris by centrifugation, supernatants were mixed and loaded to Ni-NTA resin, washed five times with wash buffer, and eluted in 100 μl elution buffer. Input and eluted samples were analyzed by Western blotting. Bioinformatics analysis. All gene sequences of A. dhakensis SSU are retrieved from the draft genome assembly. TseP and TseC sequences were analyzed with Phyre2 and blastp to identify homologs and predict structures. A representative set of the top 24 hits was downloaded from the NCBI database. Homologs were aligned using Clustal Omega, and maximum likelihood phylogeny was constructed using the IQ-TREE web server with bootstrap 1,000 times. Phylogeny was visualized using the iTOL server. A structural model of TseC was constructed using Phyre2. Protein toxicity assay. Cells carrying different pBAD constructs were grown in LB with 0.2% glucose at 37°C overnight. Cells were then transferred to fresh LB and grown to an OD 600 of 1. Serially diluted cells were plated on LB containing 0.1% l -arabinose or 0.2% glucose. Each experiment was repeated three times. Purification and analysis of peptidoglycan. Peptidoglycan was purified from E. coli following a previously published protocol. Cultures of E. coli MG1655 were grown in LB at 37°C to stationary phase, and cells were collected by centrifugation and washed in sterile water. Cells were resuspended to an OD 600 of 70 in sterile water, mixed with an equal volume of 8% SDS solution at boiling temperature, and stirred for 3 h. After cooling down to room temperature, the boiled solution was centrifuged and washed in sterile water four times to remove SDS. The final pellet was resuspended in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.0, buffer and digested with 5 mg DNase I and 16 mg trypsin for 16 h. The treated peptidoglycan was then centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 1 h, resuspend in sterile water, and mixed with an equal volume of 8% SDS at boiling temperature. SDS was then removed by centrifugation and washing in sterile water, and the final PG was resuspended to 20 mg/ml. To analyze digested PG, 500 μg PG was incubated with purified TseP and its mutant separately at 37°C for 2 h. The supernatants were collected after an equal volume of methanol was added into the mixtures and analyzed by UPLC-QTOF-MS. The settings of UPLC-QTOF-MS were as follows. The solid phase was an Acquity UPLC HSS T3 column, and the mobile phase contained a mixture of two solvents, solvent A and solvent B. Separation was achieved with a linear gradient of solvent B from 1% to 20% in 65 min, followed by a gradient from 20% to 70% in 65 min, and finally with a gradient from 70% to 99% in 1 min. Amoeba plaque assay. The phagocytosis amoeba model was used to evaluate the T6SS antieukaryotic activities as previously described. Briefly, SSU and E. coli MG1655 cells were grown overnight at 37°C for 16 h, pelleted by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 1 min, and resuspended in 1 ml phosphate-buffered saline. A 100-μl volume of bacterial cells was plated on SM/5 plates and allowed to dry under room temperature. D. discoideum cells were collected after axenic growth in HL5 medium for 3 days, pelleted by centrifugation at 500 × g for 4 min, washed once with PBS, and resuspended in PBS to a final concentration of about 1.5 × 10 7 cells/ml. A series of 5-, 4-, and 3-fold dilutions of D. discoideum cells was plotted on the SM/5 plates. The numbers of plaques were counted after plates were incubated at 22°C for 3 to 7 days. The minimal number of D. discoideum cells deposited above that was able to form plaque on the bacterial lawn was recorded. Data availability. The data that support the findings of this study are available within the paper or available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Footnotes Supplemental material is available online only. SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 1 Supplemental material. Download aem.00435-21-s0001.pdf, PDF file, 1.1 MB Article information Appl Environ Microbiol. 2021 Jun; 87: e00435-21. Published online 2021 May 26. Prepublished online 2021 Apr 9. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00435-21 PMCID: PMC8174664 PMID: 33837015 Xiaoye Liang, # a Tong-Tong Pei, # a Zeng-Hang Wang, a Weiliang Xiong, a Li-Li Wu, a Ping Xu, a Shuangjun Lin, a and Tao G. Dong a, b Xiaoye Liang a State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China Find articles by Xiaoye Liang Tong-Tong Pei a State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China Find articles by Tong-Tong Pei Zeng-Hang Wang a State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China Find articles by Zeng-Hang Wang Weiliang Xiong a State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China Find articles by Weiliang Xiong Li-Li Wu a State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China Find articles by Li-Li Wu Ping Xu a State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China Find articles by Ping Xu Shuangjun Lin a State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China Find articles by Shuangjun Lin Tao G. Dong a State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China b Department of Ecosystem and Public Health, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada Find articles by Tao G. Dong Charles M. Dozois, Editor Charles M. Dozois, INRS—Institut Armand-Frappier; a State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China b Department of Ecosystem and Public Health, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada Corresponding author. # Contributed equally. Tao G. Dong: ac.yraglacu@gnodt Xiaoye Liang and Tong-Tong Pei contributed equally to this work. Author order was determined in order of increasing seniority. Citation Liang X, Pei T-T, Wang Z-H, Xiong W, Wu L-L, Xu P, Lin S, Dong TG. 2021. Characterization of lysozyme-like effector TseP reveals the dependence of type VI secretion system secretion on effectors in Aeromonas dhakensis strain SSU. Appl Environ Microbiol 87:e00435-21.. Received 2021 Mar 2; Accepted 2021 Mar 8. Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved. Articles from Applied and Environmental Microbiology are provided here courtesy of American Society for Microbiology 