 Chemotaxis, the guided motion of cells by chemical gradients, plays a crucial role in many biological processes. In the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, chemotaxis is critical for the formation of cell aggregates during starvation. The cells in these aggregates generate a pulse of the chemoattractant, cyclic adenosine 3’,5’-monophosphate, every 6 min to 10 min, resulting in surrounding cells moving toward the aggregate. In addition to periodic pulses of cAMP, the cells also secrete phosphodiesterase, which degrades cAMP and prevents the accumulation of the chemoattractant. Here we show that small aggregates of Dictyostelium can disperse, with cells moving away from instead of toward the aggregate. This surprising behavior often exhibited oscillatory cycles of motion toward and away from the aggregate. Furthermore, the onset of outward cell motion was associated with a doubling of the cAMP signaling period. Computational modeling suggests that this dispersal arises from a competition between secreted cAMP and PDE, creating a cAMP gradient that is directed away from the aggregate, resulting in outward cell motion. The model was able to predict the effect of PDE inhibition as well as global addition of exogenous PDE, and these predictions were subsequently verified in experiments. These results suggest that localized degradation of a chemoattractant is a mechanism for morphogenesis. Eukaryotic cell motion guided by gradients of diffusible chemoattractants plays a crucial role in wound healing, embryology, the movement of immune cells, and cancer metastasis. In some cell types, including neutrophils and the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, gradient generation occurs through a relay mechanism where cells stimulated by the chemoattractant secrete additional chemoattractant. To prevent continuous build-up of chemoattractants, many systems use enzymes to degrade the chemoattractant. These enzymes are either membrane-bound, with their active sites facing the extracellular environment, or can diffuse in the surrounding environment. In addition, chemoattractants may be removed by other methods, including receptor uptake or decoy receptors. Compared to chemoattraction, relatively little is known about chemorepulsion, exemplified by the dispersal of immune cells out of a tissue during the resolution of inflammation. Under some conditions in chamber-based assays, chemoattractant-degrading enzymes can create a local minimum in chemoattractant concentration, resulting in chemoattractant gradients that point away from areas with high cell density. In a nutrient-rich environment, Dictyostelium cells grow as separate, independent cells. When deprived of food, these amoebae start to secrete the chemoattractant cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate in an oscillatory manner. The secreted cAMP rapidly diffuses to neighboring cells, which, in turn, start to secrete cAMP as well. The resulting relay mechanism generates periodic waves that sweep through the cell population with a period of 6 min to 10 min. For wave periods smaller than 10 min, cells only respond to incoming waves, ignoring the “back of the wave,” and directionally move toward higher concentrations of cAMP, form streams, and eventually aggregate into mounds of up to ∼ 100,000 cells. Cells within the aggregate subsequently differentiate and form a fruiting body that contains the majority of the original population of cells as a mass of spores held up off of the substrate by a stalk to maximize dispersal of spores. In addition to cAMP, Dictyostelium cells also secrete phosphodiesterases, which hydrolyze cAMP and which prevent continuous build-up of cAMP. The presence of PDE is essential for aggregation, and mutants that cannot secrete PDE fail to form viable aggregation centers. We reasoned that the competition between a time-varying chemoattractant signal and an inhibitor can result in guidance that changes direction as a function of time. To test this hypothesis, we examined the aggregation of Dictyostelium cells at low cell densities. We present evidence that aggregates of developing Dictyostelium cells display dispersal behavior in which cells are “repelled” from, rather than attracted to, aggregates. This behavior was only present for small aggregates. Furthermore, we show that, during this dispersal behavior, oscillatory cAMP signaling is still active, but that its period is abruptly increased at the onset of dispersal. We develop a model for cell aggregation and show that periodic signaling of cAMP, together with a spatial profile of PDE, can explain the observed dispersal. Furthermore, the model predicts that the disruption of the PDE profile, either by removal of PDE or by globally adding PDE, will result in the abolishment of dispersal. These predictions were subsequently verified in experiments. Our results suggest that, by modulating the frequency of cAMP signaling, small aggregates can shed their cells, potentially avoiding mounds that would form small and thus relatively ineffective fruiting bodies. Materials and Methods Cells and Chemicals. Cells of the axenic Dictyostelium discoideum strain AX4 were transformed to express a fusion of GFP to LimE and a gene encoding a fusion of RFP to Coronin. In addition, we transformed wild-type AX4 cells with the plasmid Flamindo2 expressing Flamindo2-GFP, a marker for cytosolic cAMP levels with a fluorescent intensity that is inversely proportional to the level of cAMP. We used cultures having a doubling time less than 8 h, because we found that the slower growing cells were less chemotactically active. The cells were grown in submerged shaking culture in HL5 medium. For starvation, when cells reached their exponential growth phase, they were harvested by centrifugation at 3,000 rpm for 5 min, resuspended in KN 2 /Ca buffer, collected by centrifugation, and resuspended in KN 2 /Ca at 1 0 7 cells per mL. The 1,4-dithiothreitol was prepared by dissolving DTT in deionized water at a concentration of 10 mM. We deposited 20 μ L directly on top of a dispersing aggregate. To test the effects of PDE1, we used 10 μ L of PDE 3′,5′ cyclic nucleotide activator-deficient from bovine heart dissolved in 50% glycerol/50% water at a concentration of 0.5 mg/mL. Experimental Setup. For aggregate formation, 4 mL of KN2/Ca buffer was added to a 32-mm-diameter glass-bottom Petri dish. We deposited 2 × 1 0 6 vegetative cells, obtained from the shaking culture after removing the growth media and washed twice with K N 2 /Ca buffer, by placing 40- μ L drops at five different locations, and waited for 10 min for cells to attach to the glass. Differential interference contrast images were taken every minute for 20 h on a spinning-disk confocal Zeiss Axio Observer inverted microscope using a 10× objective with a Cascade QuantEM 512SC camera. To quantify intracellular cAMP dynamics, we captured fluorescent time-lapse images using Slidebook 6. Images were analyzed using custom-made scripts in Python. Aggregate Size and Location Calculation. Aggregate size was determined by manually tracing the aggregate perimeter with ImageJ, repeated at least five times, after which the average was taken. The location of the aggregate was determined by manually identifying the center in ImageJ at least once every 15 min. The trajectory of the aggregate was then computed by fitting a spline through these points. Cell Motion Measurements and Analysis. Cell motion for cells outside of the aggregate was measured using dense optical flow, which was computed using the grayscale DIC channel and the dense inverse search algorithm, described in a previous study. We used a specific DIS implementation in the OpenCV library of Python using the fastest available parameter settings. Inward/outward flow was computed with respect to the centroid of the aggregate, and the radial component of the velocity was temporally averaged over a window between 90 s and 5 min. Using the raw dense optical flow, we computed the total displacement and the displacement in the radial direction from which the radial chemotactic index C I was computed as the ratio of radial displacement and total displacement. To compute net average cell motion, we averaged the radial velocity of all cells that were in an annulus centered at the centroid and with an inner radius that is approximately 10 μ m beyond the maximum radius of the aggregate and an outer radius up to 300 μ m, dependent on the apparent motion of the cells. In order to normalize net cell motion by cell area, we computed the average cell area in the relevant annulus. For this, the location of the perimeter of a cell was computed by zeroing and then normalizing the DIC channel, performing edge detection via Scharr filtration, and then binarizing to achieve a scalar phase field with value zero everywhere except at the edges of the cell. To compute the area of this cell, we first averaged adjacent time frames. To decrease sensitivity to signal noise, this average was blurred with a Gaussian filter. The result was binarized such that the interior of the cell took the value of unity, and the area outside took the value of zero. This result was then used to compute the average cell area in the annulus. To visualize cell motion, we color-coded the dense optical flow results. Finally, the median CI was computed as the median value among all pixels located in the annulus described above, averaged over 2.5 min. Further details of the image analysis are provided in SI Appendix, while supporting code can be freely downloaded at. Pipette Aspiration Experiments. Extracellular fluid near a dispersing aggregate of cells expressing Flamindo2 was aspirated during its dispersing phase using a micropipette tip with an inner diameter of 180 μ m. The aspirated fluid was immediately deposited near a nondispersing aggregate. The position of the centroid of the aggregate was determined by peak detection using the python package Trackpy. Single-cell tracking was then manually performed. Shedding angle for each dispersed cell was computed as the angle between two rays, with the first ray beginning at the micropipette tip and extending toward the centroid of the aggregate and the second ray beginning at the aggregate and extending toward the initial position of the cell. Statistics and Reproducibility. P values were computed with the Wilcoxon rank sum test using MATLAB. Experimental values are reported as median or as mean ± standard deviation. A P value less then 0.05 was considered to be significant, where *** P < 0.001, ** P < 0.01, and * P < 0.05. Computer Simulations. Our two-dimensional simulations modeled radial concentration profiles of the chemoattractant cAMP in a disk-shaped domain using the phase field approach. This domain consisted of a circular subdomain of radius r 0 = 50 μ m, representing the aggregate containing a large number of cells, and 100 individual cells, randomly placed in an annulus with radii 150 μ m and 350 μ m. The aggregate was assumed to secrete cAMP in an oscillatory manner as described in previous studies and to diffuse in the extracellular space. At a distance far from the aggregate, taken here to be 1,000 μ m, the cAMP concentration was set to the constant background value c A M P b a c k. As initial condition, the concentration of cAMP was set equal to c A M P b a c k, and cell motion was determined after the first cAMP oscillation cycle. In addition, PDE was assumed to be secreted by the aggregate at a constant rate, consistent with experimental work. Since aggregate dispersal occurs many hours after the onset of the experiment, we took as initial condition the spatial PDE profile, obtained after constant secretion and degradation for 60 min. The length scale of this profile, L P D E, is determined by the diffusion constant and degradation constant of PDE. The cAMP was linearly degraded by PDE with a degradation constant k P D E. Individual cells were assumed to secrete constant PDE and oscillatory cAMP, with amplitudes that were scaled relative to the number of cells in the aggregate. Specifically, using confocal imaging, we estimated the number of cells in a dispersing aggregate to be approximately 400 so that the amount of secretion from a single cell is 1/400th of that of the aggregate. In our reduced 1D model, the cAMP concentration is computed along a radial line and where the PDE profile is given by the steady-state solution. Fig. 3. Schematic drawing of the setup of the 2D computer simulations. A circular aggregate of fixed size periodically secretes cAMP signals as well as a constant amount of PDE. The computational domain had a radius of 1,000 μ... We determined the movement of the cells by computing the local gradient of cAMP, ∇ c A M P. Cell motion was in the direction of this gradient with basal speed v 0 if the magnitude of the gradient exceeded a threshold δ *. For absolute values of the gradients smaller than this threshold, thought to be below the detection capabilities of the cell, the cell will not move at all. Based on earlier work, the threshold was taken to be 0.1 nM across a cell body of 15 μ m, resulting in δ * = 6.67 × 1 0 − 3 nM / μ m. This allowed us to compute the net displacement for each cell for an entire cAMP oscillation cycle. An aggregate was considered to be dispersive if cell motion during one cycle was outward for all cells. Results Cell Aggregates Display Dispersive Behavior. When plated at low density, we observed that developed Dictyostelium cells aggregated into small-sized aggregates. These aggregates grew in size by attracting nearby cells using cAMP signaling, and most subsequently merged with others to form larger ones. Surprisingly, however, some aggregates showed dramatically different behavior. Instead of acting as an attractant source, resulting in inward motion of neighboring cells, they showed distinct dispersal during which cells moved away from the aggregates as single cells or as a small groups of cells. In addition, these aggregates often displayed oscillatory dynamics, during which outward motion was followed by inward motion in a repetitive cycle. To quantify the cell motion, we analyzed the images using dense optical flow, which calculates the motion between two image frames. This method avoids the use of explicit cell tracking, which is challenging to implement in an automated way. An example of the results of the optical flow algorithm for two cycles of a dispersive aggregate is shown in Fig. 1 A, where inward cell motion is displayed using red shading. Note that this shading extends well beyond the position of the cell in the snapshot, since it represents the optical flow data for the entire trajectory of each cell. In the first panel, motion is primarily inward while in the second panel, taken 5 min later, the motion has reversed and is now outward. This oscillation repeats itself in the third and fourth panels. Fig. 1 B shows some examples of manually tracked cells that were present in the black/blue squares of the second and third panels in Fig. 1 A. Fig. 1. Micrographs showing cell motion, visualized using dense optical flow, near a dispersing aggregate at four different times. Dispersal started at t = 0, and inward/outward motion is indicated in red/blue, while the aggregate center is marked by the yellow... To further quantify the dispersal behavior, we computed the spatially averaged outward and inward flow near aggregates. For this, we averaged over all cells that were within an annulus centered at the aggregate with an inner radius of 100 μ m and an outer radius of 300 μ m. The result for the aggregate in Fig. 1 A, normalized by the total cell area, is presented in Fig. 1 C, where we plot the inward and outward motion as a function of time in red and blue, respectively. This shows that cell motion was mainly inward before the onset of dispersal, arbitrarily set here and in all other figures at t = 0, since the inward flow was larger than the outward flow. At the onset of dispersal, however, the outward flow was suddenly larger than the inward flow, indicating net dispersal. Furthermore, following this onset, the dynamics of the flow showed oscillatory behavior, with predominantly outward motion followed by predominantly inward motion. For this aggregate, the period of these cycles was ∼ 20 min for the first two cycles, after which it decreased to ∼ 15 min. After these cycles, at t ≈ 110 min, dispersal ceased, and inward motion became dominant again. Finally, we verified that the inward and outward motion were negatively correlated, by computing the cross-correlation between the two time traces in Fig. 1 C. We next quantified the radial chemotactic index C I, defined as the ratio of radial displacement and total displacement, for all cells within the above annulus. The results are shown in Fig. 1 D and illustrate that the median radial CI becomes positive during outward motion. This indicates that the motion of cells during the outward cycle was overwhelmingly directed away from the aggregate. It also suggests that the observed dispersive motion is due to an outward pointing cue and not simply due to a loss of directed inward motion, which would result in randomly moving cells and a CI close to 0. This dispersive behavior was seen for many, but not all, aggregates. In six separate trials, we identified 38 aggregates between 16 h and 17 h after the start of the experiments. Of these aggregates, 23 showed dispersal behavior as determined using our optical flow algorithm. For the aggregates that displayed dispersal, the number of oscillations varied between one and eight. For some aggregates, only a limited number of dispersal events was observed, after which nearby cells were moving, on average, toward the aggregate again. Other aggregates displayed dispersal events, after which the aggregate did not contain any more cells. Finally, nondispersing aggregates displayed the usual chemotactic behavior during which cells move in a periodic fashion toward the cell aggregate. Oscillatory Dispersal Is Limited to Small Aggregates. To determine for which conditions aggregates showed oscillatory dispersal, we measured the size of aggregates that had at least three oscillations and compared this to the size of aggregates that did not show any dispersal. For this comparison, we identified movies that contained both oscillatory dispersive aggregates and nondispersive aggregates and determined their sizes at the same time point, chosen to be the onset of dispersal. Observations at a later time point showed a decreased size of dispersing aggregates and an increased size of nondispersing aggregates. The average size for dispersing aggregates was significantly smaller than that of nondispersing aggregates, with a median area of 7.1 × 1 0 3 μ m 2 vs. 20.0 × 1 0 3 μ m 2. cAMP Signaling Is Present in Aggregates. To determine whether cAMP signaling was still present during dispersal, we used cells that express Flamindo2. This marker is an indicator for cytosolic cAMP levels, and the binding of cAMP to Flamindo2 causes a decrease in its fluorescence intensity. When plated at low density, Flamindo2-expressing aggregates also showed dispersal. Specifically, 22/41 aggregates showed dispersal behavior between 16 h and 17 h after cell plating. An example is presented in Fig. 2 A, with shows micrographs of an aggregate during two consecutive inward/outward cycles and the corresponding fluorescent snapshots. The fluorescence intensity oscillated between high and low in a nearly spatially uniform manner, indicating that the cytosolic levels of cAMP of cells in the aggregate reach their maximum value in a near-synchronous manner. The dispersal is also evident from the quantification of the inward and outward flow as a function of time. As in Fig. 1 B, the net motion was toward the aggregate before the onset of dispersal, after which it became overwhelmingly outward. Here, cell motion was averaged for distances of 60 μ m to 120 μ m from the center of the aggregate. This outward motion clearly alternated with inward motion for at least eight cycles. Fig. 2. Micrographs of a dispersing aggregate of cells expressing Flamindo2 and the corresponding fluorescent intensity snapshots. Inward/outward optical flow averaged over the ranges 60 μ m to 120 μ... The fact that continued cAMP signaling was present during dispersal becomes evident when the fluorescence intensity is plotted as a function of time. This is presented in Fig. 2 C, where we plot the average intensity for all cells that are within 20 μ m of the edge of the aggregate and for all cells at a distance between 75 μ m and 150 μ m from the center of the aggregate. Clearly, periodic cAMP signaling remains present during dispersal. To determine whether it is plausible that cAMP signaling of the aggregate is driving cAMP signaling of cells outside the aggregate, we computed the cross-correlation of the fluorescent signal of the aggregate and the fluorescent signal of the isolated cells. The result shows that the neighboring cells are positively correlated with the aggregate signal with a delay of approximately 30 s. Computing this cross-correlation for nearby cells and for cells more distant from the aggregate shows that this delay is larger for the more distant cells, which further supports the aggregate as the driving center of signaling. To determine whether this delay is consistent with a diffusive cAMP signal that originates at the aggregate and triggers cAMP signaling in the neighboring cells, we computed the diffusive time scale. This time scale is approximately L 2 / D c A M P, where L is the distance to the aggregate and D c A M P is the diffusion constant of cAMP. Taking D c A M P ≈ 400 μ m 2 /s and L ≈ 100 μ m, we estimate the diffusive time delay to be ∼ 25 s, consistent with the results from the cross-correlation. We next determined how cAMP signaling is correlated with cell motion. For this, we computed the cross-correlation function between the fluorescence intensity and radial motion. The result reveals that the fluorescence signal was anticorrelated with inward motion, both before and after onset of dispersal. Specifically, the cross-correlation shows a minimum at t ≈ 30 s, indicating that the inward motion was largest slightly after the fluorescence intensity level was lowest. Since increasing intracellular levels of cAMP results in increasing extracellular levels of cAMP, these findings suggest that high intracellular cAMP leads to the formation of a gradient that is pointing toward the aggregate, resulting in directed motion toward the aggregate. We have verified that this is consistent with the cAMP signal for nondispersing aggregates. This signal is clearly negatively correlated with inward motion, indicating that the cAMP signal results in significant cAMP concentration levels away from the aggregate and generates an inward-pointing gradient during high levels of intracellular cAMP. The Period of cAMP Signaling Significantly Increases at Onset of Dispersal. Fig. 2 C also shows that the period following the onset of dispersal is significantly increased. To determine whether this increase occurred for all dispersing aggregates, we computed the period of cAMP oscillations as a function of oscillation number. We then compared the average period for the two oscillations preceding dispersal and the two following dispersal. The average period increased from T = 10 ± 4 min to T = 21 ± 6 min, and we observed that no aggregates exhibited dispersal behavior while pulsing regularly at short periods. Furthermore, the ratio of these two periods was computed to be 2.1 ± 1.4, corresponding to a more than doubling in cAMP signaling period and suggesting the possibility that the central oscillator somehow skips beats. This doubling of period was observed in nondispersing aggregates, indicating that an increase of cAMP signaling period is required for dispersal. Computer Simulations Support PDE-Mediated Degradation Can Cause Dispersal. Our experimental results show that dispersal is oscillatory, can last several periods, and can affect cells as far as 400 μ m away from the aggregate. Furthermore, the onset of dispersal coincides with an increase of the cAMP period. We hypothesized that the competition between the periodic cAMP source from the aggregate and the PDE gradient that is pointing toward the aggregate may be responsible for the observed reversal in directed motion. For small values of PDE degradation and small cAMP periods, the cAMP gradient would be directed toward the aggregate. For high values of PDE degradation and large cAMP periods, however, cAMP near the aggregate could be sufficiently degraded to form an outward cAMP gradient and cause cell movement away from the aggregate. To investigate this possible mechanism, we constructed a mathematical model that describes the production and diffusion of cAMP and PDE. The model contains an aggregate of fixed size and a variable number of individual cells randomly placed away from the aggregate. Key parameters in the model are the degradation constant of cAMP due to PDE, k P D E, the length scale L P D E of the PDE profile, and the cAMP concentration far from the aggregate, c A M P b a c k. Cell motion, defined as positive/negative for outward/inward radial motion, was determined by the gradient of cAMP, and motion was considered possible only if cAMP gradients exceeded a threshold, based on earlier studies. In our simulations, we varied k P D E, L P D E, and c A M P b a c k. Other fixed parameters are listed in SI Appendix, Table S1. Motivated by our experimental results, we determined the direction of migration in simulations in which the cAMP period abruptly increased from 10 min to 21 min. Using these results, we constructed phase diagrams in the space, determining which parameter values resulted in dispersal. Dispersal was deemed to be present when all cells displayed net outward motion during the 21-min cAMP period. In Fig. 3 B, we have indicated the region in phase space which resulted in dispersal for c A M P b a c k = 12 nM. For values of parameters that are outside this region, cells did not show dispersal. A snapshot and movie of a typical simulation are presented in SI Appendix, Fig. S5 and Movie S5, respectively. Dispersal also occurred when we doubled the number or changed initial distance to the aggregate of the individual cells. To understand why certain parameter values did or did not result in dispersal, we examined the cAMP concentration gradient 9 min after the start of the T = 21 min cycle. Examples of these gradients, averaged over the azimuthal direction and corresponding to parameter values indicated by dots in Fig. 3 B, are plotted in Fig. 3 C – F. For the profile corresponding to successful dispersal, the gradient is clearly pointing outward, and the gradient exceeds the critical threshold, indicated by a horizontal line, in a domain that extends a significant distance from the aggregate. For other values of the parameters, the gradient is too shallow either close to the aggregate, in the entire domain, or away from the aggregate. Since the number of cells in the aggregate is much larger than 1, it is possible to simplify the 2D model to a computationally more amenable 1D model. In this model, secretion of cAMP and PDE by individual cells is ignored, the cAMP concentration is computed along a radial line, and the PDE profile is given by its steady-state solution. We have verified that the phase diagram obtained from the 1D model is qualitatively similar to the one from the full 2D model. Using this simplified model, we have determined that reducing the computational domain to 500 μ m and the background concentration to 6 nM also results in a qualitatively similar phase diagram. Furthermore, we used the 1D model to determine the dispersal domain in phase space as a function of the background concentration and found that, below a minimum value of c A M P b a c k, approximately 4 nM, successful dispersal was not possible. Predictions from Computer Simulations. The computer simulations show that a dynamic competition between PDE and cAMP signaling can result in outwardly directed motion. The model can generate several distinct and clear predictions by altering the PDE profile, and thus the cAMP concentration, in simulations. In one set of simulations, we considered the effect of globally adding a PDE inhibitor. The outcome of this simulation is shown in Fig. 4 A, Left, where we plot the net displacement of the individual cells per cAMP cycle before and after the global addition of a PDE inhibitor. We considered model parameters to be within the dispersal region of Fig. 4 B. Therefore, the cAMP gradient right before the addition of PDE was pointed away from the aggregate, resulting in cell motion directed away from the aggregate. The addition of the inhibitor was modeled by setting k P D E = 0 at the start of cycle 1, while the cAMP signaling of the aggregate was assumed to continue. The addition of the inhibitor changed the sign of the gradient, resulting in net motion toward the aggregate. Thus, our simulations predict that dispersing aggregates can become nondispersing following the global addition of a PDE inhibitor. Fig. 4. Net cell motion during a cAMP cycle in response to the global addition of a PDE inhibitor and of PDE. Radial cAMP concentration profiles and outward cAMP gradient are shown at 1 min before and 6 min after... Another set of simulations examined the effect of globally adding PDE. For this, we again started with the dispersing aggregate described above and set the cAMP concentration to zero everywhere after cycle 0, while the aggregate continued to secrete cAMP in an oscillatory fashion. The net displacement of the cells in this simulation is shown in Fig. 4 A, Right, while the resulting cAMP profile and gradient are plotted in Fig. 4 B, Right. Immediately following the resetting of cAMP to 0, the concentration profile changed, and the gradient points toward the aggregate, resulting in inward motion. Raising the PDE levels to high uniform values at the start of cycle 1 also resulted in the abolishment of dispersal. Thus, a second prediction is that dispersing aggregates can also become nondispersing after the global addition of PDE. Dispersal from Medium Aspiration Experiment Shows Effect of Medium. Our computer simulations show that PDE, an extracellular inhibitor for cAMP, can be responsible for the observed dispersal. To test this, we identified dispersing aggregates and aspirated a small amount of medium near these aggregates during dispersal. This medium was then rapidly introduced close to a nondispersing aggregate using a micropipette, and the shedding angle of dispersing cells was quantified. We found that this aspiration experiment rendered the previously nondispersing aggregate into a dispersing one. Furthermore, analysis of individual cell tracks revealed that cells were primarily directed away from the needle tip, according to Kuiper’s test against a uniform distribution. The average chemotactic index directed away from the pipette tip was computed to be ⟨ C I ⟩ = 0.8. As a control, we verified that aspiration of medium far from any aggregate did not result in statistically significant motion away from the tip when this medium was deposited within 10 μ m of a nondispersing aggregate. In addition, when depositing medium obtained from a nondispersing aggregate near another nondispersing aggregate, it did not result in movement directed away from the tip. These experiments point to a role of the medium in the onset of dispersal. Fig. 5. Micrograph of a previously nondispersing aggregate after exposure to medium transferred from an aggregate that was dispersing. Motion is visualized using dense optical flow, with blue/red corresponding to motion away from/toward the transferred fluid... DTT Can Abolish Dispersal. To test our first modeling prediction, that PDE inhibition can reverse the directed motion of cells near dispersing aggregates, we identified dispersing aggregates and deposited a small amount of DTT onto them using a pipette. DTT is a known inhibitor of the activity of PDE1, which dominates extracellular cAMP degradation during the aggregation phase of Dictyostelium. The addition of DTT ceased outward cell motion, which then was followed by inward cell motion, as shown in the snapshots of Fig. 5 B and C. This was further quantified by computing the average inward and outward flow, which clearly shows that DTT suppressed dispersal and increased inward motion. These results were obtained for all analyzed aggregates and indicate that blocking of PDE activity abolished outward motion but not inward motion. Importantly, the addition of DTT did not abolish the signaling of the aggregate, as shown by plotting the Flamindo2 fluorescence intensity as a function of time before and after the addition of DTT. Thus, the assumption of our predictive simulations, that signaling continues after the modification, is valid. Addition of PDE Abolishes Dispersal. To test the prediction that the global addition of PDE can alter the dispersing behavior of aggregates, we added PDE1 to aggregates. Fig. 6 A and B shows two micrographs before and after the introduction of PDE1 onto a dispersing aggregate. Before PDE1 introduction, at t = 0, the aggregate shows oscillatory dispersal. After adding PDE1, dispersal was abolished, and inward motion was dominant. This is quantified in Fig. 6 C, where we plot the inward and outward motion as a function of time. This behavior was consistent in all aggregates N a g g = 21 we analyzed. The Flamindo2 intensity of both the aggregate and neighboring cells increased sharply following the exposure to PDE1, indicating the intracellular cAMP concentration decreases. After a delay, cAMP signaling resumed, again validating our modeling assumption. We also verified that dispersal was not abolished in the control experiment, in which we deposited solution without PDE onto the aggregate. Fig. 6. Micrographs of an initially dispersing aggregate t = −14 min before the addition of PDE1 and t = +14 min after the addition of PDE1. Inward/outward optical flow averaged for... Discussion In this report, we showed that aggregates of Dictyostelium cells can display a dramatic reversal in directed motion in which cells move away from, rather than toward, the cluster of cells. This dispersal was often present in the form of cycles of alternating inward and outward motion and was only seen for small-sized aggregates. Furthermore, we established that cAMP signaling remained present during the dispersal phase and that the period of cAMP signaling approximately doubled at the onset of dispersal. Using mathematical modeling, we showed that the competition between the secretion of cAMP and a steady-state profile of PDE, the inhibitor of cAMP, can be responsible for the observed dispersal. We showed that, if PDE exhibits a spatial profile such that its concentration near the aggregate is higher than farther away, it can create an outwardly pointing gradient capable of supporting dispersal. Our experiments showed that the medium plays an essential role in the aggregate dispersal: The introduction of an aspirate taken during the dispersal phase of an aggregate, which presumably contains little cAMP and an abundance of PDE, rendered a previously nondispersing aggregate into a dispersing one. Obviously, this experiment does not rule out the possibility that the medium contains a chemorepellent. Identifying such a repellent, however, is not feasible, since the medium contains hundreds of different proteins. In addition, and predicted by our simulations, our experiments show the abolishment of dispersal following the addition of PDE or a PDE inhibitor. Essential in the proposed mechanism is the temporal signaling of secreted cAMP of the aggregate. We found that the period of this signaling increases abruptly at the onset of dispersal, from approximately 10 min to 21 min. Earlier studies have shown that Dictyostelium cells exhibit a cellular memory and can continue to move in the original direction, even after a gradient reversal. These studies showed that cells are able to respond to very shallow gradients, after having been exposed to waves with amplitudes on the order of 1 μ M and that this memory is effective for cAMP waves with periods up to 10 min but that this memory breaks down for larger periods. This suggests that cellular memory before the onset of dispersal prevents outward cell motion. Following the period doubling, however, cellular memory will have dissipated, and the outwardly pointing gradient can become steep enough to guide cells away from the aggregate, resulting in the observed dispersal. We should note that it is not clear, at the moment, what causes this increase in periodicity of cAMP signaling. Earlier perfusion chamber experiments have shown that the frequency of cAMP signaling increases for increasing cell density or decreasing cAMP dilution. This increase, however, is gradual and not sudden. This suggests that unknown feedback mechanisms or bistabilities, perhaps through cell counting factors, may be at play during the aggregation process and are responsible for the observed sudden shift in frequency. The critical parameters in our proposed mechanism are the signaling period, the degradation constant of cAMP, the length scale of the spatial profile of PDE, and the background concentration of cAMP. Our modeling shows that there exists a region in parameter space for which dispersion is possible. For these parameter values, the cAMP gradient is pointing outward and exceeding the critical sensitivity threshold within a sufficiently large annulus. For parameter values outside this region, the reversed gradient either is too small for reversed motion or is only significant close to the aggregate. For example, making the degradation constant too large will result in a very shallow gradient near the aggregate, while making it too small will lead to gradients that are below the threshold for the entire domain. We should point out that, in the limit of no degradation, the cAMP gradient will always point toward the aggregate as long as it continues to secrete cAMP in an oscillatory manner. Likewise, in the limit of an infinite PDE length scale, corresponding to uniform degradation, the cAMP gradient will also always point toward the aggregate throughout the entire signaling cycle. Finally, for very small PDE length scales, degradation is only significant very close to the aggregate, and the gradient will not be steep enough to direct dispersal farther away from the aggregate. This means that a PDE that is exclusively bound to the membrane is unlikely to be responsible for the observed dispersal. Similar qualitative arguments can be made for the necessity of a minimum value of c A M P b a c k. Values for c A M P b a c k that are below this minimum value will result in reversed gradients that are too small to be detected. Our model predicts that, for values of c A M P b a c k smaller than 4 nM, it is not possible to achieve dispersal. Consistent with this result, our experiments show that the introduction of PDE abolished dispersal. This can be understood by realizing that PDE will reduce the cAMP concentration not only close to but also far away from the aggregate. Therefore, the introduction of PDE will reduce c A M P b a c k, which means that outward gradients are no longer sufficient to generate dispersal movement. Although the precise parameter values that allow for dispersal depend on the details of the model, it is still useful to examine whether the observed range is physiologically relevant. For the diffusion coefficient of PDE, we can take D P D E ≈ 10 μ m 2 / s, a value typical for a Brownian particle with an effective radius roughly 10 times larger than that of cAMP. In addition, as in a previous study, we can take, as an upper limit for its decay rate, the value of a typical extracellular protein, K P D E ≈ 1 0 − 4 s − 1. This results in a maximal length scale on the order of L P D E = D P D E / K P D E ≈ 1 0 2 μ m. Note that the actual decay rate may be larger and the length scale smaller, since PDE is inhibited by a secreted inhibitor, PDI. Furthermore, some of the PDE is membrane bound, further reducing the length scale. Thus, our values of L P D E for which the model displays dispersal appear to be within the physiological range. Previously, model values of the cAMP degradation rate due to the presence of PDE were in the range of k PDE ≈ 0.04 s −1 to 0.2 s −1. In these studies, the PDE concentration was normalized by the Michaelis constant. The experimentally determined half-life of cAMP in a suspension of 1 0 8 cells per mL at a concentration of 1 μ M was found to be approximately 60 s, resulting in a degradation rate, normalized by the PDE concentration, of approximately 0.02 s − 1. Our PDE concentration is normalized by the value at the aggregate, which makes it difficult to estimate the precise degradation constant. However, assuming that this value is not significantly different from the PDE concentration in the suspension experiment or from the Michaelis constant, we can conclude that the dispersal range found in our model is physiologically relevant. Finally, our model shows that dispersal is only possible if the background cAMP concentration is above a critical value that we estimate to be around 3 nM. This value is comparable to the estimated value found in experiments and is thus also in the physiological range. A nonzero background value can be explained, in our experiments, by realizing that the Petri dish contains a large number of aggregates, each secreting cAMP, resulting in elevated cAMP levels away from the dispersing aggregate. Although our 2D model is conceptually simple, it captures the salient features of cAMP signaling, diffusion, and degradation, and we do not expect that the qualitative findings will change in a significant manner if the details of the model are developed. In our simulations, we have taken a specific form of the secretion dynamics, based on earlier modeling studies. However, we have verified that the precise dynamics of the secretion dynamics does not affect the qualitative results. For example, simulations with different pulse shapes, including sinusoidal, block-shaped, and Gaussian ones, gave qualitatively identical results. Furthermore, we have implemented very simple cell motion rules requiring cells to take on one of three motility states. In reality, the response of cells is more complicated than this ternary rule and may include randomness, speeds that depend on the gradient steepness, and cellular memory. Implementing these more complex rules, however, is not expected to alter the qualitative conclusions. Our modeling also shows that a further simplification to a 1D model, which only considers cAMP secretion from the aggregate and assumes a steady-state profile of PDE, is able to reproduce the essential features of our proposed mechanism. This can be explained by realizing that the cell density of the aggregate is much higher than the density of freely moving cells. The mechanism we propose is an example of a self-generated chemotactic gradient. This type of gradient has been observed before for chemoattractant sources that are time independent. For example, a study showed that a linear gradient can be established in the zebrafish posterior lateral line primordium through spatially asymmetric sequestration and internalization. In this case, the established gradient is linear, resulting in motion that is persistently directed. Another example involves vegetative Dictyostelium cells placed in a uniform concentration of folate. These cells can break down folate through secreted and cell-surface folate deaminase. As a result, a high cell density region creates a local reduction of folate and thus a self-generated gradient, as also verified in a computational model. Finally, a recent study demonstrated that Dictyostelium cells can create self-generated chemoattractant gradients that allow them to navigate complex paths with great efficiency. Our results show that self-generated gradients can also play a significant role when the chemoattractant source is time dependent and can even result in surprising dispersal behavior. Intriguingly, the aggregates that display dispersal are significantly smaller than aggregates that continue to accrue neighboring cells. This raises the possibility that the dispersal mechanism is a protection against the formation of aggregates that are too small to continue along a viable developmental path, since an aggregate that is too small will not be able to form a fully developed fruiting body structure. Our dispersal can thus be considered as an example of quorum sensing, which plays a role in a large number of biological systems. Quorum sensing has also been demonstrated in Dictyostelium cells where, in the vegetative stage, the AprA−CfaD complex works as a chemorepellent and limits the cell proliferation by negative feedback control, while, in the developed stage, the secreted protein counting factor limits the size of the aggregates. We have verified, however, that aggregates of mutant cells lacking these quorum-sensing proteins were still able to display dispersal. This further points toward the competition between cAMP secretion and PDE-mediated degradation as a mechanism for the observed dispersal. Supplementary Material Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. Supplementary File Click here to view. 