 Chemotaxis, which is G protein-coupled receptor -mediated directional cell migration, plays pivotal roles in diverse human diseases, including recruitment of leukocytes to inflammation sites and metastasis of cancer. It is still not fully understood how eukaryotes sense and chemotax in response to chemoattractants with an enormous concentration range. A genetically traceable model organism, Dictyostelium discoideum, is the best-studied organism for GPCR-mediated chemotaxis. Recently, we have shown that C2GAP1 controls G protein coupled receptor-mediated Ras adaptation and chemotaxis. Here, we investigated the molecular mechanism and the biological function of C2GAP1 membrane targeting for chemotaxis. We show that calcium and phospholipids on the plasma membrane play critical roles in membrane targeting of C2GAP1. Cells lacking C2GAP1 displayed an improved chemotaxis in response to chemoattractant gradients at subsensitive or low concentrations, while exhibiting impaired chemotaxis in response to gradients at high concentrations. Taken together, our results demonstrate that the membrane targeting of C2GAP1 enables Dictyostelium to sense chemoattractant gradients at a higher concentration range. This mechanism is likely an evolutionarily conserved molecular mechanism of Ras regulation in the adaptation and chemotaxis of eukaryotes. Keywords: chemotaxis, C2GAP1, adaptation, sensitivity, G protein coupled receptor, gradient sensing Introduction Chemotaxis, which is G protein-coupled receptor -mediated directional cell migration, plays pivotal roles in diverse physiological and pathological processes, such as embryo development, angiogenesis, recruitment of neutrophils to inflammation sites, and metastasis of cancer. Dictyostelium is a genetically traceable model organism that is the best-studied organism for GPCR-mediated chemotaxis. Chemotaxis is crucial for detecting, moving toward, and eventually engulfing bacteria as food source, as well as development of Dictyostelium. A key feature of chemotaxis in eukaryotic cells is that cells sense a large concentration range of chemoattractants. To accurately navigate through an enormous concentration-range gradient of various chemoattractants, both Dictyostelium and neutrophils employ a mechanism called adaptation, in which they no longer respond to present stimuli but remain sensitive to stronger stimuli. Homogeneous, sustained chemoattractant stimuli trigger transient, adaptive responses in many steps of the GPCR-mediated signaling pathway downstream of heterotrimeric G proteins. Adaptation provides a fundamental strategy for eukaryotic cell chemotaxis through large concentration-range gradients of chemoattractants. However, little connection has been made between GPCR-mediated adaptation and the basal activity of a cell. The small GTPase Ras mediates multiple signaling pathways that control directional cell migration in both neutrophils and Dictyostelium. In Dictyostelium, the activation of Ras is the first signaling event that displays adaptation behavior in GPCR-mediated signaling pathways. Ras signaling is activated through guanine nucleotide exchange factors and deactivated by GTPase-activating proteins. Several RasGEFs and RasGAPs have been found to activate and deactivate Ras signaling, respectively. Recently, we identified a locally recruited RasGAP protein, C2GAP1, that is essential for F-actin-independent Ras adaptation and long-range chemotaxis in Dictyostelium. However, the molecular mechanism of membrane targeting of C2GAP1 is not fully understood. Here, we show that calcium and phospholipids on the plasma membrane, but not GAP activity, play critical roles in membrane targeting of C2GAP1. More importantly, C2GAP1 controls both the basal activity and the GPCR-mediated adaptation in Dictyostelium cells and thereby enables cells to sense chemoattractant gradients at a higher concentration range. Results Calcium Negatively Mediates Membrane Targeting of C2GAP1 C2GAP1 possesses a C2 domain, which is a calcium-binding motif and is often involved in membrane targeting of host proteins. Thus, we first examined whether calcium affects the interaction between C2GAP1 and Ras by immunoprecipitation and found an interesting effect of on the interaction between C2GAP1 and Ras. The presence of high decreased the C2GAP1/Ras interaction. Interestingly, the highest interaction of C2GAP1 and Ras was detected with the presence of 1 nM calcium, while lower to none again decreased the interaction. The effect of on the interaction between C2GAP1 and Ras might be due to its effect on C2GAP1 membrane targeting. To understand the effect of, we first monitored the cAMP-induced calcium response by an ultrasensitive indicator, Nano15, using fluorescence resonance energy transfer microscopy in live cells. Consistent with a previous report, 1 μM cAMP stimulation induced a transient increase in the FRET efficiency of Nano15, indicating a clear increase peaking around 40 s after stimulation in wild-type cells. In iplA – cells, which lack the IP 3 receptor, cAMP stimulation triggered no increase, as previously reported. Calcium-binding protein 7 has the highest calcium-binding capacity among 14 Dictyostelium calcium-binding proteins and is highly expressed during early development. Cells lacking Cbp7 have a slightly higher level of in the resting state, indicating that Cbp7 functions as a Ca 2+ -binding protein. In response to 1 μM cAMP stimulation, cbpG – cells showed a much more rapid increase with the peak at about 20 s. This dynamics is typically observed in Dictyostelium mutants that lack calcium-binding proteins: earlier onset, earlier peak, and faster fall rate. FIGURE 1 is dynamically involved in the membrane targeting of C2GAP1. High decreases the association of C2GAP1-YFP and Ras determined by co-immunoprecipitation. Cells expressing C2GAP1-YFP were lysed in the presence or absence of GTPγS... We next monitored membrane translocation of C2GAP1-YFP in WT and mutant cells. We found that 1 μM cAMP induced a robust membrane translocation of C2GAP1-YFP in WT cells. The same cAMP stimulation induced a prolonged membrane translocation of C2GAP1 in iplA – cells. In the resting cbpG – cells, membrane localization of C2GAP1-YFP was notably increased. cAMP stimulation triggered little membrane translocation in cbpG – cells. We also monitored C2GAP1-YFP in WT, iplA –, and cbpG – cells treated with 5 μM Latrunculin B, an actin polymerization inhibitor, to eliminate cell migration for quantitative measurement of membrane translocation of C2GAP1-YFP. Interestingly, there was notably more membrane localization of C2GAP1 in resting iplA – and cbpG – cells. In WT cells, cAMP stimulation induced membrane translocation of C2GAP1-YFP that was similar in both immobile cells and motile cells. cAMP stimulation triggered a significantly prolonged membrane translocation of C2GAP1 in iplA – cells, while the same cAMP stimulation induced little membrane translocation of C2GAP1, instead, further reduced membrane localization of C2GAP1 in cbpG – cells. Quantitative measurement of the precise membrane translocation dynamics of C2GAP1 in these cells confirmed what we observed in motile cells. In contrast to WT cells, cAMP stimulation triggered a significant prolonged membrane translocation of C2GAP1 in iplA – cells and little membrane translocation in cbpG – cells. Taken together, the above results indicate that calcium dynamically regulates membrane targeting of C2GAP1. C2GAP1 Binds to Phospholipids on the Plasma Membrane Proteins and phospholipids on the plasma membrane play critical roles in membrane targeting of C2 domain-containing RasGAPs. In order to understand whether GAP activity plays a crucial role in the interaction between Ras and RasGAP1, we generated a GFP-tagged GAP-inactive mutant of C2GAP1 and expressed it in c2gapA – cells. We then examined the chemotaxis behavior of c2gapA – /R616A cells and compared it with that of WT and c2gapA – cells. We found that c2gapA – / R616A cells displayed similar chemotaxis defect to c2gapA – cells in a 10 μM cAMP gradient in contrast to WT cells, as previously reported. The above result indicates that R616A does not rescue the chemotaxis defect of c2gapA – cells. Using immunoprecipitation, we found that the R616A mutant showed a binding with Ras similar to that of the WT C2GAP1. The above results indicate that GAP activity is not required for the interaction between C2GAP1 and Ras. FIGURE 2 GAP activity is not required for the binding of C2GAP1 and phospholipids on the plasma membrane. Montage show the tracing paths of chemotaxing cells of WT or c2gapA – cells expressing empty vector, or R616R... Phospholipids on the plasma membrane play critical roles in the membrane targeting of C2 domain-containing proteins. We found that cAMP stimulation also triggered clear membrane translocation of R616A. Therefore, we used a PIP strip assay to determine the species of phospholipids that bind to C2GAP1. We incubated PIP strips with cell lysates collected from the cells expressing GFP-tagged PH C rac, WT, or R616 of C2GAP1. PH Crac -GFP was used as a control. The phospholipid-binding specificity of PHCrac-GFP is consistent with the previous report. We found that both WT and R616A of C2GAP1 bound to multiple phospholipids, including the products of PI3K, such as PIP, PIP2, and PIP3, and the substrates of PI3K. Interestingly, R616A showed a preference for PIP2, while the WT showed a better affinity to PIP3. Sensitivity of c2gapA – Cells Is Increased in Response to Chemoattractant Stimulus Little connection has been made between GPCR-mediated adaptation and the sensitivity of a cell. We noticed that C2GAP1 localized on the membrane of resting cells, suggesting its potential role in inhibiting the basal Ras activity of resting cells. It has also been previously shown that depletion of multiple PIP2 species, such as phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate or phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate increases Ras/Rap-related activities and excitability in a cell. C2GAP1 binds to both PIP2 and PIP. More importantly, cAMP-induced membrane translocation of C2GAP1 is F-actin independent. We speculated that the higher basal Ras activity in c2gapA – cells might enhance their sensitivity to chemoattractant stimulation in an F-actin-independent fashion. Therefore, we next determined the sensitivity of both WT and c2gapA – cells without the actin cytoskeleton. Cells expressing the PIP 3 biosensor PH Crac -GFP were treated with 5 μM Latrunculin B for 10 min prior to the experiment to diminish the existing cytoskeleton. In response to 10 μM Sp-cAMP stimulation, F-actin-free immobile WT cells displayed a transient membrane translocation of PH Crac -GFP, an adaptive behavior of WT cells. However, c2gapA – cells displayed a secondary, persistent accumulation of PH Crac -GFP on the plasma membrane after its initial, transient membrane translocation, a non-adaptive behavior as previously shown. In response to 0.1 nM Sp-cAMP stimulation, few WT cells responded, while most of the c2gapA – cells showed clear membrane translocation of PH Crac -GFP. Quantitative measurement of the responsiveness and adaptation behavior of WT and c2gapA – cells confirmed the above observation. These results together demonstrate that c2gapA – cells, lacking Ras inhibitor, are more sensitive to chemoattractant stimuli independent of the actin-based cytoskeleton. FIGURE 3 c2gapA – cells are more sensitive to the stimuli at low concentrations and fail to adapt to the stimuli at high concentrations. Montage shows cell response as PIP 3 production monitored through the membrane translocation of the PIP 3 probe PH... The Concentration Range of cAMP Gradients in Which Cells Chemotax Efficiently Is Upshifted in c2gapA – Cells The basal activity of Ras is essential for the regulation of actin dynamics and, more importantly, promotes chemotaxis of Dictyostelium cells in a shallow chemoattractant gradient. We observed the localization of C2GAP1 not only on the protrusion sites but also on the plasma membrane of resting cells, indicating a role of C2GAP1 in regulating both basal and chemoattractant-stimulated Ras signaling. Consistent with the above, c2gapA – cells displayed an enhanced basal Ras activity and sensitivity in response to chemoattractant stimulation. To precisely determine the function of C2GAP1 in chemotaxis in response to gradients at different concentrations, we monitored the chemotaxis behavior of WT and c2gapA – cells in the gradients with a wide concentration range. For the experiments, we used EZ-TAXIScan to apply a well-controlled linear gradient. Without a gradient, c2gapA – cells displayed a bigger random walk than WT cells. In the gradients generated from a source concentration greater than 1 μM, c2gapA – cells, in clear contrast to WT cells, displayed a significant decrease in the four parameters of chemotaxis: migration speed, directionality, total path length, and polarity. When exposed to a gradient at a lower concentration, WT and c2gapA – cells displayed similar directionality. The above results are consistent with the previous report. Next, we monitored chemotaxis behaviors of both WT and c2gapA – cells in response to gradients at low or subsensitive concentrations. We found that in the gradients generated from 1 and 10 nM cAMP sources, c2gapA – cells displayed significantly improved chemotaxing behavior, especially in migration speed, directionality, and polarity, in comparison with CTL cells. In a subsensitive, 0.1 nM cAMP gradient, most WT cells displayed random migration, while the majority of c2gapA – cells displayed directional cell migration with improved directionality and migration speed. Taken together, these data indicate that c2gapA – cells display defective chemotaxis in high-concentration gradients but improved chemotaxis in low- or subsensitive-concentration gradients. The above result indicates that WT cells chemotaxed efficiently through gradients of various chemoattractants ranging from 10 – 9 to 10 – 6 M, while c2gapA – cells did so from 10 – 10 to 10 – 7 M. In other words, the concentration range of cAMP gradients in which cells chemotax efficiently is upshifted in c2gapA – cells. FIGURE 4 The concentration range of cAMP gradients in which cells chemotax efficiently is upshifted in c2gapA – cells. Montages show the traveling path of chemotaxing WT or c2gapA – cells in response to gradients generated from a cAMP source... Discussion An amazing feature of eukaryotic cells is that they sense chemoattractants over an enormous concentration range. We have previously shown that C2GAP1 mediates cAMP receptor cAR1-mediated adaptation. Here, we reveal the molecular mechanism of C2GAP1 membrane targeting by which C2GAP1 controls both GPCR-mediated adaptation and the sensitivity of a cell. More importantly, we show that C2GAP1 allows Dictyostelium cells to sense chemoattractant at a higher concentration range through membrane targeting by lowering cell sensitivity and GPCR-mediated adaptation. Calcium is involved in C2GAP1 membrane targeting. C2GAP1 has a calcium binding domain that is often required for membrane targeting of the host proteins. In contrast to several other C2 domains, which require calcium binding for their membrane translocation, we found a decreased membrane localization of C2GAP1 in the presence of high. Consistent with the above result, iplA – cells without increase in response to cAMP stimulation, displayed an increased, prolonged membrane translocation of C2GAP1-YFP, while cbpG – cells with higher basal and stronger, quicker peaking upon cAMP stimulation exhibited little membrane translocation of C2GAP1, instead, more further withdrawal of C2GAP1 from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasm in response to cAMP stimulation. An intracellular calcium gradient that was higher at the trailing edge of chemotaxing cells has been previously reported. This spatial distribution of might reinforce the leading-front targeting of C2GAP1 in the chemotaxing cells. However, the role of calcium in chemotaxis has been under debate for the past two decades. Initially, chemoattractant-induced calcium influx was thought to play no role in chemotaxis. This conclusion comes from the following two facts: firstly, mouse plcb2 –/ – b3 – / – neutrophils without two major PLC isoforms, PLCβ2/β3, display impaired calcium influx yet show normal chemotaxis ; secondly, Dictyostelium cells lacking the IP 3 receptor show no chemoattractant-induced Ca 2+ response and chemotax just like WT cells do. Recent studies demonstrate the essential role of chemoattractant-induced PLCβ/γ activation and subsequent Ca 2+ response in neutrophil chemotaxis. More importantly, the chemotaxis assays in both studies in Dictyostelium gradients generated from 100 nM cAMP sources, in which we observed little difference in chemotaxis behavior between WT and c2gapA – cells. Importantly, we observed more membrane localization of C2GAP1-YFP in resting cbpG – cells that might be resulted from a higher basal in the cells. Agreeing with the increased localization of C2GAP1 and subsequent downregulation of Ras/Rap1 function, cbpG – cells display decreased adhesion and cell migration. It is important to investigate the chemotaxis behavior of cells lacking mediators of calcium signaling, such as iplA – and cbpG – cells, in response to gradients of different concentrations. Little connection has been made between GPCR-mediated adaptation and the basal activity of a cell. Interestingly, Dictyostelium cells lacking RasGAPs often display higher basal Ras activity, indicating that the regulation of basal Ras activity through RasGAPs might be a common mechanism in Dictyostelium. Recently, it has been shown that active Ras plays a role in cell locomotion and in chemotaxis through very shallow gradients. Thus, we examined the chemotaxis behavior of WT and c2gapA – cells in response to a cAMP gradient over a large concentration range and found that in WT cells chemotaxed better than c2gapA – cells did in gradients at high concentrations, while they displayed chemotaxis capability similar to that of c2gapA – cells gradients at mid-concentration range. In gradients at low concentrations, c2gapA – cells chemotaxed better than WT cells did, indicating a higher sensitivity of c2gapA – cells. We further confirmed that the increased sensitivity of c2gapA – cells is independent of F-actin. Importantly, human neutrophils lacking CAPRI, a RasGAP protein that controls Ras adaptation in GPCR-mediated chemotaxis, are more sensitive to chemoattractant gradients and sense gradients with a lower concentration range. In conclusion, membrane targeting of Ras inhibitors allows both human neutrophils and D. discoideum to sense chemoattractant gradients at a higher concentration range. These findings suggest that locally recruiting a Ras inhibitor of gradient sensing and chemotaxis for sensing an enormous concentration range of chemoattractants is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism. Materials and Methods Cell Lines, Cell Growth, and Differentiation AX2 cells are the parent, WT cell line for c2gapA – cells. iplA – cells were from Dictybase.org. cbpG – cells were from Park et al.. Cells expressing the protein of interest were selected by growth in the presence of 20 μg/ml geneticin or 10 μg/ml blasticidin S, and/or hygromycin with the requirement of double selection. For differentiation, log-phase vegetative cells were harvested from shaking culture and washed twice with developmental buffer. Cells were resuspended at 2 × 10 7 cells/ml in shaking flask at 100 rpm, and allowed to differentiate with 75 nM adenosine 3′:5′-cyclic monophosphate pulses at 6 min intervals for 5–7 h or longer to obtain chemotactic cells. Differentiated cells were diluted to 1 × 10 7 cells/ml in DB buffer with 2.5 mM caffeine and shaken at 200 rpm for 15 min. Plasmids The YC-nano15 vector was obtained from Catherine Pears. PH Crac -RFP and C2GAP1-R616A-GFP were from AK, University of Groningen, Netherlands. Imaging and Data Processing Differentiated cells in DB buffer with 2.5 mM caffeine were plated and allowed to adhere to the cover glass of a 4-well or a 1-well chamber for 10 min, and then covered with DB buffer for the live cell imaging experiment. If necessary, cells were treated with 5.0 μM Latrunculin B for 10 min prior to the experiments. Cells were imaged using a Carl Zeiss Laser Scanning Microscope Zen 780 with a 40x/NA 1.4 Oil DIC Plan-Apochromatic objective. Images were processed and analyzed by Zen 780 software. Images were further processed in Adobe Photoshop, and the intensity of the ROI was explored and analyzed with Microsoft Office Excel. To measure the membrane translocation of the indicated protein, we first measured the intensity change of the cytoplasm in response to uniformly applied stimuli over time. To obtain the relative intensity change of each individual cell during the time lapse, we divided the cytosolic intensity at time 0 by its intensity at given time ; consequently, the relative intensity of any cells at time 0 became 1. To compensate for significant photobleaching that might occur with long-time acquisition, we also normalized the intensity relative to the photobleaching of the cells. Lastly, we calculated and presented the mean and standard deviation of membrane translocation from more than five independent cells. To measure calcium response using the calcium sensor YC-nano15 with D. discoideum cells, we monitored FRET change by sensitized emission FRET measurement, a process previously reported in detail. The FRET signal change is presented as a function of using Zen Software provided by Carl Zeiss Zen 780 software. Immunoprecipitation Assay Cells were differentiated, washed with PM buffer with 2.5 mM caffeine, resuspended to 8 × 10 7 cells per ml in same PM buffer, and kept on ice before assay. If necessary, the cells were stimulated with 10 μM cAMP. 0.5 ml aliquots of cells at indicated time points were lysed with 10 ml immunoprecipitation buffer for 30 min on ice. Cell extracts were centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatant fractions were collected and incubated with 25 μl anti-GFP agarose beads at 4°C for 2 h. Beads were washed four times with immunoprecipitation buffer and proteins were eluted by boiling the beads in 50 μl SDS sample buffer. A second set of aliquots of the cells at each time point was taken for the assessment of total Ras protein in the sample. The indicated proteins were detected by Western blotting using specific antibodies. PIP Strip Assay Cells were suspended with PM buffer and run through a filter system with 5 μm pores. The lysed cells were centrifuged at 16,000 rpm for one min. The supernatants were immediately mixed with immunoprecipitation buffer pre-cooled on ice. PIP-strip membranes were incubated with the mixtures obtained from the above at 4°C for 2 h and washed using IB buffer and then subject to western blot detection of the indicated proteins. EZ-TAXIScan Chemotaxis Assay and Data Analysis The procedure was as previously reported. Briefly, differentiated cells were loaded onto one side of a 4-μm EZ-TAXIScan chamber. The chemoattractants at the indicated concentrations were added to the other side of the well across the terrace to generate a linear gradient which the cells chemotax through. The traveled distance is the traveled length. The length of the terrace is the total length of the gradient generated. The chemoattractant concentration of gradient a cell experienced at each given position depends on both the concentration of the fMLP source and the ratio of the distance the cell traveled from no gradient to the total distance to the cAMP source. In other words, C = C s our ce × ratio of the traveled length to the total length). The cells migrated for 30 min at room temperature. Images were taken for 30 min at 15 s intervals. For chemotaxis parameter measurements, 25 cells in each group were analyzed with DIAS software. Chemotaxis behaviors are measured as four parameters: directionality, specifically “upward” directionality, where 0 represents random movement and 1 represents straight movement toward the gradient; speed, defined as the distance that the centroid of the cell moves as a function of time; total path length, which is the total distance the cell has traveled; and roundness for polarization, which is calculated as the ratio of the width to the length of the cell. Thus, a circle is 1 and a line is 0. Student’s t -test was used to calculate the p -values. The bar graphs of chemotaxis parameters in mean ± SD were plotted with Microsoft Office Excel or shown directly in the table. Data Availability Statement The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/ Supplementary Material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author/s. Author Contributions XX designed the research. XX, SB, HP, and XW performed the research and analyzed the data. XX, AK, TJe, and TJi wrote the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version. Conflict of Interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Publisher’s Note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Footnotes Funding. This work was supported by the intramural fund of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health. Supplementary Material The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Article information Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021; 9: 725073. Published online 2021 Jul 30. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.725073 PMCID: PMC8362602 PMID: 34395450 Xuehua Xu, 1, * Smit Bhimani, 1 Henderikus Pots, 2 Xi Wen, 1 Taeck J. Jeon, 3 Arjan Kortholt, 2 and Tian Jin 1 Xuehua Xu 1 Chemotaxis Signaling Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, United States Find articles by Xuehua Xu Smit Bhimani 1 Chemotaxis Signaling Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, United States Find articles by Smit Bhimani Henderikus Pots 2 Department of Cell Biochemistry, Univeristy of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands Find articles by Henderikus Pots Xi Wen 1 Chemotaxis Signaling Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, United States Find articles by Xi Wen Taeck J. Jeon 3 Department of Biology and BK21-Plus Research Team for Bioactive Control Technology, College of Natural Sciences, Chosun University, Gwangju, South Korea Find articles by Taeck J. Jeon Arjan Kortholt 2 Department of Cell Biochemistry, Univeristy of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands Find articles by Arjan Kortholt Tian Jin 1 Chemotaxis Signaling Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, United States Find articles by Tian Jin 1 Chemotaxis Signaling Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, United States 2 Department of Cell Biochemistry, Univeristy of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands 3 Department of Biology and BK21-Plus Research Team for Bioactive Control Technology, College of Natural Sciences, Chosun University, Gwangju, South Korea Edited by: Robin S. B. Williams, Royal Holloway, University of London, United Kingdom Reviewed by: Shashi Prakash Singh, University of Glasgow, United Kingdom; Yoichiro Kamimura, RIKEN Center for Biosystems Dynamics Research, Japan *Correspondence: Xuehua Xu, vog.hin.diain@uxx This article was submitted to Molecular and Cellular Pathology, a section of the journal Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology Received 2021 Jun 14; Accepted 2021 Jul 12. Copyright © 2021 Xu, Bhimani, Pots, Wen, Jeon, Kortholt and Jin. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License. The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author and the copyright owner are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. Articles from Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology are provided here courtesy of Frontiers Media SA 