 Cells can use self recognition to achieve cooperative behaviors. Self-recognition genes are thought to principally evolve in tandem with partner self-recognition alleles. However, other constraints on protein evolution could exist. Here, we have identified an interaction outside self-recognition loci that could constrain the sequence variation of a self-recognition protein. We show that during collective swarm expansion in Proteus mirabilis, self-recognition signaling co-opts SdaC, a serine transporter. Serine uptake is crucial for bacterial survival and colonization. Single-residue variants of SdaC reveal that self recognition requires an open conformation of the protein; serine transport is dispensable. A distant ortholog from Escherichia coli is sufficient for self recognition; however, a paralogous serine transporter, YhaO, is not. Thus, SdaC couples self recognition and serine transport, likely through a shared molecular interface. Self-recognition proteins may follow the framework of a complex interaction network rather than an isolated two-protein system. Understanding the molecular and ecological constraints on self-recognition proteins lays the groundwork for insights into the evolution of self recognition and emergent collective behaviors. IMPORTANCE Bacteria can receive secret messages from kin during migration. For Proteus mirabilis, these messages are necessary for virulence in multispecies infections. We show that a serine transporter, conserved among gammaproteobacteria, enables self-recognition. Molecular co-option of nutrient uptake could limit the sequence variation of these message proteins. SdaC is the primary transporter for l -serine, a vital metabolite for colonization during disease. Unlike many self-recognition receptors, SdaC is sufficiently conserved between species to achieve recognition. The predicted open conformation is shared by transport and recognition. SdaC reveals the interdependence of communication and nutrient acquisition. As the broader interactions of self-recognition proteins are studied, features shared among microbial self-recognition systems, such as those of Dictyostelium spp. and Neurospora spp., could emerge. KEYWORDS: serine, serine transport, LeuT fold proteins, self recognition, kin recognition, Proteus mirabilis, protein evolution INTRODUCTION Self recognition regulates diverse processes in organisms across the tree of life. These vital roles include cell-cell communication, morphogenesis, and cooperation. Sequence variation in self-recognition proteins specifies genotypic identity, either on the level of individual cells or across a clonal population of kin cells, and informs discrimination between different identity groups. For example, individual neurons express their identity through a unique set of clustered protocadherin proteins that interact between cells to inform neuronal self-avoidance and proper circuit formation. Kin cells of filamentous fungi can fuse to share resources in a syncytial lifestyle, and social microbes use self recognition to identify, and coordinate with, kin during group migrations and fruiting body formation. Self-recognition proteins that encode genotype information, while diverse across biological systems, often contain regions—stretches of amino acids—that vary between lineages to barcode a range of identities. The molecular mechanisms that regulate variation in self-recognition proteins are not fully elucidated. The study of the evolution and specificity of self-recognition proteins has primarily followed a two-protein framework, typified by the well-studied two-component signal transduction system. From studies on eukaryotes, we know that protein-protein interactions affect how self-recognition proteins change over time. For clustered protocadherins, residues coevolve across the homophilic interaction interface. The allelic diversity of self-recognition genes results from balancing selection. Still, no comprehensive model unifies genetics and molecular mechanisms. A similar gap between gene evolution and protein biochemistry exists for microbial self recognition. One can directly address this schism by studying the broader interaction networks that shape self-recognition evolution, in both individual microbial cells and populations. Many microbes use self recognition to engage in collective behaviors selectively with kin. Microbial populations can build large, structured biofilms or migrate collectively across surfaces. For example, Proteus mirabilis cells engage in a collective migration known as swarming, allowing populations to cover surfaces efficiently. Individual cells communicate using two sets of self-recognition proteins to discern clonal siblings from others. The Idr system appears to be a more traditional lethal effector-immunity pair where the entire effector sequence varies between strains. In contrast, the Ids system is nonlethal, and only short variable regions within IdsD and its partner IdsE vary between strains. Siblings gain preferred access to collective motility; nonself cells enter a transient altered state, resulting in exclusion from the swarming population. Unlike many cooperative self-recognition proteins found on the cell’s surface, P. mirabilis cells inject the protein signal IdsD into adjacent neighbors. Mechanisms for localization and downstream signaling in the recipient cell are unknown. For delivery into the recipient cell, IdsD may interact with a receptor protein residing in the inner membrane. Models propose that IdsD localizes to the inner membrane of recipient P. mirabilis cells, but there is less clarity about the membrane insertion mechanism. A comparable model is the contact-dependent inhibition toxin CdiA. In Escherichia coli, CdiA can promote collective behavior through cell-cell adhesion. Transferred from one cell into its neighbor, CdiA requires outer and inner membrane receptors for delivery to a recipient cell’s cytoplasm. Uptake depends on the interaction between CdiA’s modular translocation domain and a species-specific host receptor. None of IdsD’s species-specific binding partners—its chaperone IdsC in the donor cell and its self-recognition partner IdsE in the recipient cell —could reasonably act as a receptor for delivery to the inner membrane. The variable region of IdsD likely binds to the variable region of IdsE but does not appear to be required for interaction with IdsC. Different interfaces for each partner could interact within the structure of IdsD. Although receptors on the inner or outer membrane have remained elusive, identifying these proteins is necessary to describe self-recognition pathways and elucidate further constraints on IdsD’s evolution. With this in mind, consider bacteriophage-host interactions as a framework for studying the molecular evolution of self-recognition proteins. Many phage receptors are nutrient transporters on the outer and inner membranes. Phages exploit these host transporters, leading to the rapid coevolution of competing proteins—an “arms race,” as reported for outer membrane proteins. While mutations in the receptor can disrupt interactions and prevent killing, modifying these transporters can also carry fitness costs due to the importance of nutrient uptake. Receptors for self-recognition proteins, particularly nutrient transporters, could likewise carry both costs and benefits. Discerning these interactions could reveal molecular constraints on the evolution of self-recognition systems. Ids-mediated self recognition in P. mirabilis provides an opportunity to examine this concept. Cells can bypass recognition-triggered limitations by removing the self-recognition genes or the cell-to-cell transport system. Here, we show that another mechanism is the disruption of the serine transporter SdaC. Self-recognition signaling specifically uses SdaC during collective motility. By analyzing single-residue variants that alter the protein state, we show that self-recognition signaling requires an open conformation but not l -serine transport. Supporting the importance of a protein interface, we saw that an ortholog from E. coli is sufficient for self-recognition. A paralogous serine transporter in P. mirabilis, YhaO, is not. Therefore, SdaC moonlights to couple self recognition with serine transport, revealing a critical interaction and a potential regulator for self-recognition protein evolution. RESULTS Disruption of the gene sdaC, encoding the dominant serine transporter during swarming, bypasses self-recognition control. Within a mixed population, nonkin that evade self recognition can potentially take advantage of the benefits of collective motility and other public goods to survive without contributing. Organisms can escape self-recognition control using several strategies. Spontaneous mutations that restore collective motility have removed self-recognition communication by either disrupting self-recognition genes themselves or disrupting the necessary transport system. To identify additional mechanisms, we modified an unbiased assay for isolating self-recognition escape mutants emerging from an initial swarm colony. We selected 12 novel independent mutant strains for further study. Whole-genome sequencing showed that these strains contained mutations in the gene sdaC ; all, except two, were deleterious to a full-length protein. We reasoned that sdaC disruption might constitute another mode of escape from recognition-based swarm exclusion. FIG 1 SdaC is required for Ids-mediated self recognition and is the dominant l -serine transporter during swarming. Strains containing de novo mutations emerged from a restricted swarm colony of strain BB2000 Δ ids /pIdsBBΔ... Direct deletion and complementation of sdaC in a clean genetic background could confirm this proposed role. We generated a nonpolar deletion of sdaC in the nonself Δ idsE background, resulting in strain ACH01. In a colony of the Δ idsE strain, each cell perceives others as nonself, resulting in restricted collective swarm motility. Strain ACH01 showed a relative 3-fold increase in collective swarm motility. In contrast, the plasmid-based expression of sdaC in ACH01 restricted motility back to the nonself strain’s level. The rescue of collective motility in ACH01 is not due to a change in the self-recognition protein’s transport. The sdaC gene was dispensable for IdsD secretion as measured using a self-recognition assay based on boundary formation between colliding swarming populations; IdsD secretion into oncoming cells is required for a macroscopic boundary to form between swarm colonies. Thus, sdaC is necessary for self-recognition signal transduction in the receiving cell. The SdaC protein is a predicted membrane-bound serine transporter but without confirmed function in Proteus spp. In E. coli and other enteric Gram-negative bacteria, SdaC is an integral inner membrane protein that brings serine into the cell coupled to a proton. Serine deaminases primarily metabolize imported serine to pyruvate. SdaC likely prefers l -serine, and this pathway for l -serine uptake and degradation appears distinct from that of d -serine in P. mirabilis. Proteus spp. contain genes with sequence similarity to these l -serine import and utilization genes. We confirmed the membrane localization of P. mirabilis SdaC by expressing an mCherry fusion from its native promoter. As with E. coli, the deletion of sdaC does not produce any significant growth or motility defects in P. mirabilis. Serine uptake and utilization in P. mirabilis via SdaA, SdaB, and SdaC resemble those in E. coli. Therefore, we can use what is known about E. coli to develop tools to investigate the function of SdaC further. Serine transport should contribute to the internal serine pool and could shift growth dynamics. Deleting the E. coli serine deaminases increases the internal serine concentration, causing physiological effects. Direct inhibition of an enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of threonine and isoleucine leads to growth defects in minimal medium. The substitution of highly concentrated serine for alanine during peptidoglycan biosynthesis leads to cell wall instability. Informed by these results, we made a P. mirabilis strain with a serine-dependent reporter phenotype. Removing the comparable l -serine deaminases resulted in strain ACH04. Consistent with the serine toxicity observed in E. coli, this strain had the expected delayed growth in minimal medium containing exogenous l -serine but not in the absence of l -serine. Swarm colony cells were also lysed and subjected to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis to measure serine concentrations. ACH04 cells contained an ∼400-fold-higher intracellular serine concentration than the wild-type parent. They also displayed less swarm expansion than the wild type. Based on subsequent experiments and previous reports, serine-induced cell wall instability in strain ACH04 evidently causes the reduced growth rate and swarm colony expansion under nutrient-rich conditions. Therefore, swarm expansion in the ACH04 strain background can serve as a readout for internal serine levels. We reasoned that if SdaC were a serine transporter in P. mirabilis, then the deletion of sdaC would alleviate the defects in strain ACH04. ACH05, the engineered strain containing an sdaC deletion in the ACH04 background, showed a partial rescue of growth in minimal medium with serine. Internal serine concentrations decreased by ∼30-fold compared to ACH04, while swarm expansion increased by roughly 8-fold. Adding back SdaC to ACH05, through plasmid-based expression, reproduced the growth and colony expansion defects. G ). However, two other predicted serine transporters, sstT and yhaO, could play a role. To examine any potential contributions to internal l -serine during swarming, we individually removed sstT and yhaO from the ACH04 background. Neither strain showed swarm colony expansion and instead looked like the ACH04 parental strain. Thus, SdaC is indeed a serine transporter in P. mirabilis and is dominant during collective motility. The open conformation of SdaC is sufficient for self-recognition signaling, whereas a full range of conformations is required for serine transport. Of the possible ways in which SdaC could function in self-recognition, two seemed most probable. SdaC serine transport could regulate downstream self-recognition signaling by modulating internal serine levels. Alternatively, a specific conformation of SdaC could be a required binding interface. Indeed, point mutations in SdaC already hinted at a molecular mechanism for its function in signal transduction. Two independent full-length SdaC disruptions emerged from the suppressor screen: G328V and G332R. These residues sit in a predicted interface that stabilizes the open conformation of LeuT, a similar transport protein. In combination with the assay toolkit, additional reduced-function point mutations could reveal SdaC’s role in self recognition. FIG 2 SdaC’s conformation determines serine transport and IdsD signaling. PyMOL figures of a structural model for P. mirabilis SdaC from I-TASSER to make this model based on the primary amino acid sequence and solved structures of similar proteins. LeuT fold transporters sample at least three conformations: open, closed, and an intermediate state. A V222W mutation would reasonably bias the SdaC protein to the open conformation ; B ); an equivalent conversion in NRAMP favors the open conformation. The mutations in the suppressor strains, G328V and G332R, are predicted to bias SdaC to the closed conformation B ). Altering either of two residues in the substrate-binding site would allow the nonspecific transport of additional amino acids B ) while continuing to sample both open and closed conformations. Each mutation was introduced independently into sdaC expressed from its native promoter on a plasmid. The engineered variants were visualized using an N-terminal mCherry fusion comparable to the wild type and localized to the P. mirabilis cell envelope. The mutant strains provide molecular levers to distinguish contributions to serine transport versus self-recognition. Bias toward an open or closed conformation should restrict serine transport compared to that of the wild type and the mutant that transports nonspecifically. Therefore, we tested transport function in the ACH05 background, which lacks the serine deaminases. All strains grew equivalently in minimal medium. As described above, ACH05 has decreased internal serine concentrations and grows like the wild type in minimal medium with exogenous serine. The addition of transgenic SdaC resulted in attenuated growth. The open-biased and closed-biased variants grew like ACH05 in minimal medium plus excess serine. However, the nonspecific variants showed attenuated growth in minimal medium plus excess serine, much like ACH05/pSdaC. This reduced liquid growth did not translate to altered swarm expansion. All mutant strains expanded beyond a radius of 10 mm, similar to ACH05, instead of being restricted as observed for ACH05/pSdaC, suggesting that serine transport is limited to certain conditions of amino acid availability and not fully functional compared to the wild-type protein. These results support that serine transport is not itself required for swarm colony expansion under these conditions. Suppose that self recognition relies on SdaC-mediated serine transport. In that case, the conformations biased to open or closed should prevent Ids-mediated recognition signaling, allowing swarm colonies of BB2000 Δ idsE to expand. To test this hypothesis, we introduced each SdaC variant into the ACH01 background. The closed-biased variants showed increased swarm colony expansion, consistent with these mutations emerging from the original suppressor screen. B ). In contrast, the open-biased and nonspecific variants exhibited restricted swarm expansion comparable to that of ACH01/pSdaC, which is the wild-type protein. Altogether, these results indicate that self-recognition signaling requires SdaC to sample the open conformation but not transport serine. These SdaC functions are distinct and overlapping. The SdaC homolog from E. coli, but not the paralogous serine transporter YhaO, can support IdsD self-recognition signaling. The natural sequence variation among similar proteins provides an avenue for understanding what molecular aspects of SdaC might be critical for self recognition. SdaC from E. coli is a diverged ortholog whose function is understood. As stated above, SdaC is in a broader conserved pathway with SdaA and SdaB, apparently shared between E. coli and P. mirabilis. On the other hand, YhaO, a paralogous predicted serine/H + symporter in P. mirabilis, is a more distant homolog. The literature indicates that YhaO can reduce cysteine toxicity under certain conditions, but it does not import cysteine and is not required for cysteine utilization. Import of d -serine and l -serine appears to be the primary function of YhaO in E. coli. YhaO shares much less sequence identity with SdaC-Pmir than SdaC-Ecol, yet conserved residues are visible throughout the protein, especially in the predicted transmembrane domains. I-TASSER-based predictions for the structures of SdaC-Ecol and YhaO show that they also have a LeuT fold and share the same I-TASSER templates as SdaC-Pmir. Therefore, SdaC-Pmir, SdaC-Ecol, and YhaO share sequence similarities and predicted tertiary structures. FIG 3 Sequence alignment of SdaC orthologs from P. mirabilis and E. coli and the paralog YhaO from P. mirabilis. Aligned to each other are SdaC from P. mirabilis BB2000, SdaC from E. coli K-12 MG1655, and YhaO from BB2000 using Clustal... Suppose that sampling an open conformation is the critical molecular mechanism for SdaC’s function in self-recognition. In that case, SdaC-Ecol and YhaO should be able to replace SdaC in P. mirabilis. To interrogate this hypothesis, we expressed SdaC-Ecol and YhaO from an inducible promoter in the ACH05 background. The resultant strains showed growth defects in minimal medium with added serine but not in minimal medium. Therefore, both SdaC-Ecol and YhaO are sufficient to substitute for SdaC’s serine transport function in P. mirabilis. Next, SdaC-Ecol and YhaO were expressed from an inducible promoter in the nonself ACH01 background and subjected to the swarm expansion assay. Strains producing SdaC-Pmir or SdaC-Ecol showed restricted swarm expansion. The strain producing YhaO expanded more fully. Despite the sequence divergence, only SdaC-Ecol could substitute for SdaC and reproduce self recognition. FIG 4 SdaC homologs share a similar predicted structure and function, but only the SdaC ortholog from E. coli can complement in self recognition. Growth curve of ACH05 expressing an empty vector, pTet-SdaC-Pmir, pTet-SdaC-Ecol,... Theoretically, YhaO might not sufficiently sample an open conformation, so we introduced a point mutation to bias the protein. We constructed an open-biased S234W variant of YhaO analogous to the V222W variant of SdaC. Unlike wild-type YhaO, there was no growth defect for the open-biased variant expressed in ACH05 when grown in minimal medium with serine. This disrupted serine transport is consistent with the results for the open-biased SdaC variant. We then moved the open-biased variant into the ACH01 background. The resultant strain showed swarm expansion similar to that for wild-type YhaO. YhaO in the open conformation is sufficiently different from SdaC that it does not work in self-recognition. While SdaC’s transport function is conserved among similar proteins, there is specificity to its conformation and sequence needed for self-recognition signal transduction. DISCUSSION SdaC, a serine transporter, moonlights in the self-recognition signaling pathway. The transduced self-identity signal IdsD is a type VI secretion substrate predicted to localize to a recipient cell’s inner membrane. Although inner membrane transporters are not known as receptors for type VI secretion substrates, we propose that SdaC functions as a receptor to promote IdsD insertion. Consistent with this hypothesis, disrupting SdaC in E. coli also provides resistance to microcin V and phage C1. Multiple inner membrane proteins are nutrient transporters and receptors for incoming proteins. For example, the contact-dependent inhibition protein CdiA requires specific inner membrane transporters for proposed insertion. Based on work in CdiA, a predominant hypothesis is that the membrane protein’s functions work independently: nutrient transport versus translocation of protein. Our data expand this previous model. For SdaC, self recognition and nutrient transport are interdependent, likely affecting the protein’s evolutionary trajectory. FIG 5 Model in which SdaC functions in serine transport and self-recognition signaling. Cells need SdaC to sample an open conformation for either self recognition or serine transport to occur. Like CdiA receptors, self-recognition signaling and collective motility do not specifically require l -serine transport. E ). Removing SdaC allows cells to bypass Ids-mediated self-recognition. Nonself populations regained collective motility when SdaC was not functional. Mutations that biased SdaC to an open conformation were sufficient to permit Ids-mediated self recognition regardless of l -serine transport. However, the open conformation is accessible only when SdaC undergoes the conformational dynamics needed for active transport. These two functions of SdaC are distinct but not independent. High internal serine concentrations are toxic, inducing cell envelope stress and fitness defects of slower growth and no swarming. Stopping serine transport by deleting SdaC rescues serine toxicity in mutant strains lacking serine deaminases. G ). However, deleting the two other serine transporters, SstT and YhaO, does not relieve serine toxicity during swarming. Therefore, internal serine levels, partially controlled by SdaC activity, are important during collective motility, and it is during this collective motility that self recognition occurs. Expanding upon proposals for phage receptors, the coupling of SdaC functions may limit the emergence of mutations in both pathways. Ecological context could constrain SdaC evolution. In bacteriocin and phage receptors, the local ecology and associated fitness trade-offs impact the emergence of intersectional mutations. Serine is a crucial metabolite for urinary tract and gut pathogens. Moreover, serine homeostasis is vital. Elevated internal serine poisons cells, leading to growth defects and susceptibility to cell envelope stress. Too little serine starves cells of a significant amino acid. SdaC is the critical l -serine transporter during swarming, H ), a behavior correlated with disease. The SdaA/SdaB/SdaC pathway for l -serine uptake and degradation appears distinct from that of d -serine in P. mirabilis. Furthermore, this l -serine uptake pathway holds for distantly related species, suggesting its evolutionary conservation and importance. Our results support that SdaC is a bifunctional conserved molecular interface, constrained by Proteus ’ ecology. SdaC structure may limit plasticity and exploration of sequence space in buried regions. Often, exposed loops of receptor proteins are the main interaction interface based on outer membrane proteins coopted by phages and toxins. However, this model does not appear to hold for SdaC from E. coli and P. mirabilis. Sequences for the exposed periplasmic loops are ∼65% identical. At the same time, the transmembrane regions are ∼86% identical. E. coli SdaC can function in self-recognition and transport. The paralogous P. mirabilis YhaO protein, the E. coli homolog of which transports both l - and d -serine, also aligns with SdaC and transports l -serine. However, YhaO cannot substitute for self-recognition, even when biased into an open conformation. D ). Our data suggest that the membrane-localized pocket, predicted to be exposed conditionally in the open conformation, is the interaction interface. SdaC may follow conventional evolution ideas for integral membrane helical proteins, which are predicted to evolve slowly in buried regions due to molecular constraints. Multiconformation proteins are further constrained. The synergy between ecological fitness and structural constraints could decrease the rate of SdaC sequence changes, which needs to be further explored. SdaC conservation could potentially regulate IdsD sequence drift to preserve signal fidelity. We have discussed the constraints on SdaC, but what constraints exist for the identity signal IdsD? Self-recognition genes contain polymorphic regions that can serve as a proxy for relatedness. A dominant model is that the evolution of self-recognition proteins is constrained by interactions with themselves or other self-recognition proteins, driving variation in their interaction interface. However, IdsD binds other self-recognition proteins such as its chaperone IdsC and its partner recognition protein IdsE. Given these data, the current model of the IdsD-IdsE interaction being the primary driver of IdsD evolution seems limited. An alternative framework to consider would be a systems-level interaction network. Although prominent examples elude us in bacteria, eukaryotes provide examples of combinatorial protein-protein interactions during signal transduction such as multisubunit G proteins with G-protein-coupled receptors and regulatory partners. Importantly, the functional diversification of G proteins is constrained by structurally linked interaction interfaces. Therefore, we hypothesize that SdaC, a nutrient transport protein, may act as an additional source of selective pressure. IdsD requires SdaC in a sequence-specific manner. Although predicted to have a similar structure and function, YhaO cannot replace SdaC for recognition. For uptake, IdsD must retain compatibility with SdaC, in which case SdaC could be a bottleneck for recognition signal transduction in the receiving cell. To further explore this hypothesis, one would next seek if changes in the different interaction interfaces between IdsD and its partners impact the evolution and specificity of one another. Molecular cross talk mirrors observed interactions between nutrient availability, collective behavior, and self recognition in many organisms. Collective behaviors are associated with nutrient limitation in other microbes, fungi, and plants. Collective behaviors can allow the sharing of nutrients and promote developmental processes such as fruiting body formation. Self-recognition signaling allows preferential collective action with kin, an advantage during nutrient limitation. Functional coupling between self recognition and organism-relevant pathways such as nutrient transport, as shown for SdaC, could constrain identity signal evolution. For other contexts such as self-avoidance and syncytial fusion, there might be other core proteins that are evolutionarily constrained. Along these lines, conserved nonrecognition proteins might anchor self-recognition proteins in multiple systems. MATERIALS AND METHODS Bacterial strains and media. The strains and plasmids used in this study are described in Table 1. P. mirabilis strains were maintained on low-swarm agar. CM55 blood agar base agar was used for swarm-permissive nutrient plates. Cultures of all strains were grown overnight at 37°C in LB broth under aerobic conditions. For growth curve assays, cells were grown in minimal medium supplemented with 10 mM l -serine when stated. Kanamycin was used at a concentration of 35 μg/mL for plasmid maintenance and added to swarm and growth media when appropriate. Other antibiotics were used at the following concentrations for transforming plasmids into P. mirabilis : 15 μg/mL tetracycline and 25 μg/mL streptomycin. Anhydrotetracycline was used to induce gene expression from the tetracycline promoter at a concentration of 10 nM in the medium when stated. TABLE 1 Strains used in this study Random mutagenesis of IdsE and spontaneous suppressor collection. Plasmids pIdsBB-IdsE-mut1 and pIdsBB-IdsE-mut2 were constructed by amplifying the idsE gene using primers oAC006 and oAC007 from the pIdsBB expression system containing a C-terminal GFPmut2 fusion using error-prone PCR with the GeneMorph II random mutagenesis kit and ligated back into the same pIdsBB expression vector using the restriction enzymes SacI and BamHI. Swarm-capable spontaneous mutants of the BB2000 Δ ids strains carrying pIdsBB-IdsE-mut1 or pIdsBB-IdsE-mut2 were isolated. Starting from frozen stocks, the stable recovery of swarm expansion was verified. Plasmids were miniprepped and retransformed into the BB2000 Δ ids strain background to screen for plasmid-based suppressors, which were removed from further analysis. Boundary assays were performed to screen for defects in the production or secretion of IdsD, and these suppressors were removed from further analysis. Seven of the remaining suppressor mutants were whole-genome sequenced. The second set of swarm-capable spontaneous mutants was isolated from BB2000 Δ idsE carrying pTet-IdsE-mut3 and from ACH06. The idsE -mut3 sequence was amplified from pIdsBB-IdsE-T246A-S247A-T248A using primers oAC006 and oAC041 and ligated into the anhydrotetracycline-inducible vector using the enzymes SacI and Bsu36I. Starting from frozen stocks, the stable recovery of swarm expansion was verified. For suppressors derived from BB2000 Δ idsE /pTet-IdsE-mut3, the promoter and gene were sequenced using Sanger sequencing to confirm that causative mutations were chromosomal. Boundary assays were performed to screen for defects in the production or secretion of IdsD, and these suppressor mutant strains were excluded from further analysis. Five of the remaining suppressor strains were whole-genome sequenced. Whole-genome sequencing and variant calling. For the first round of sequencing, isolates were subjected to phenol-chloroform extractions to isolate genomic DNA. gDNA was sheared using a Covaris S220 system, and a library for whole-genome sequencing was prepared using the PrepX ILM DNA library kit for the Apollo 324 next-generation sequencing library prep system. The library was sequenced as 75-bp paired-end reads using an Illumina NextSeq 500 system. The Bauer Core Facility at Harvard University performed all genome sequencing. For subsequent sequencing of the second set of mutants, gDNA was isolated as described above, but library prep using a Kapa HyperPrep kit was performed by the Bauer Core Facility. The library was sequenced as 150-bp paired-end reads using an Illumina NextSeq 500 system by the Bauer Core Facility. Breseq was used to perform variant calling of Illumina NextSeq reads against the BB2000 reference genome. Plasmid construction. Restriction digestion was performed using the restriction enzymes described below. Ligations were resolved in OneShot Omnimax2 T1R competent cells or SM10 λ pir cells. The resultant plasmids were confirmed by Sanger sequencing, and the correct resultant plasmids were then transformed into P. mirabilis as described previously, using E. coli conjugative strain MFDpir. Table S2 contains the nucleotide sequences for the primers used, all of which contain the prefix “oAC.” For pSdaC, the sdaC gene, including the ∼1-kb upstream putative promoter region, was amplified using oAC072 and oAC071 and ligated into the pTet vector using the restriction enzymes NheI and PshAI to construct pSdaC. The empty vector is derived from pSdaC, containing no promoter or gene of interest but the rest of the backbone, including kanamycin resistance, and the origin of replication is intact. For pTet-SdaC-Pmir, the sdaC gene was amplified from pSdaC using oAC208 and oAC071. Next, the sequence encoding the tetracycline promoter was amplified from pTet-FLAG-IdsE-mut3 with the addition of a 3×FLAG tag using oAC068, oAC196, oAC197, oAC198, and oAC207. The tetracycline promoter and sdaC gene were joined using overlap extension PCR with oAC068 and oAC071. The insert was ligated into the pTet vector using NheI and PshAI. For pTet-SdaC-Ecol, the sdaC gene was amplified from E. coli K-12 MG1655 using oAC177 and oAC178. Next, the tetracycline promoter sequence was amplified from the pTet vector using oAC68 and oAC185. The sdaC and tetracycline promoter sequences were joined using overlap extension PCR with oAC68 and oAC178. The insert was ligated into the pTet vector using NheI and Bsu36I. For pTet-YhaO, the yhaO gene was amplified from P. mirabilis BB2000 using oAC187 and oAC188. Next, the tetracycline promoter sequence was amplified from the pTet vector using oAC68 and oAC186. The yhaO gene and tetracycline promoter sequence were joined using overlap extension PCR with oAC68 and oAC188. The insert was ligated into the pTet vector using NheI and Bsu36I. SdaC variants were constructed by amplifying the sdaC gene from pSdaC using complementary primers containing the mutation along with oAC072 or oAC068 and oAC071 in overlap extension PCR. The sdaC gene containing the mutation was ligated back into the pSdaC vector using the enzymes NheI and PshAI. The primers for each mutation were oAC264 and oAC265 for I115A, oAC268 and oAC269 for H325A, oAC293 and oAC294 for V222W, oAC118 and oAC119 for G332R, and oAC227 and oAC228 for G328V. The YhaO variant was constructed using complementary primers oAC314 and oAC315 containing the S324W mutation along with flanking primers oAC68 and oAC188 in overlap extension PCR. The insert was ligated into pTet-YhaO with the enzymes NheI and Bsu36I. Strain construction. All chromosomal deletions were performed as described previously, using pKNG101-derived suicide vectors. For strain ACH01, 500-bp regions adjacent to either side of sdaC with restriction sites were amplified using oAC046 through oAC049 and ligated into pKNG101 using the restriction enzymes ApaI and SpeI. The resulting vector was mated into BB2000 Δ idsE. Matings were subjected to antibiotic selection on LSW agar. Candidate strains were subjected to sucrose counterselection as described previously. Double recombinants were confirmed by PCR of the surrounding regions using oAC113 and oA114. ACH01 was confirmed by whole-genome sequencing. For strain ACH04, the regions flanking the sdaB gene were amplified using overlap extension PCR with oAC050-oAC053 and ligated into pKNG101 using the enzymes ApaI and SpeI. The resulting vector was mated into BB2000 and subjected to sucrose selection. Double recombinants were confirmed by colony PCR of the surrounding region using oAC113 and oAC114. The regions flanking the sdaA gene were amplified using overlap extension PCR with oAC141-oAC144 and ligated into pKNG101 using the enzymes ApaI and SpeI. The resulting vector was mated into BB2000 Δ sdaB and subjected to sucrose selection. Double recombinants were confirmed by PCR of the surrounding region using oAC153 and oAC154. For strain ACH05, the sdaA deletion vector used to construct ACH04 was mated into BB2000 and confirmed by PCR of the sdaA region using oAC153 and oAC154. The regions flanking the sdaB-sdaC genes were amplified using overlap extension PCR with oAC46, oAC53, oAC54, and oAC55 and ligated into pKNG101 using the enzymes ApaI and SpeI. The resulting vector was mated into the Δ sdaA strain and subjected to sucrose selection. Double recombinants were confirmed by PCR of the surrounding region using oAC113 and oAC114. Strain ACH05 was confirmed by whole-genome sequencing. For strain ACH04 Δ sstT, the regions flanking the sstT gene were amplified using overlap extension PCR with oAC145-oAC148 and ligated into pKNG101 using the enzymes ApaI and SpeI. The resulting vector was mated into ACH04 and subjected to sucrose selection. ACH04 Δ sstT was confirmed by PCR amplification of the surrounding region using oAC156 and oAC157. For strain ACH04 Δ yhaO, the regions flanking the yhaO gene were amplified using overlap extension PCR with oAC161-oAC164 and ligated into pKNG101 using the enzymes ApaI and SpeI. The resulting vector was mated into ACH04 and subjected to sucrose selection. ACH04 Δ yhaO was confirmed by PCR amplification of the surrounding region using oAC179 and oAC180. Growth curve. Cultures grown overnight were normalized to an optical density at 600 nm of 0.1 in minimal medium supplemented with 10 mM l -serine when stated. Both cultures were supplemented with kanamycin for plasmid maintenance when appropriate. Normalized cultures were grown overnight at 37°C, with periodic shaking, in a Tecan Infinite 200 Pro microplate reader. Swarm expansion. Cultures grown overnight were normalized to an OD 600 of 0.1, and swarm-permissive nutrient plates supplemented with kanamycin were inoculated with 2 μL of the normalized culture in the center. Plates were incubated at room temperature for 2 days, and the radii of actively migrating swarms starting from the edge of the inoculum were measured using Fiji. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry of l -serine in P. mirabilis cells. P. mirabilis cells were harvested by centrifugation from three swarm-permissive plates after incubation at 37°C for 16 to 20 h. Cells were sequentially resuspended and centrifuged in 1 mL of 100% LB broth, 80% LB broth, 60% LB broth, 40% LB broth, 20% LB broth, or water. Cell pellets were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C. Pellets were resuspended in 1 mL cold LC-MS-grade methanol and lysed by vortexing for 10 min with cell disruptor beads. The lysate was transferred to an 8-mL glass vial with an additional 1-mL cold methanol rinse of the lysis tube. Four milliliters of cold LC-MS-grade chloroform was added, and samples were vortexed for 1 min. Two milliliters of LC-MS-grade water containing 0.1 μL of MSK-A2-1.2 stable isotope-labeled amino acid standards was added before vortexing for 1 min. After centrifugation for 10 min at 3,000 rpm, 3.5 mL of the upper aqueous phase was transferred to a new glass vial and stored at −80°C. After removing the organic chloroform phase, the remaining interphase was dried completely before resuspension in Tris-buffered saline for protein quantification using a Bradford assay. The aqueous phase was evaporated under nitrogen flow and used for LC-MS, which was performed by the Small Molecule Mass Spectrometry Core Facility at Harvard University. Bioinformatics. We used I-TASSER to predict the protein structure of SdaC-Pmir. Figures of structural models were made using PyMOL. Amino acid sequences in Fig. 3 were aligned using Clustal Omega. Sequence alignments were visualized in Jalview. Data analysis. All figures and statistical values were generated in Prism. For swarm assays with a sample size of greater than five data points per strain, a Mann-Whitney nonparametric two-tailed test was used to calculate the statistical significance of either a P value of >0.01 or a P value of <0.01. Data availability. Strains and primary data are available upon request. 