 Using a self-generated hypoxic assay, we show that the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum displays a remarkable collective aerotactic behavior. When a cell colony is covered, cells quickly consume the available oxygen and form a dense ring moving outwards at constant speed and density. To decipher this collective process, we combined two technological developments: porphyrin-based O 2 -sensing films and microfluidic O 2 gradient generators. We showed that Dictyostelium cells exhibit aerotactic and aerokinetic response in a low range of O 2 concentration indicative of a very efficient detection mechanism. Cell behaviors under self-generated or imposed O 2 gradients were modeled using an in silico cellular Potts model built on experimental observations. This computational model was complemented with a parsimonious ‘Go or Grow’ partial differential equation model. In both models, we found that the collective migration of a dense ring can be explained by the interplay between cell division and the modulation of aerotaxis. Research organism: Dictyostelium Introduction Oxygen is the main electron acceptor for aerobic organism to allow efficient ATP synthesis. This high-energy metabolic pathway has contributed to the emergence and diversification of multicellular organism. While high O 2 availability in the environment seems a given, its rapid local consumption can generate spatial and temporal gradients in many places, including within multicellular organism. Oxygen level and gradients are increasingly recognized as a central parameter in various physiopathological processes, cancer and development. The well-known HIF pathway allows cells to regulate their behavior when exposed to hypoxia. At low O 2 levels, cells accumulate HIFα leading to the expression of genes that support cell functions appropriate to hypoxia. Another strategy used by organisms facing severe oxygen conditions is to move away from hypoxic regions, a mechanism called aerotaxis and first described in bacteria. Aerotaxis will occur at the interface between environments with different oxygen content, such as soil/air, water/air or even within eukaryotic multicellular organisms between different tissues. In such organisms, oxygen was proposed to be a morphogen as in placentation or a chemoattractant during sarcoma cell invasion. Aerotaxis may also play a role in morphogenesis. The notion that gradients of O 2 and energy metabolism govern spatial patterning in various embryos dates back to the classic work of Child, 1941. Such notions have mostly been abandoned due to the inability to visualize such a gradient or clarify whether they are the result or the cause of developmental patterning. Even at the single-cell level, in vitro experimental studies on aerotaxis are rare. One reason might be technical: gradient control and live monitoring of oxygen concentrations at the cellular level are difficult. More recently, Chang et al. found an asymmetric distribution of hypoxia-inducible factor regulating dorsoventral axis establishment in the early sea urchin embryo. Interestingly, they also found evidence for an intrinsic hypoxia gradient in embryos, which may be a forerunner to dorsoventral patterning. Self-generated chemoattractant gradients have been reported to trigger the dispersion of melanoma cells, Dictyostelium cells or the migration of the zebrafish lateral line primordium. The mechanism is simple and very robust: the cell colony acts as a sink for the chemoattractant, removes it by degradation or uptake creating a gradient that, in turn, attracts the cells as long as the chemoattractant is present in the environment. Physiologically speaking, self-generated gradients have been demonstrated to increase the range of expansion of cell colonies and to serve as directional cues to help various cell types navigate complex environments, including mazes. Recently, it was demonstrated that after covering an epithelial cell colony by a coverglass non permeable to O 2, peripheral cells exhibit a strong outward directional migration to escape hypoxia from the center of the colony. This is a striking example of a collective response to a self-generated oxygen gradient by eukaryotic cells. Oxygen self-generated gradients could therefore play important roles in a variety of contexts, such as development, cancer progression, or even environmental navigation in the soil. Dictyostelium discoideum is an excellent model system to study the fairly virgin field of aerotaxis and of self-generated gradients. Dd is an obligatory aerobic organism that requires at least 5% O 2 to grow at optimal exponential rate while slower growth can occur at 2% O 2. However, its ecological niche in the soil and around large amount of bacteria can result in reduced O 2 availability. During its multicellular motile stage, high oxygen level is one of the signal used to trigger culmination of the migrating slug. For many years, Dd has been a classical organism to study chemotaxis and has emulated the development of many models of emergent and collective behavior since the seminal work of Keller and Segel. An integrated approach combining biological methods, technological progress, and mathematical modeling is very valuable to tackle the issue of aerotaxis. In this article, we study the influence of O 2 self-generated gradients on Dd cells. Using a simple confinement assay, microfluidic tools, original oxygen sensors and theoretical approaches, we show that oxygen self-generated gradients can direct a seemingly collective migration of a cell colony. Our results confirm the remarkable robustness and long-lasting effect of self-generated gradients in collective migration. This case where oxygen is the key driver also suggests that self-generated gradients are widespread and a possible important feature in multicellular morphogenesis. Results Confinement triggers formation and propagation of a self-sustained cell ring To trigger hypoxia on a colony of Dd cells, we used a vertical confinement strategy. A spot of cells with a radius of about 1 mm was deposited and covered by a larger glass coverslip with a radius of 9 mm. We measured the vertical confinement through confocal microscopy and found the height between the bottom of the plate and the coverslip to be 50 μm. Using spots containing around 2000 cells, the formation of a dense ring of cells moving outwards was observed as quickly as 30 min after initiation of the confinement. This formation time however depended non-linearly on initial cell density. Once triggered, this collective migration was self-maintained for tens of hours, even days and the ring could, at these points, span centimeters. Figure 1. Formation and dynamics of a dense ring of cells after vertical confinement. Video 1. Download video file. Initial phase of ring formation and migration. Scale bar: 500 μm. Notably, as the ring expanded outwards, it left a trail of cells behind. This led to the formation of a central zone populated by cells which did not contribute directly to the migration of the ring but were still alive and moving albeit a clear elongated phenotype resembling pre-aggregative Dd cells. In comparison, cells in the ring or outside the colony were rounder, as usual vegetative cells. Video 2. Download video file. High framerate, high-resolution imaging of cell dynamics in and behind the ring over 15 min. Time is in min:s and the scale bar represents 100 μm. To study the properties of the ring, we computed density profiles using radial coordinates from the center of the colony to study cell density as a function of time and distance to the center. We found that after a transitory period corresponding to the ring passing through the initial spot, the density in the ring, its width and its speed all remained constant over long time scales. The speed and density of the ring were found to be 1.2 ± 0.3 μm/min and 1.9 10 3 ± 0.3 10 3 cells/mm 2 respectively. The density of cells left behind the ring was also found to remain constant after a transient regime. As the diameter of the ring increased over time, the absence of changes in morphology implies an increase of the number of cells and thus an important role of cell division. Overall, this self-sustained ring propagation is very robust and a long lasting collective phenotype that can easily be triggered experimentally. This shows that the spot assay is an excellent experimental system to study the response of a variety of cell types to vertical confinement and its physiological consequences. Cell dynamics in different regions Following the reported shape differences, we questioned how cells behaved dynamically in different regions. To do so, we performed higher resolution, higher frame rate experiments to allow cell tracking over times on the order of tens of minutes. Both the cell diffusion constant and instantaneous cell speeds were fairly constant throughout the entire colony. Cell diffusion was 28.2 ± 1.4 μm 2 /min, comparable to our measurement of activity at very low oxygen level in the microfluidic device. To test the influence of motion bias, we projected cell displacements on the radial direction and computed mean speeds in this direction as a function of distance to the center. Random motion, either persistent or not, would lead to a null mean radial displacement whereas biased migration would be revealed by positive or negative values. Here, we found that significantly non-zero biases were observed only in a region spanning the entire ring and a few tens of microns behind and in front of it with the strongest positive biases found in the ring. Overall, our results show that the different regions defined by the ring and its dynamics can be characterized in terms of cell behavior: behind the ring in the hypoxic region: elongated shape, normal speeds, and low bias; in the ring: round shape, normal speeds and high bias. Response of Dd cells to controlled oxygen gradients The spot assay is experimentally simple but is not ideally suited to decipher the response of Dd cells to hypoxia since local concentrations and gradients of oxygen are coupled to cell dynamics and thus very difficult to manipulate. We hence designed a new double-layer PDMS microfluidic device allowing to quickly generate oxygen gradients in a continuous, controlled manner. Briefly, cells were seeded homogenously within a media channel positioned 500 µm below two gas channels continuously perfused with pure nitrogen on one side and air on the other. As PDMS is permeable to these gases, the gas flows imposed hypoxic conditions on one side of the media channel while the other was kept at atmospheric oxygen concentration. Of note, the distance between the two gas channels, thereafter called the gap, varied from 0.5 mm to 2 mm in order to modify the steepness of the gradients in the median region of the media channels. Figure 2. Dictyostelium single cells are attracted by an external O 2 gradient when O 2 level drops below 2%. To make sure that the gas flows were sufficient to maintain a constant O 2 distribution against leakages and against small variation in the fabrication process, we also developed O 2 -sensing films to be able to experimentally measure O 2 profiles both in the microfluidic devices and in the spot assay. These films consisted of porphyrin based O 2 sensors embedded in a layer of PDMS. As O 2 gets depleted, the luminescence quenching of the porphyrin complex is reduced leading to an increase in fluorescence intensity. Quantitative oxygen measurements were then extracted from this fluorescent signal using a Stern-Volmer equation. Within 15 min, we observed the formation of a stable O 2 gradient in the devices closely resembling numerical predictions with or without cells. We then turned our attention to the reaction of the cells to this external gradient. We first noticed that depending on local O 2 concentrations, cell motility was remarkably different. Using cell tracking, we found that cell trajectories seemed much longer and more biased in hypoxic regions. These aerokinetic and aerotactic responses were confirmed by quantifying the mean absolute distance travelled by cells, or the mean distance projected along the gradient direction in a given time as a function of position in the device. Since cells in the microfluidic devices were also experiencing oxygen gradients, we further tested if the observed was true aerokinesis. To do so, we compared cell motility in homogenous environments of either 20.95% or 0.4% O 2. We found cell diffusion constant to be D=40.2±9.6 µm 2 /min at 0.4%, comparable to our measurements in the center of the spot. At atmospheric oxygen concentrations though, this effective diffusion was clearly reduced as we measured it to be D=19.2±8.8 µm 2 /min. The very significant difference demonstrates that Dd cells show an aerokinetic positive response to low oxygen, even in the absence of gradients. The second important observation stemming from the microfluidic experiments is an accumulation of cells at some midpoint within the cell channel. Naively, one could have expected cells to follow the O 2 gradient over its entire span leading to an accumulation of all cells on the O 2 rich side of the channel. This did not happen and, instead, cells seemed to stop responding to the gradient at a certain point. Similarly, we observed a strong positive bias in hypoxic regions but the bias quickly fell to 0 as cells moved to oxygen levels higher than about 2%, confirming that the observed cell accumulation was a result of differential migration and not, for example, differential cell division. In addition, if we inverted the gas channels halfway through the experiment, we observed that the cells responded in around 15 min and showed the same behavior, albeit in reverse positions. We measured the bias for the different gaps and for the situation of reversed gradient and obtained a value of 1.1 ± 0.4 µm/min. Of note, the position at which cells accumulated and stopped responding to the gradient was still in the region were the gradient was constantly increasing. This led to the hypothesis that, in addition to gradient strength, O 2 levels also play an important role in setting the strength of aerotaxis displayed by Dd cells. Furthermore, when we compared experiments performed with different gaps, we found that the position of cell accumulation varied from one channel to another. However, our O 2 sensors indicated that the accumulation occurred at a similar O 2 concentration of about 1% in all three channels thus strongly hinting that the parameter controlling the aerotactic response was O 2 levels. Overall, these experiments in controlled environments demonstrated two main features of the response of Dd cells to hypoxia: a strong aerokinetic response and a positive aerotactic response, both modulated by local O 2 levels regardless of the local gradient. These results reveal a subtle cross talk between O 2 concentrations and gradients in defining cell properties and it would be very informative, in the future, to study in details the reaction of Dd cells to various, well defined hypoxic environments where O 2 concentrations and gradients can be independently varied. Coupled dynamics between oxygen profiles and collective motion Thanks to these results, we turned our attention back to the collective migration of a ring of cells and asked whether similar aerotactic behaviors were observed under self-generated gradients. To do so, we performed spot experiments on the O 2 -sensing films described above which allowed us to image, in parallel, cell behavior and O 2 distribution. Figure 3. Interplay between ring dynamics and O 2 profiles. Video 3. Download video file. Reconstruction of cell and oxygen dynamics from a spot experiment on an oxygen sensor. Cell positions are shown as black dots, oxygen in colors. The entire movie spans 15 hr of experiment. In a first phase, preceding the formation of the ring, cell motion was limited and the structure of the colony remained mostly unchanged. As O 2 was consumed by cells, depletion started in the center and sharp gradients appeared at the edges of the colony. Then, the ring formed and started moving outwards, O 2 depletion continued and the region of high O 2 gradients naturally started moving outwards. At this point, coupled dynamics between the cells and the O 2 distribution appeared and we observed that the position of the ring closely followed the dynamics of the O 2 field, that is it followed a constant concentration of oxygen of 0.25%. In the process, three distinct regions were created. Behind the ring, O 2 was completely depleted and thus no gradient was visible. In front of the ring, the O 2 concentration remained high with high gradients. Finally, in the ring region, O 2 was low and the gradients were strong. Based on our results in externally imposed gradients, we would thus expect cells to present a positive aerotactic bias mostly in the ring region which is indeed what we observed. Minimal cellular Potts model Based on these experimental results, we then asked whether this subtle response of Dd cells to complex oxygen environments was sufficient to explain the emergence of a highly stable, self-maintained collective phenomenon. To do so, we developed cellular Potts models based on experimental observations and tested whether they could reproduce the observed cell dynamics. Briefly, the ingredient underlying the model are as follows. First, all cells consume the oxygen that is locally available at a known rate. Cell activity increases at low O 2. Cells respond positively to O 2 gradients with a modulation of the strength of this aerotaxis based on local O 2 concentrations, as observed in our microfluidic experiments. Finally, all cells can divide as long as they sit in a high enough O 2 concentration since it was demonstrated that cell division slows down in hypoxic conditions. Of note, all parameters were scaled so that both time and length scales in the Potts models are linked to experimental times and lengths. Although this model is based on experimental evidence, some of its parameters are not directly related to easily measurable biological properties. Therefore, we decided to fit our parameters to reproduce as faithfully as possible the results of our microfluidic experiments. Through a trial and error procedure, we managed to reproduce these results qualitatively and quantitatively in terms of collective behavior, cell accumulation, and individual cell behavior. Video 4. Download video file. Dynamics of the Potts model reproducing microfluidic experiments. Low oxygen regions are on the left and high oxygen on the right. Cell positions are shown as black dots and the entire movie represents the equivalent of 10 hr of experiments. We then applied this model and added O 2 consumption by cells, with initial conditions mimicking our spot assay and other ingredients mimicking the vertical confinement. We observed the rapid formation and migration of a ring. This ring was remarkably similar to that observed in experiments. In particular, we found its speed to be constant after an initial transitory period. This speed was also comparable to experimental ones. Similarly, the morphology of these simulated rings was constant over time with a fixed cell density and width. Finally, cell behavior was qualitatively well reproduced by this model. Figure 4. Minimal Potts model of ring formation and migration. Video 5. Download video file. Dynamics of the Potts model reproducing the spot experiments. Cell positions are shown as black dots and the oxygen is in colors. In terms of coupled dynamics between cell density and O 2 profiles, we found here too that the driving force behind this collective phenomenon was the fact that the ring followed a constant O 2 concentration. We then asked what were the key ingredients in the model to trigger this phenomenon, a question we explored by tuning our original Potts model. We started by dividing cell consumption of oxygen by a factor of 3 and found that it did not significantly change the ring speed but could change the aspect of cell density in the central region. We then turned our attention to other key elements in the model. Figure 5. Key ingredients of the Potts model by density kymograph evaluation. If we turned off cell division in our models, the formation of the ring was mostly unchanged but after a short time, the ring started slowing down and even stopped as cell density was no longer sufficient to reach highly hypoxic conditions. Second, we asked whether the observed and modeled aerokinesis was necessary to reproduce the collective migration. We found that it wasn’t as models ran at different effective temperatures applied to all cells regardless of local O 2 concentrations all showed qualitatively similar behavior. Of note though, lower effective temperatures led to less dense rings as fewer cells were able to start in the ring. Finally, we found that modulation of aerotaxis by local O 2 concentrations was essential. Indeed, as we increased the range of O 2 concentration at which aerotaxis is at play, we found that forming rings became wider and less dense to the point where no actual ring could be distinguished if aerotaxis was kept constant for all cells. These numerical simulations based on cellular Potts models provide a good intuition of the phenomenon and reveal that cell division and aerotactic modulation are the two key ingredients to reproduce the ring of cells. Because of their versatility, they can also be used to make some predictions on the observed phenomenon. Experimentally, we tested two such predictions to demonstrate the relevance of the underlying assumptions. First, we show in Figure 5B the effect of turning cell division off in the simulated spot. A similar result can be achieved by placing cells in a phosphate buffer medium, lacking nutrients and thus blocking cell division. In this situation, at short time scales, a ring of cells started forming and expanding outwards in a similar fashion as in nutritive medium. After a few hours, however, the ring started slowing down until it completely stopped and cells started dispersing again. This is in complete agreement with the predictions of the Cellular Potts Model, as one can see by comparing the density kymographs and firmly demonstrates the importance of cell division in this behavior. At longer time scales though, Dd cells started forming aggregates and entering a developmental phase. This aggregation is presumably due to the concomitant expression of cell adhesion molecules and, apparition of self-organizing secreted cAMP pulses whose timing agrees with the one reported in classical free cell spot aggregation assays. Cell-cell adhesion and cAMP signaling are not included in our models or numerical simulations that hence cannot predict the long times in Video 6. However, the timing is well separated from the end of the ring expansion period. This still demonstrates that the phenomenon observed here is relevant for both the single cell and collective stages of Dd life cycle. Video 6. Download video file. Spot assay in phosphate buffer. Left: cell dynamics show the formation and migration of a ring of cells up to 4 hr at which point it started disintegrating and aggregates started forming around 10 hr. Right: polar visualization of cell dynamics with angles shown vertically and distance to the center horizontally. This visualization clearly shows the early propagation of a ring of cells. Second, we used these numerical simulations to predict the behavior of cells in more complex environments. One can see the expansion of the ring as a way for each cell to optimize its own resources. This begs the question of what happens when more than one colony is present in the environment, a problem more directly relevant for real life situations. Can the different colonies sense their respective presence and adapt accordingly by migrating preferably away from one another or, on the other hand, will the depletion of oxygen induced by a neighboring colony increase hypoxia on this side and therefore accelerate migration? In this case, what would happen when two rings come in contact? We started exploring this question by simulating two colonies put in close proximity. These simulations predict that the formed rings do not repel each other, instead they tend to rush toward one another and, when they meet, they fuse together to make an elliptical front which then relaxes towards a more circular shape. We then performed the corresponding experiment and found very similar behavior. Video 7. Download video file. Ring fusion during experiments and as predicted by the Potts model. Note that this Potts model is a non-quantitative version and, as a result, space and time are in arbitrary units and thus not shown. Overall, these results show that the cellular Potts model indeed recapitulates all the major experimental observations with only two key ingredients. However, they fall short of giving an in-depth quantitative description because they rely on many parameters and are not amenable to theoretical analysis per se. 'Go or Grow' hypothesis: a Mean-field approach In order to complement the methodology of the cellular Potts model, we developed a mean-field approximation of the latter: the cell density ρ is subject to a reaction-advection-diffusion partial differential equation : ∂ ρ ∂ t = D ∇ ⋅ ∇ ρ - ∇ ⋅ a C, ∇ C ρ + r C ρ C is the oxygen concentration, a C, ∇ C corresponds to the aerotactic advection speed and r C to the cell division rate. By assuming radial symmetry in agreement with the experiments, we propose a C, ∇ C = a C, ∂ r C = λ a e r o C ∂ r C, where λ a e r o C is the already mentioned aerotactic strength fitting the microfluidic experiments with an upper O 2 concentration threshold C 0 =0.7% and r = = r i n ρ i n + 1 2, where a i n = λ C i n C i n - C i - 1 n Δ x, r i n = r C i n and R i the distance from the center. In the case of the Go or grow model with its planar symmetry, the discretization for ρ was: ρ i n + 1 2 − ρ i n − 1 2 Δ t − D ρ i − 1 n + 1 2 − 2 ρ i n + 1 2 + ρ i + 1 n + 1 2 Δ x 2 + 1 Δ x ⋅ = r i n ρ i n + 1 2, with a i n = a C i n. Concerning the equation on Oxygen concentration Equation 2, the consumption term - b C ρ was expressed in two different manners: either b C = b 0 and a non-negativity constraint was added on the Oxygen concentration, just as it was the case in the cellular Potts model, or b C = m i n b 0, b 0 C C 0 ' which leads to an oxygen consumption that goes to zero in the region of very low concentration C < C 0 ′ and therefore ensures non-negativity for C under a sufficiently small time step Δ t. Both expressions led to qualitatively similar results, but we opted for the latter in all the simulations presented here. Finally, the discretization scheme for C in the planar symmetry was: C i n + 1 - C i n Δ t - D o x y C i - 1 n + 1 - 2 C i n + 1 + C i + 1 n + 1 Δ x 2 = - b i n ρ i n + 1 2, with b i n = b C i n. For the radial symmetry: C i n + 1 - C i n Δ t - D R i + Δ x 2 C i + 1 n + 1 - C i n + 1 - R i - Δ x 2 C i n + 1 - C i - 1 n + 1 R i Δ x 2 = - b i n ρ i n + 1 2 The schemes were coded in Python language. All simulations of shown in this article were carried out with a mesh size Δ t = 0.02 m i n and Δ x = 1 μ m. The values used for the constants are: D = 30 μ m 2 ⋅ m i n - 1, C 0 = 0.7 % O 2, C 0 ' = 0.1 % O 2, D o x y = 1.2 ⋅ 10 5 μ m 2 ⋅ m i n - 1, r 0 = l n 2 / 480 m i n - 1 and b 0 = 0.01 % O 2 m i n - 1 c e l l - 1. The scheme on C was supplemented with the boundary condition C L = 21 % O 2. We have chosen L = 9 m m for the Go or grow model to match experimental conditions. For the mean-field model, we have chosen L = 2.5 m m in order to match the cellular Potts model for which size was a concern for computation time. In the mean-field model, the initial condition for ρ was taken the same as in the cellular Potts model. For the other simulations, initial conditions for ρ and C were chosen such that they were already close to the expected stationary profile. We measured the speed of the wave σ, once the wave profile was qualitatively stable, by considering the evolution of the point x ¯ t such that C t, x ¯ t = C 0. Mathematical analysis of the ‘Go or Grow’ model We present below a preliminary analysis of the ‘Go or Grow’ model. A more detailed mathematical investigation of this model will be carried out in a separate article. 1.The ‘Go or Grow’ model admits explicit traveling wave solutions. We recall that z = x - σ t is the spatial variable in the moving frame at speed σ > 0. We seek a pair of stationary profiles, resp. the density ρ z and the oxygen concentration C z. We assume that C z is an increasing function. By translation invariance, we set without loss of generality that C 0 = C 0, so that Equation 3 becomes:, 2 ) > 0, one can first show that every element of the spectrum of λ ∈ σ L ~ such that λ < γ is an eigenvalue of L ~. Second, one shows that the only eigenvalue λ of L ~ such that λ < γ is λ = 0. Finally by standard theory of self-adjoint operators and semi-group theory, one obtains that w t = P w 0 + e - t L ~ I - P w 0, where ‖ e - t L ~ I - P w 0 ‖ L 2 R, d z ⩽ e - γ t ‖ w 0 ‖ L 2 R, d z. Translating these properties onto the neutral fraction v k, we have that v k t → ⟨ v 0 k, ρ ⟩ L 2 R, e U d z ⟨ ρ, ρ ⟩ L 2 R, e U d z ρ at an exponential rate, where ρ is the traveling wave profile calculated in the previous section. Therefore, each fraction converges to a fixed proportion of the whole population. We conclude that after some time the wave becomes a perfect mix of each neutral fraction. This corresponds to the definition of a pushed wave according to Roques et al., 2012. 3. The wave is pulled in the case a 0 ≤ r 0 D. The preceding reasoning does not apply to this case and the intuition is clear, as the wave speed coincides with Fisher’s σ = 2 r 0 D, which is typically the signature of a pulled reaction- diffusion front. In order to prove the pulled nature of the front, we consider w k = v k ρ, where ρ is the corresponding wave profile. By computation, w k then satisfies the following PDE: ∂ w k ∂ t - β z ∂ w k ∂ z - D ∂ 2 w k ∂ z 2 = 0 with β = { 2 r 0 D − a 0 D, i f z < 0 2 r 0 D − a 0 z + 1, i f z ≥ 0 and set η a positive solution to the differential equation η ' = β η. As β z ≥ 0 and β ' bounded above, it can be shown by arguments similar to Roques et al., 2012, that under the integrability condition ∫ ) 2 η d z < ∞, the neutral fraction goes extinct, that is lim t = + ∞ ⁡ ‖ w k 2 η ‖ ∞ = 0, which characterizes a pulled wave in the framework of neutral fractions. Mathematical analysis of a specific ‘Go or Grow’ model with a second threshold We present quickly a specific case for a ‘Go or Grow’ model with a second threshold, that is completely analytically solvable. We consider the advection term of the form a C s i g n ∂ x C with a = { a 0, i f C 0 ′ < C < C 0 0, o t h e r w i s e, the division rate r = { r 0, i f C > C 0 0, i f C < C 0 and the O 2 consumption rate per cell b C = b 0, without including the constraint that the O 2 concentration C be non-negative. Although this hypothesis seems physically non relevant, it is consistent with the fact that cells are not sensitive to O 2 concentration gradients below the threshold C 0 '. Given a traveling wave profile ρ, C and the corresponding front speed σ, we suppose C 0 = C 0 and we introduce the spatial gap h > 0 between the two thresholds, i.e. C - h = C 0 ', so that becomes: { − σ ∂ ρ ∂ z = D ∂ 2 ρ ∂ z 2, i f z < − h − σ ∂ ρ ∂ z = D ∂ 2 ρ ∂ z 2 − a 0 ∂ ρ ∂ z, i f − h < z < 0 − σ ∂ ρ ∂ z = D ∂ 2 ρ ∂ z 2 + r 0 ρ, i f z > 0 Introducing a multiplicative constant A, ρ is then of the shape: { ρ = A, i f z < − h ρ = A D z ), i f − h < z < 0 ρ = A e − μ z, i f z > 0 With B = σ - µ D σ - a 0, E = µ D - a 0 σ - a 0 and µ = σ + σ 2 - 4 D r 0 2 D. We obtain the following condition, that establishes a one-to-one correspondence between σ and h : e σ − a 0 D h = a 0 σ The equation on C becomes: − σ ∂ C ∂ z = D o x y ∂ 2 ∂ z 2 − b 0 ρ With the assumption that that C be continuously differentiable, we can solve Equation 15 for C : { C = F A z + G, i f z < − h C = H A z + I A e − D z + J + K e − σ D o x y z, i f − h < z < 0 C = L A e − μ z + M e − σ D o x y z + C i n i t, i f z > 0 With F = b 0 σ B + E e σ - a 0 D h, G = C 0 ' + F A h, H = b 0 B σ, I = b 0 D 2 E σ - a 0 D σ - D o x y σ - a 0, L = b 0 µ µ D o x y - σ, M = C 0 - L A - C i n i t, J = C 0 - I A - K and, by setting Δ = σ D H - F - I σ - a 0 D e σ - a 0 D h - H + L µ - σ D o x y - I σ - a 0 D σ D o x y e σ D o x y h, we have that K = 1 Δ H - F - I σ - a 0 D e σ - a 0 D h σ D o x y C i n i t - C 0 ' and A = 1 Δ σ D o x y e σ D o x y h σ D o x y C i n i t - C 0 '. This closes the system, but one more constraint remains, which is: C 0 ' = - H A h + I A e σ - a 0 D h + J + K e σ D o x y h The front speed σ of a traveling wave must therefore satisfy the implicit Equation 16. Finding a closed form for the solutions of Equation 16 seems out of reach. Nevertheless, we can approximate the roots numerically, especially by noticing through numerical observation that Equation 16 is monotone on the interval 2 r 0 D, a 0 + r 0 D a 0, where the root σ is located. Hence through a dichotomy search algorithm we can find the speed σ of the traveling wave with arbitrary accuracy. Acknowledgements We thank R Fulcrand for his expert help in microfabrication; G Torch, C Zoude, G Simon and A Piednoir for technical assistance. This study was supported by the CNRS - Mission pour les Initiatives Transverses et Interdisciplinaires – « Défi Modélisation du vivant - 2019», by the GDR ImaBio and by the IFS LyC Collaborative Research Project 2019. S Hirose was supported by the STARMAJ Program and K Funamoto by the CNRS. This project has received funding from the European Research Council under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program and from Agence Nationale de la Recherche. Funding Statement The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication. Contributor Information Tatjana Piotrowski, Stowers Institute for Medical Research, United States. Naama Barkai, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel. Funding Information This paper was supported by the following grants: IFS J19Ly11 to Kenichi Funamoto, Jean-Paul Rieu. Université de Lyon STARMAJ to Satomi Hirose. European Research Council 639638 to Vincent Calvez. Agence Nationale de la Recherche ANR-19-CE45-0002-02 to Jean-Paul Rieu. GDR Imabio AMI to Christophe Anjard, Jean-Paul Rieu. Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique MITI 2019 to Vincent Calvez, Jean-Paul Rieu. Additional information Competing interests No competing interests declared. Author contributions Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Supervision, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Project administration, Writing - review and editing. Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing. Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology. Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology. Resources, Methodology, Writing - review and editing. Resources, Formal analysis, Methodology. Conceptualization, Resources, Formal analysis, Supervision, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Writing - review and editing. Conceptualization, Resources, Formal analysis, Supervision, Investigation, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Project administration, Writing - review and editing. Conceptualization, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Validation, Investigation, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Project administration, Writing - review and editing. Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Project administration, Writing - review and editing. Additional files Source data 1. Detailed measurements for quantities presented in the text as means ± standard deviations. Click here to view. Transparent reporting form Click here to view. Data availability All data generated or analysed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files. Article information eLife. 2021; 10: e64731. Published online 2021 Aug 20. doi: 10.7554/eLife.64731 PMCID: PMC8378850 PMID: 34415238 Olivier Cochet-Escartin, # 1, † Mete Demircigil, # 2, † Satomi Hirose, 3, 4 Blandine Allais, 1 Philippe Gonzalo, 5, 6 Ivan Mikaelian, 5 Kenichi Funamoto, 3, 4, 7 Christophe Anjard, 1 Vincent Calvez, # 2, † and Jean-Paul Rieu # 1, † Olivier Cochet-Escartin 1 Institut Lumière Matière, UMR5306, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Olivier Cochet-Escartin Mete Demircigil 2 Institut Camille Jordan, UMR5208, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Mete Demircigil Satomi Hirose 3 Graduate School of Biomedical Engineering, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan 4 Institute of Fluid Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan Find articles by Satomi Hirose Blandine Allais 1 Institut Lumière Matière, UMR5306, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Blandine Allais Philippe Gonzalo 5 Centre Léon Bérard, Centre de recherche en cancérologie de Lyon, INSERM 1052, CNRS 5286, Université Lyon 1, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France 6 Laboratoire de Biochimie et Pharmacologie, Faculté de médecine de Saint-Etienne, CHU de Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France Find articles by Philippe Gonzalo Ivan Mikaelian 5 Centre Léon Bérard, Centre de recherche en cancérologie de Lyon, INSERM 1052, CNRS 5286, Université Lyon 1, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France Find articles by Ivan Mikaelian Kenichi Funamoto 3 Graduate School of Biomedical Engineering, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan 4 Institute of Fluid Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan 7 Graduate School of Engineering, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan Find articles by Kenichi Funamoto Christophe Anjard 1 Institut Lumière Matière, UMR5306, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Christophe Anjard Vincent Calvez 2 Institut Camille Jordan, UMR5208, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Vincent Calvez Jean-Paul Rieu 1 Institut Lumière Matière, UMR5306, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France Find articles by Jean-Paul Rieu Tatjana Piotrowski, Reviewing Editor and Naama Barkai, Senior Editor Tatjana Piotrowski, Stowers Institute for Medical Research, United States ; Contributor Information. 1 Institut Lumière Matière, UMR5306, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France 2 Institut Camille Jordan, UMR5208, Université Lyon 1-CNRS, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France 3 Graduate School of Biomedical Engineering, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan 4 Institute of Fluid Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan 5 Centre Léon Bérard, Centre de recherche en cancérologie de Lyon, INSERM 1052, CNRS 5286, Université Lyon 1, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France 6 Laboratoire de Biochimie et Pharmacologie, Faculté de médecine de Saint-Etienne, CHU de Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France 7 Graduate School of Engineering, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan # Contributed equally. Olivier Cochet-Escartin: rf.1noyl-vinu@nitracse-tehcoc.reivilo ; Vincent Calvez: rf.srnc.htam@zevlaC.tnecniV ; Jean-Paul Rieu: rf.1noyl-vinu@ueir.luap-naej † These authors contributed equally to this work. Received 2020 Nov 9; Accepted 2021 Jul 30. Copyright © 2021, Cochet-Escartin et al This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use and redistribution provided that the original author and source are credited. Articles from eLife are provided here courtesy of eLife Sciences Publications, Ltd 