Evolution of a novel cell type in Dictyostelia required gene duplication of a cudA-like transcription factor You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt No PDF Evolution of a novel cell type in Dictyostelia required gene duplication of a cudA-like transcription factor Curr Biol. 2022 Jan 24; 32: 428–437.e4. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List Elsevier Sponsored Documents Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view Printer Friendly Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay Current Biology E L S E V I E R Evolution of a novel cell type in Dictyostelia required gene duplication of a cudA-like transcription factor Koryu Kin, Zhi-Hui Chen,, and Pauline Schaap Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials Video S1. A time-lapse movie of the culmination of cdl1a −, related to Figure 2 mmc4.mp4 GUID: 61637CC5-C677-4172-B4C3-47E70035C68C Document S1. Figures S1 and S2 and Tables S1 and S2 mmc1.pdf GUID: 7C8B1B2D-16E2-4261-8C10-8A222DF9939B Data S1. Excel file with the statistical analysis of the RNA-seq experiments comparing transcripts in wild-type and cdl1a − fruiting bodies, including annotation of differentially expressed genes, related to Figure 2 mmc2.xlsx GUID: 1344601E-BF61-40FE-BFAB-E7692FE6D572 Data S2. Zip file with the full and trimmed protein and DNA alignments that were used for the phylogenetic trees in Figure 1 mmc3.zip GUID: 9811FF9E-2371-400B-84AE-7250F0D98148 Document S2. Article plus supplemental information mmc5.pdf GUID: 3A0208B7-3B79-40DB-94C2-74FE54663039 Data Availability Statement • The raw RNA-Seq reads of cdl1aˉ and wild-type fruiting bodies have been deposited at the European Nucleotide Archive and are publicly available. • This paper does not report original code. • Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request. Summary The evolution of novel cell types has been proposed to result from duplication of gene regulatory networks, but proven examples are rare. In addition to stalk cells and spores that make up the fruiting bodies of three major groups of Dictyostelia, those in group 4 additionally evolved basal disc and cup cells that respectively anchor the stalk to the substratum and the spore mass to the stalk. We noted a putative group-4-specific duplication of a cudA-like transcription factor in a comparative analysis of group-representative genomes. Using increased taxon sampling, we here confirmed that this TF, cdl1, duplicated into cdl1a and cdl1b in the common ancestor to group 4. cdl1a, but not cdl1b, showed signatures of positive selection, indicative of functional innovation. Deletion of cdl1a in Dictyostelium discoideum resulted in fruiting bodies with sagging spore heads that lacked the supporting cup cells and expression of cup-specific genes. Deletion of cdl1b resulted in thinner fruiting body stalks, while a cdl1b − cdl1a − double knockout showed more severe stalk defects, suggesting an ancestral role of cdl1 in stalk formation. This was confirmed in a closely related non-group 4 species, Polysphondylium violaceum, where cdl1 knockout caused defective stalk formation. These data indicate that the group-specific duplication of cdl1 and subsequent diversification of cdl1a played a pivotal role in the evolution of a novel somatic cell type in group 4 Dictyostelia. Keywords: evolution of soma, gene duplication, transcription factor evolution, RNA-seq, cup gene expression, stalk morphogenesis, Dictyostelia, Polysphondylia, phylogenetics, cell-type specialization Highlights • The transcription factor cdl1 duplicated into cdl1a and cdl1b in group 4 Dictyostelia • cdl1a knockout results in loss of cup cells, a novel cell type in group 4 • cdl1b and cdl1 knockout causes stalk defects in and outside of group 4 • Gene duplication of cdl1 caused the evolution of a novel cell type Novel cell type evolution is posited to result from duplication of gene regulatory networks. Kin et al. show that cup cells, which evolved in some Dictyostelia, require the transcription factor cdl1A, a novel duplicate of cdl1, which mediates stalk formation in all Dictyostelia. This provides evidence for cell type evolution by gene duplication. Introduction Multicellularity allowed cells to specialize and perform different functions within a single organism, giving rise to two fundamental cell types, gametes and somatic cells. In several multicellular lineages, a wide range of different somatic cells evolved that act in concert to generate complex forms. How different cell types evolved is an active area of research, 1, 2, 3 with new technologies, such as single-cell RNA sequencing facilitating the quest for homologous cell types in evolution. 4, 5 However, many of these studies are phenomenological, and there are few studies that demonstrate specific molecular mechanisms that gave rise to novel cell types. A candidate mechanism for the evolution of new cell types is through gene duplication. Gene duplication is a key driver of organismal complexity, 7, 8, 9, 10 and in the context of cell type evolution, it has been proposed that duplication of a gene regulatory network can lead to duplication and diversification of a cell type. 1, 11, 12, 13 However, causal evidence that links duplication of specific genes to the evolution of a novel cell type is still lacking. We here explore this issue in the dictyostelid social amoebas and report a case of gene duplication contributing to the evolution of a new cell type. Dictyostelia are a group of protists in the supergroup Amoebozoa that can be subdivided into four major and some minor groups based on molecular data. 14, 15 The four major phylogenetic groups were simply called groups 1–4, with group 4 including the model species Dictyostelium discoideum. All Dictyostelia switch between free living and multicellular forms, depending on food availability. When starved, the free-living amoebas secrete chemoattractant and form multicellular aggregates that undergo morphogenesis into fruiting bodies. In most species, the fruiting bodies consist of two encapsulated cell types, the viable compact spores and the vacuolated dead stalk cells. However, in major group 4, a novel cell type, the cup cell, evolved. 16, 17 Cup cells are amoeboid cells localized in the upper and lower part of the spore mass. 18, 19 They are mainly derived from precursor cells called anterior-like cells and a subpopulation of prestalk cells. 19, 20 Their documented function is the elevation of spore mass: when cup cells are surgically removed, the spore mass fails to reach the top of the stalk. 21 A recent RNA-seq study revealed that many genes became expressed in cup cells after the spore masses were already fully elevated, 22 suggesting additional roles for cup cells. The molecular pathways that trigger cup cell differentiation are unknown. To identify genes involved in this process, we looked for a cup-cell-specific transcription factor, which is also a product of group-4-specific gene duplication. We found a possible case in the cudA-like TF family. CudA-like proteins are TFs that are only found in Amoebozoa. Members of this family have developmental roles in D. discoideum, with cudA regulating both prespore and stalk cell differentiation 23 and spaA being essential for spore differentiation. 24 By increasing taxon sampling for molecular phylogenetics, we established that cdl1 genes duplicated in the common ancestor to group 4, producing two copies, cdl1a and cdl1b. We found an episode of positive selection on the stem lineage of the cdl1a genes and revealed by gene knockout that cdl1a is essential for cup cell differentiation. Combined with the analyses of the knockout phenotypes of cdl1b as well as those of the double cdl1b − cdl1a − knockout, we characterized the diverging functions of the duplicated genes and established the function of the ancestral cdl1 gene in Polysphondylium violaceum, a sister species to group 4. Results Molecular phylogenetics reveals a cdl1 gene duplication in group 4 Dictyostelia To identify TFs that duplicated in group 4 Dictyostelia, we screened phylogenies in a previous evolutionary comparative study of dictyostelid TF families 25 for clades that contain only a single TF gene from non-group 4 dictyostelid species but two or more genes in group 4 species. We found four possible duplications in cudA-like, myb, Jumonji C, and homeo domain TFs. Among them, the cudA-like gene was the best candidate in the sense that the phylogenetic tree was well resolved and that one of the cudA-like duplicates was specifically expressed in cup cells, an evolutionary novelty of group 4. The previous study included only two group 4 species and one species each from the other major groups. 25 Importantly, it did not include P. violaceum, the closest outgroup species to group 4. We therefore reconstructed a more comprehensive phylogeny of cudA -like genes, using recently sequenced genomes. As noted before, 25 cudA -like genes were only found in Amoebozoa and are subdivided into five ortholog groups. Two genes, cudA and spaA, have essential roles in stalk and spore differentiation in D. discoideum, respectively. 23, 24 We designated the uncharacterized genes as cdl for cudA-like. All five genes are found in most of the dictyostelid genomes, except for cdl1 and spaA in P. multicystogenum and cdl2 in D. caveatum. Their absence may be due to lineage-specific loss or poor quality of these draft genomes. The non-dictyostelid Physarum polycephalum possesses all cudA -like genes except spaA, while the phylogenetic affinities of the Entamoeba and Acanthamoeba cudA -like genes to the five groups are less clear. Figure 1 CudA-like phylogeny and cdl1 selection signatures The new phylogeny corroborates duplication of a gene named cdl1 into the paralogs, cdl1a and cdl1b, which are present in all six examined group 4 species. Only the single cdl1 gene exists in non-group 4 species, including the closest outgroup P. violaceum. This phylogenetic distribution suggests that the duplication of cdl1 occurred in the stem lineage of group 4. Interestingly, cdl1 / cdl1a was found in close genomic proximity to cdl3 in all group 4 and group 3 species, but not in group 1 or 2 species. In groups 3 and 4, cdl1 / cdl1a and cdl3 show the same orientation, with cdl1 / cdl1a usually 3 to 4 kb upstream of cdl3 but sometimes less than 0.3 kb. This indicates that the genomic linkage of cdl1 and cdl3 evolved after the split of groups 1 and 2 from groups 3 and 4. The linkage of cdl1 or cdl1a with cdl3 further suggests that cdl1b evolved by transposition of the cdl1 gene to a separate genomic location after the split of group 3 and group 4. Table 1 Genome locations of cdl1 / cdl1a genes and cdl3 genes A signature for positive selection in the cdl1a stem lineage Duplicated genes can experience various patterns of natural selection and undergo functional divergence. 27 In particular, adaptive evolution is expected to occur when a gene acquires a new function during evolution. To test whether either of the cdl1 duplicates experienced adaptive evolution, we fitted the branch-site model where the nonsynonymous-synonymous substitution rates can vary across both lineages and sites during evolution. Two different models, M2a in codeml 28, 29 and adaptive branch-site random effects likelihood in Hyphy 30, 31 gave broadly the same results. In both cases, the alternative model with positively selected sites in the stem lineage of cdl1a had significantly higher likelihoods compared to the null model without positively selected sites. In contrast, the alternative model of the stem lineage of cdl1b being positively selected was not supported. Table 2 Parameters estimated in the selection tests in the cdl1a and cdl1b stem lineage The codeml analysis identified seven amino acid residues in Cdl1A as sites possibly under positive selection, with naive empirical Bayes posterior probability above 0.95. Two of them were also supported with Bayes empirical Bayes posterior probability being above 0.95. Although the structure of the Cdl1A protein has not been resolved, many of the positively selected sites were located on or close to predicted α helices or β sheets. Amino acid residues that are essential for DNA binding in CudA 26 are also conserved in Cdl1A. These sites are distinct from the positively selected sites but are within a 174 AA region that contains 6 out of 7 putative sites. Cdl1a is essential for cup cell differentiation To investigate a possible role for Cdl1A, we knocked out the cdl1a gene in D. discoideum. The cdl1a − cells formed normal aggregates and slugs but showed aberrant fruiting body formation. At early culmination, the prespore mass did not properly follow the elevation of the tip, resulting in fruiting bodies with the spore heads stuck at the base or middle of the stalk. Only a small mass of what are likely prestalk cells were carried aloft. Spore and stalk cells otherwise differentiated normally. The impaired elevation of the spore mass was also observed when cup cells were surgically removed. 21 We therefore examined the presence of cup cells in cdl1a − by observing expression of lacZ fused to the promoter of the cup-specific gene beiA. 22, 32 :lacZ -expressing cells were almost completely absent from cdl1a − fruiting bodies, suggesting a lack of cup cells. Figure 2 Phenotype of cdl1a knockout mutant Video S1. A time-lapse movie of the culmination of cdl1a −, related to Figure 2: Click here to view. To obtain a comprehensive overview of genes not expressed in cdl1a −, we performed high-throughput sequencing of RNAs isolated from late wild-type and cdl1a − fruiting bodies. Compared to wild type, 135 genes were significantly underexpressed in cdl1a − and 35 genes were overexpressed. Differentially expressed transcripts, standardized to maximum read counts, for the three replicate experiments are shown in Figure 2 D as red-blue heatmaps and are combined with heatmaps of published RNA-seq data for the same genes of purified cell types and developmental time points of wild-type D. discoideum cells. 22, 33 This comparison shows that the top cluster of genes, downregulated in cdl1a −, are in wild-type D. discoideum mostly upregulated in late development and enriched in cup cells, with about half of the genes also or alternatively upregulated in stalk cells. This substantiates the evidence that Cdl1A is a transcription factor, required for cup gene expression. There is no obvious preference for prestalk or prespore expression of the genes downregulated in cdl1a −. The genes upregulated in cdl1a − are generally not expressed in cup cells and tend to be expressed throughout development. Contrary to notions that cup cells are derived from prestalk cells, the upregulated genes in the cupless cdl1a − mutant were mostly prestalk specific. We also examined the expression pattern of the prestalk and stalk marker genes ecmA and ecmB, 34 which, apart from being expressed in the stalk and basal disc, are also expressed in cup cells. The ecmA or ecmB expressing cup precursors are in wild type derived from so-called anterior-like cells that are scattered among the posterior prespore cells in the slug and move toward the upper and lower cup positions during culmination. 19 Up to the early culminant stage, the spatial expression patterns of ecmA and ecmB were not markedly different between wild type and cdl1a −. Thereafter, both genes showed normal expression in the cdl1a − prestalk and stalk cells. However, instead of accumulating in the cup region, cells expressing ecmA or ecmB remained intermixed with spores. This suggests that the ecmA and ecmB expressing cup precursors were initially formed but never committed to cup differentiation. After prolonged incubation, secondary sorogens often emerged from the sagging spore masses of cdl1a −, which are possibly formed from the uncommitted cup precursors, because all the remaining cells are at this stage encapsulated as spores or stalk cells. Neither ecmA nor ecmB transcripts were significantly differentially expressed between wild-type and cdl1a − fruiting bodies, and transcript numbers were actually somewhat higher in cdl1a −, indicating that these genes are not positively regulated by Cdl1A. The strong association between the presence of Cdl1A, the expression of cup-specific genes, and the presence of cup cells indicates that Cdl1A is a transcription factor that activates expression of genes essential for cup differentiation. Cdl1a is expressed in stalk and cup precursors To visualize the expression pattern of Cdl1A, the cdl1A gene inclusive of the 3 kb 5′ intergenic sequence was fused to YFP and transformed into cdl1a − cells. The p:cdl1a-YFP construct restored the normal uplift of spores in cdl1a −, confirming that the loss of cup cells in cdl1a − was due to the gene knockout. Cdl1A-YFP was initially expressed strongly at the slug tip and in cells scattered throughout the slug. During culmination, expression became more pronounced at the prespore and prestalk boundary and in the lower cup region until it was almost completely confined to the upper and lower cup in mature fruiting bodies. Figure 3 cdl1a − complementation and cdl1a expression The temporal expression pattern and cell type specificity of cdl1a and cdl1b and its ancestor cdl1 were also inferred from published RNA-seq experiments of D. discoideum, D. purpureum, and D. lacteum, 25, 33, 35 which show that cdl1a and cdl1b expression is upregulated at 16 h when migrating slugs have formed. Expression of both genes is highest in the prestalk cells, and while cdl1b expression then remains confined to the stalk cells, cdl1a becomes more strongly expressed in the cup cells. The ancestral cdl1 gene is also upregulated in late development and is specific to stalk cells in D. lacteum. Evidently, the novel role of Cdl1A as cup cell inducer involved elaboration of its ancestral expression pattern in stalk cells. Deletion of both cdl1a and cdl1b causes defects in stalk morphogenesis To examine functional redundancy or a divergent role for cdl1b, we deleted first cdl1b and then cdl1b and cdl1a together. The cdl1b − mutants developed normally and produced apparently normal fruiting bodies, but their stalks were often thinner, compared to wild type or cdl1a −, as is evident by staining with Calcofluor, which reacts with cellulose in the stalk and spore walls and the tube that surrounds the stalk. The cdl1b − cdl1a − strain developed normally until culmination, but then proper stalk formation was impaired, with phenotypes ranging from severe to very severe. In a severe case, stalk-like structures projected upward but with a sagging spore mass like cdl1a −. The stalky part of this projection contained vacuolized cells staining with Calcofluor, but its shape was irregular. While a cellulosic stalk tube was formed, it appeared to no longer constrain most of the stalk cells. In a very severe case, the structures showed only minimal upward projection and consisted of disorganized stalk cells and a spore mass. Figure 4 Fruiting body morphology of cdl1b − and cdl1b − cdl1a − The aberrant stalk formation was already evident at the onset of culmination. In cdl1b −, the stalk tube is rather thin from the outset, while in cdl1a − cdl1b −, the opening of the stalk tube is very wide, giving it a funnel-like appearance. Overall, Cdl1B and Cdl1A seem to be required together for proper stalk morphogenesis, rather than stalk cell differentiation. To further test this notion, we quantitatively compared induction of the stalk genes abcG18, staC, and staE by the stalk-inducing signals DIF-1 and c-di-GMP between wild type and cdl1a − cdl1b − by qRT-PCR. Effects of DIF-1 were relatively small in both wild type and cdl1a − cdl1b −, but c-di-GMP induced stalk gene expression over 15-fold, with no significant difference being evident between the two strains. While it is still possible that Cdl1A and Cdl1B regulate subsets of stalk genes, a role in overt stalk cell differentiation is less likely. Polysphondylium violaceum Cdl1 is required for stalk morphogenesis The gene duplication that generated cdl1a and cdl1b occurred early in the group 4 lineage. To examine the ancestral function of their proto-ortholog cdl1, we knocked out cdl1 in P. violaceum, the closest outgroup species to group 4. The P. violaceum cdl1 − cells developed normally up to early culmination, when stalk formation initiates. The cdl1 − culminants produced thicker, more rugged stalks than wild type, and the cell masses that were carried aloft tended to have a more bulbous or curvy appearance. The mature cdl1 − fruiting bodies were significantly shorter than those of wild type and almost entirely failed to produce the whorls of side branches that typify the Polysphondylia. When stained with Calcofluor, the cdl1 − mutant showed an irregular and sometimes fragmented arrangement of stalk cells in the sorogen. Figure 5 Phenotype of P. violaceum cdl1 − Discussion A group-4-specific gene duplication associated with cup cell emergence Duplication of genes in gene regulatory networks was proposed as a possible mechanism for the evolution of novel cell types in multicellular organisms. Group 4 Dictyostelia evolved large robust fruiting bodies with new cell types and other innovations that are not present in the other groups. 16, 17 To identify a putative regulatory network that duplicated in group 4, we screened phylogenies of the ∼440 dictyostelid TFs across taxon group representative species 25 for TFs that were duplicated in group 4. The clearest example specific to group 4 was found in the cudA-like family. Sampling of cdl homologs from four additional group 4 and three more non-group 4 species corroborated that the cdl1 duplication occurred after the common ancestor to group 4 split from its small sister group, which contains P. violaceum. The genomic proximity of cdl1 genes to cdl3 allowed us to infer that one copy, cdl1b, was produced by a copy-and-paste type duplication of cdl1 to another chromosome, while the other, cdl1a, can be considered as the “original” copy. Cdl1a showed evidence of having experienced positive selection on seven different sites, which could have contributed to the evolution of a derived function of this gene. Deletion of D. discoideum cdl1a prevented the differentiation of cup cells in the fruiting body as well as the expression of many cup-specific genes, indicating that Cdl1A plays a decisive role in the induction of cup cell differentiation. Consistent with effects of surgical removal of cup cells, 21 the spore mass of cdl1a − failed to elevate to the top of the stalk. Combinatorial control of stalk morphogenesis by Cdl1A and Cdl1B Deletion of the cdl1a duplicate cdl1b caused more subtle effects; fruiting bodies were formed normally but appeared to have thinner stalks. When both cdl1a and cdl1b were knocked out, the stalk defects were more severe. The cellulose stalk tube was formed but showed abnormalities, and the arrangement of the stalk cells inside the tube was disorganized. Stalk genes were still induced by the stalk-inducing factor c-di-GMP, so the cdl1a and cdl1b lesions appeared to affect stalk morphogenesis more than stalk cell differentiation. While cdl1a − cells do not show obvious stalk defects, cdl1a is expressed at the slug tip in addition to the cup cells. A synergistic role with cdl1b in stalk formation is therefore not unexpected and suggests that the ancestral cdl1 gene was involved in stalk morphogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, knockout of cdl1 in an outgroup species, P. violaceum, also caused defects in stalk morphogenesis. The newly formed stalk tube in the P. violaceum cdl1 − mutant appeared to be fragmented. Stalk cells still differentiated but were more disordered, resulting in short, rugged stalks. This indicates that the ancestral function of cdl1 in the Dictyostelia was to form proper stalks. During the evolution of group 4, this gene duplicated and one of the duplicated genes, cdl1a, became additionally involved in inducing the novel cup cells of this group. While a role for gene duplication in the evolution of novel cell types has been repeatedly pointed out, 1, 11, 12, 13 no empirical examples are known, apart from a few studies in fungi that relate gene duplication to evolution of new gene regulatory networks, albeit not cell type. 36, 37, 38 Our study is one of the first examples where gene duplication of a transcription factor and the evolution of a new cell type are causally linked, although many questions remain. How did the duplicated gene evolve to acquire its novel function? What are the upstream TFs and signaling molecules that regulate the cdl1 genes? How are the regulatory programs different between the pre-duplication gene cdl1 and the post-duplication gene, cdl1a ? Answering these questions in future will provide better mechanistic insights in the evolution of novel cell types. STAR★Methods Key resources table Resource availability Lead contact Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Pauline Schaap. Materials availability All plasmid constructs and knock-out cell lines have been deposited in the Dicty Stock Centre. The assigned IDs are listed in the Key resources table. Experimental model and subject details Dictyostelium discoideum, strain AX2, was grown at 22°C in HL5 axenic medium and Polysphondylium violaceum, strain Qsvi11 strain was grown at 22°C in association with Klebsiella aerogenes on 1/5th SM agar. Mating type of cells is either not known or not relevant in this study of asexual development. Method details Phylogenetics and detection of positive selection The previously identified CudA-like genes 25 were supplemented with genes identified by tblastn in draft genome assemblies of Dictyostelium citrinum, Dictyostelium intermedium, Dictyostelium firmibasis, Dictyostelium rosarium, Dictyostelium caveatum, Polysphondylium violaceum, Polysphondylium multicystogenum, Acanthamoeba castellanii and Entamoeba histolytica, which were retrieved from GenBank. Sequences of Physarum polycephalum were downloaded from the Physarum polycephalum Genome Resource website. The amino acid sequences of the collected genes were aligned with the “E-INS-i” option of MAFFT 47 and poorly aligned sections were removed manually. The final alignment was then used for maximum likelihood phylogenetic reconstruction with IQ-tree 48 under the model “LG+F+R5,” which was selected with ModelFinder. 51 One hundred bootstrap replicates were generated to provide support values to the ML tree. Signature of positive selection was explored using both codeml in PAML 28 and aBSREL in Hyphy. 30, 31 Codon-based alignments for group 3 and 4 Dictyostelid cdl1 genes were computed and unreliable sites were removed using Guidance 2 with the Prank alignment algorithm using default settings. 52, 53, 54 All the sites that contain gaps were also removed. The final codon-based alignment of 15 DNA sequences with 753 nucleotides was used to reconstruct a ML tree of cdl1 genes with IQ-tree under the model “GTR+F+R3” selected with ModelFinder. This tree was used as an input tree for codeml and aBSREL. In codeml, a branch-site model with the codon frequency F3X4 was used for computing the likelihood of the data under the M2a model and the null model with ω 2 = 1 fixed. 29 The log-likelihood ratios of the alternative and null models were calculated and the p values were estimated by the right-tail probability of the test statistic −2 Δ under the χ 2 distribution. The aBSREL was run with default settings by providing the codon-based alignment and an input tree to the program. The secondary structure of the Cdl1A protein was predicted with JPred4. 49 Sequence logos of the cdl protein alignments were generated with WebLogo. 50 The full and trimmed alignments produced in the study are available in Data S2. Induction and imaging of development To induce development, D. discoideum or P. violaceum cells were harvested from growth medium or Klebsiella lawns, respectively, washed with 10 mM Na/K-phosphate buffer, pH 6.5 and incubated on non-nutrient agar at 1∼3 × 10 6 cells/cm 2 at 22°C, or on dialysis membrane supported by NN agar. Developing structures on NN agar plates were imaged using a Leica MZ16 dissection microscope. Video S1 was obtained by placing a small section of agar with an early culminant of cdl1aˉ in mineral oil to prevent drying out, and by acquiring images with the dissection microscope at 1 min intervals for 12 h. DNA constructs and transformation To knock out cdl1a and cdl1b in D. discoideum and cdl1 in P. violaceum, two fragments of each gene were amplified from D. discoideum or P. violaceum genomic DNAs and cloned into PLPBLP 40 for D. discoideum cdl1a and cdl1b, and pLoxP-NeoIII 41 for P. violaceum cdl1, using restriction sites that were introduced in the oligonucleotide primers. The primer sequences are listed in Table S2 by the gene name followed by A, B, C or D, with the A/B primer combination used for amplifying the 5′ KO1 fragment and the C/D combination the 3′ KO2 fragment. The knock-out plasmids were linearized and introduced into D. discoideum Ax2 or P. violaceum Qsvi11 by electroporation. 55 Transformed D. discoideum clones were selected by including 10 μg/ml blasticidin in HL5 growth medium. Transformed P. violaceum clones were selected by growth on lawns of G418-resistant Escherichia coli in the presence of 50 μg/ml G418. 55 Genomic DNAs were isolated and tested for gene knock-out by two sets of PCR reactions. D. discoideum cdl1a and cdl1b clones were screened by primer pairs cdl1awf/cdl1awr and cdl1bwf/cdl1bwr for absence and by BsrF1/cdl1aKOr and BsrF1/cdl1bKOr for presence of knock-out, respectively. Likewise, P. violaceum clones were screened by primer pairs Pvcdl1wf/Pvcdl1wr and Pvcdl1 KOf/NeoR for absence and presence of knock-out, respectively. To construct a cdl1bˉcdl1aˉ double knockout, the Bsr cassette in cdl1bˉ was removed by transformation with pDEX-NLS-cre, 40 and a blasticidin sensitive clone was transformed with the cdl1a knockout construct and selected for cdl1a deletion as above. To generate a D. discoideum cdl1a expression construct, the 3.08 kb cdl1a 5′ intergenic region was amplified from Ax2 genomic DNA with primer pair cdl1aPRf/cdl1aPRr and the cdl1a coding region with primer pair cdl1aCDSf/cdl1aCDSr. The fragments were sequentially inserted into pB17S-EYFP, 56 using the restriction sites that were introduced into the primers. This yielded plasmid p:cdl1a-YFP, which was introduced into D. discoideum by electroporation. Transformed clones were selected by growth in the presence of 10 μg/ml G418. Detection of β-galactosidase or YFP in developing structures Dialysis membranes with developing structures of cells harboring promoter- lacZ gene fusions were transferred to filter paper soaked in 0.5% glutaraldehyde, incubated in a sealed chamber for 3 min, and then submersed in 0.5% glutaraldehyde for 3 min. After washing with Z-buffer, cells were incubated with X-gal solution 6 and 5 mM K 4 Fe 6 in Z-buffer) at 37°C. 57 The incubation period ranged from 10 min to 24 h, depending on the level of LacZ expression, but the corresponding stages of the wild-type and knockout strains were stained for the same length of time. The membranes with stained structures were mounted on slides in 50% glycerol and imaged with a Leica DMLB2 compound microscope. Cells transformed with the p: cdl1a- YFP plasmid were developed on a thin agar. For imaging of developing structures, a small portion of agar was excised and placed in a drop of silicon oil on a coverslip. Confocal microscopic images were obtained with the Leica TCS SP8 platform, and analyzed with Fiji. 58 RNa-seq Wild-type and cdl1aˉ cells were incubated on NN agar until late culminants to mature fruiting bodies had formed, which were dissociated and frozen at −80°C. Total RNA was isolated from three independent experiments and enriched for mRNA using poly-T–linked magnetic beads. Barcoded cDNA libraries were constructed using NEBNext Ultra II Directional RNA Kit for Illumina, following manufacturer’s instructions, and checked for quality using the Agilent TapeStation DNA D1000 HS Kit. The six bar-coded libraries were normalized to 10 nM and combined into one pool, which was sequenced as paired-end 75-bp reads at ∼16 million reads per sample using the Illumina mid-output NextSeq platform. Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction Triplicate RNA samples were isolated from 10 7 cells, each, using the RNeasy Mini Kit, and DNA contamination was removed using the Turbo DNA-free Kit. Reverse transcription was performed on 1 μg of RNA with the SensiFAST cDNA synthesis kit. The cDNA samples were combined with the oligonucleotide primers listed in Table S2 and PerfeCTa SYBR Green SuperMix and amplified using the LightCycler® 96 System. The PCR program consisted of 45 cycles, with 30 s at 95°C, 55°C and 72°C each. Gene expression levels were normalized to the mean expression level of the constitutively expressed genes DDB_G0282429 and/or DDB_G0280765 32 in the same sample. Quantification and statistical analysis Quantification and statistical analyses for RNA-seq The quality of the sequence reads was checked with FastQC. The reads were aligned to the D. discoideum genome, counted and quantified with RSEM 45 using the coding-sequence annotation available on dictyBase. There were three biological replicates each for cdl1a- and wild-type. The R package DESeq2 46 was used to identify differentially expressed genes at a false discovery rate < 0.05. See Data S1 for Mapped read counts and annotation of DEG. 