 In facultative symbioses, only a fraction of hosts are associated with a symbiont. Understanding why specific host and symbiont strains are associated can inform us of the evolutionary forces affecting facultative symbioses. Possibilities include ongoing host-symbiont coevolution driven by reciprocal selection, or priority effects that are neutral in respect to the host-symbiont interaction. We hypothesized that ongoing host-symbiont coevolution would lead to higher fitness estimates for naturally co-occurring host and symbiont combinations compared to nonnative combinations. We used the Dictyostelium discoideum – Paraburkholderia bonniea system to test this hypothesis. P. bonniea features a reduced genome size relative to another Paraburkholderia symbiont of D. discoideum, indicating a significant history of coevolution with its host. Facultative symbionts may experience continued genome reduction if coevolution is ongoing, or their genome size may have reached a stable state if the symbiosis has also stabilized. Our work demonstrates that ongoing coevolution is unlikely for D. discoideum and P. bonniea. The system instead represents a stable facultative symbiosis. Specifically associated host and symbiont strains in this system are the result of priority effects, and presently unassociated hosts are simply uncolonized. We find evidence for a virulence-transmission trade-off without host strain specificity, and identify candidate virulence factors in the genomes of P. bonniea strains that may contribute to variation in benevolence. Keywords: Coevolution, facultative symbiosis, fitness, flow cytometry, horizontal transmission, protest, virulence factor Lay summary Symbiotic relationships between hosts and their microbial partners are prolonged and intimate associations. Some of these relationships are obligatory for both a host and symbiont to survive, while others are facultative and each partner can survive without the other. In the latter case, some host individuals may be associated with a symbiont while others are not. Specific host and symbiont combinations can be the result of reciprocal adaptation between host and symbiont partners so that naturally co-occurring combinations are best suited for each other in terms of their biological fitness. On the other hand, the symbiont that a host is associated with may simply be the symbiont that arrived first, in what is called a priority effect. We sought to determine which possibility best explained naturally co-occurring combinations of host and symbiont strains of the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum and its symbiont Paraburkholderia bonniea. Our work demonstrates that D. discoideum and P. bonniea are in a stable facultative relationship. Specifically associated host and symbiont combinations are the result of priority effects, and D. discoideum hosts without symbionts are simply uncolonized. This work fills a gap in our understanding of the evolutionary forces affecting facultative symbiotic relationships. We also show for the first time that P. bonniea symbionts can spread among amoeba hosts when they aggregate together during the social stage of their life cycle. Introduction Host-symbiont associations range from obligate or facultative depending on the degree of host-symbiont dependency. For obligate symbioses, when host and symbiont need each other to survive, we expect significant coadaptation between host and symbiont over a longer period of coevolution. In contrast, for facultative symbioses in which host and symbiont can each survive in a free-living state, we expect coadaptation to a lesser degree or relationships to be more recent. Significant coadaptation in obligate symbioses, especially those that feature strict vertical transmission of symbionts, often result in symbionts with highly reduced genome sizes. In facultative symbioses, many of which include horizontal modes of symbiont transmission, symbiont genomes tend to be intermediate in size. While ongoing coevolution can lead to continued genome reduction for facultative symbionts, genome size may have reached a stable state if the facultative symbiosis has also stabilized. For example, Glomeribacter and Glomeromycota fungi are an example of an ancient facultative symbiosis supported by phylogenetic codivergence patterns. Many aspects of facultative symbioses are relatively poorly understood, including which factors determine distribution patterns of facultative symbionts among individuals of a host species. In many facultative symbioses, only a fraction of hosts are associated with a symbiont. Understanding why specific individual host and symbiont strains are associated with each other can inform us of the forces contributing to the evolution of facultative symbioses. Possibilities include ongoing host-symbiont coevolution driven by reciprocal selection, or priority effects that are neutral in respect to the host-symbiont interaction itself. Mutualistic coevolution could lead to specific combinations of host-symbiont strains that enhance each other’s fitness relative to other combinations. In contrast, priority effects in a symbiosis context have to do with the order of symbiont colonization and are typically considered when multiple symbiont species or strains coexist within the same environment as the host. If we extend priority effects to unassociated individual hosts in a facultative symbiosis, presently unassociated individuals may simply be uncolonized. In this sense, the question of what drives host-symbiont association patterns within a facultative symbiosis is related to questions of how host-microbe associations originate and how microbial communities are assembled. The potential for, and outcome of, long-term association between a host and any potential symbionts is determined by intrinsic factors such as host and symbiont genetics, as well as various extrinsic environmental factors. For this work, we focused on the intrinsic factors of host defense and symbiont virulence and their potential contributions to fitness consequences of host-symbiont interactions. Host resistance and tolerance are the two large categories of host defense components that affect evolutionary outcomes for symbioses. The equivalent symbiont virulence components are proliferation and benevolence. Given a specific combination of host and symbiont, variable host resistance and symbiont proliferation will lead to variation in symbiont density, while variable host tolerance and symbiont benevolence will lead to variation in host fitness consequences relative to symbiont density. Differentiating components of host defense or symbiont virulence is important because of their downstream evolutionary effects. For example, host resistance often limits the spread of infections while host tolerance can do the opposite and cause infections to increase in frequency in a population. Targeting pathogen benevolence rather than proliferation may be more likely to prevent counter adaptation such as the evolution of antimicrobial resistance. Figure 1. Theoretical differences between resistance-based and tolerance-based host defense, and proliferation-based and benevolence-based symbiont virulence. Both types of variation can be detected by measuring host fitness and detecting when different host... We used the Dictyostelium discoideum – Paraburkholderia bonniea system to determine whether ongoing host-symbiont coevolution affects which host-symbiont strain pairs naturally co-occur within a facultative symbiosis, and whether host defense and symbiont virulence contribute. The amoeba D. discoideum is an established model for understanding intracellular pathogen infections. It forms a facultative symbiosis with three species of Paraburkholderia : P. agricolaris, P. bonniea, and P. hayleyella. Roughly one quarter of soil-isolated D. discoideum strains carry one or occasionally multiple species of these symbiotic Paraburkholderia. The three symbionts also provide an opportunity to contrast the effect of different evolutionary histories of association. Comparative genomics suggest that P. bonniea and P. hayleyella have evolved genomes that are half the size of other Paraburkholderia in the amoeba host environment. Patterns of host-symbiont coadaptation were previously tested for P. agricolaris and P. hayleyella, indicating that reciprocal adaptation is ongoing for native P. hayleyella hosts and symbionts. Native P. hayleyella hosts had a fitness advantage over nonnative hosts when cured and reinfected with P. hayleyella, while native P. agricolaris hosts did not have a similar advantage for P. agricolaris infections. Inside D. discoideum hosts, P. hayleyella grew faster than on its own while P. agricolaris did not. We hypothesized that ongoing host-symbiont coevolution would lead to higher fitness estimates for native host and symbiont combinations compared to nonnative combinations. We predicted coadapted intrinsic host and symbiont factors would contribute to fitness differences in host-symbiont associations. Using the fact that D. discoideum form social groups and symbiont horizontal transmission should be facilitated by these social groups, we examined host and symbiont fitness at the group level to better consider the evolutionary consequences of variation in fitness. We expected to find evidence of ongoing coevolution for D. discoideum – P. bonniea based on previous results from P. hayleyella, the sister species to P. bonniea, that contrasted from P. agricolaris. Methods D. discoideum has single-cell and multi-cell stages in its life cycle. Vegetative single-cell amoebas feed on bacteria until food density becomes low and starvation begins. Next, in their social stage, starving amoebas aggregate into a multicellular form that ultimately forms fruiting bodies. The amoebas that survive the social stage become spores contained within the fruiting body sorus. We used the vegetative stage to expose D. discoideum amoebas to P. bonniea symbionts, and used spore counts after an unmanipulated social stage as a measure of host fitness. We then used a subsequent social stage to expose uninfected amoebas to pre-infected amoebas, and estimated symbiont horizontal transmission after this manipulated social stage as an important aspect of symbiont fitness. Focal host and symbiont strains We used three native host strains of D. discoideum, three nonnative D. discoideum strains, and three P. bonniea symbiont strains. All D. discoideum strains were previously isolated from Mountain Lake Biological Station in Virginia, USA. The native host strains had been cured of their symbionts using tetracycline and verified as symbiont-free using PCR. For each replicate, host and symbiont strains were grown from freezer stock on SM/5 plates, 2 g yeast extract, 0.2 g MgCl 2, 1.9 g KH 2 PO 4, 1 g K 2 HPO 4 and 15 g agar per liter). KK2 buffer was used throughout for handling bacteria, D. discoideum spores and amoebas. Host fitness We estimated host fitness at a range of infection prevalence for each host-symbiont combination. We estimate host fitness at the social group level rather than at the individual amoeba host level. Instead of symbiont density we estimate symbiont infection prevalence within a group of amoebas, and instead of host fitness as a direct measure of individual host mortality we estimate group productivity given a degree of symbiont prevalence. Experiment : For each combination, D. discoideum spores from freshly grown fruiting bodies were collected and deposited on SM/5 plates at a density of 2 × 10 5 spores per plate and RFP-labeled symbionts at multiplicities of infection of 0, 0.6, 3, and 15. We made triplicate sample plates per combination and left these plates to fruit at 21°C for 5–7 days. We then collected all fruiting bodies and estimated the number of spores per sample by counting 50x diluted spores on a hemocytometer and multiplying these counts by the total volume of spores. Analysis : Our models examine the relationship between host fitness and infection prevalence. We estimated infection prevalence by running a sample of spores from each plate on a BD FACSCalibur flow cytometer. FCS files were imported into FlowJo v10.8.1 for analysis. For host fitness, we took the percent of spores from each host-symbiont combination relative to the uninfected control that was prepared at the same time. For example, host strain QS4 was infected with bb395 at MOI of 0, 0.6, 3, and 15. Spore counts of each individual sample plate were divided by the average spore count of the three uninfected control plates. Symbiont transmission We estimated symbiont horizontal transmission for each host-symbiont combination. We estimate symbiont transmission at the social group level rather than at the individual amoeba host level using the social stage of the D. discoideum life cycle. For symbiont transmission we estimate the rate of transmission that occurs within a social group of interacting hosts given a previous degree of symbiont infection prevalence, rather than transmission from one host to another. Pre-infection : D. discoideum spores from freshly grown fruiting bodies were collected and deposited on SM/5 plates at a density of 2 × 10^5 spores per plate with RFP-labeled symbionts at MOI of 0, plus an additional 3–5 MOI ranging from 0.3 to 30. Once these plates had fruited and amoebas were pre-infected, we collected fresh spores and deposited them on SM/5 plates at densities of 1 × 10^5 and 2 × 10^5 spores per plate with only food bacteria. Experiment : When amoebas were at log-phase growth roughly 36 hours later, uninfected amoebas were dyed with CellTracker Green CMFDA dissolved in DMSO. Pre-infected amoebas were carried along with the dyed amoebas, only exposed to DMSO, and treated in the same way through room temperature incubation and washes. Afterward, dyed amoebas were combined with infected amoebas at 1:0, 0:1, and 1:1 ratios and placed on nitrocellulose filters to aggregate and develop into fruiting bodies in triplicate. 5–7 days later, we collected all fruiting bodies and their spores from these filters. Analysis : Our models examine the relationship between symbiont transmission and infection prevalence. We estimated infection prevalence from the infected only sample and horizontal transmission from the mixed sample as indicated by the co-occurrence of dye and infection in a spore. As above, we ran spore samples on a BD FACSCalibur flow cytometer, and imported FCS files into FlowJo v10.8.1 for analysis. We applied gates for spores, then dyed cells from the negative control, and infected cells from one of the highest MOI infected only samples. A logical gate was applied to the mixed sample to find the percent of spores that were previously uninfected dyed amoebas that were now positive for symbiont infection. Figure 2. Representative samples from symbiont transmission experiment to demonstrate how symbiont transmission during a social stage is detected. Dyed cells are gated on uninfected controls treated with Celltracker. Infected cells with... Statistical analysis Statistical analyses were performed in R v3.6.0 and with packages car v.3.0–12 and lme4 v.1.1–28. For both host fitness and symbiont transmission, we fit linear models with mixed effects. For host fitness, we tested how percent spores were affected by symbiont strain and host type. We tested the effect of host type by coding the native combinations either strictly or leniently. We used infection prevalence as a continuous predictor and experiment date and host strain as random effects. For symbiont transmission, we fit a similar model but with percent transmission as the dependent variable. For all models we fit the most complex model first, then removed nonsignificant terms and compared the simpler model with the complex one using a chi-squared test. We examined effect sizes of factors in the final model using the package effectsize v.0.7.0 and its epsilon_squared function. We also compared infection prevalence across the two experiments. We fit linear models with host strain as a random effect and the different number of social stages and symbiont identity as fixed effects. We examined residuals of the final model for any indications that we had violated model assumptions. We used the package emmeans v.1.7.2 and its emtrends function for post-hoc tests of significant differences between pairwise slopes of infection prevalence by symbiont strain. We also used the emmeans function for post-hoc tests of significant differences between means of infection prevalence by symbiont strain. P -values were adjusted using Tukey’s method. Genome analysis We sequenced and assembled the genomes of bb395 and bb433 as follows. High molecular weight DNA was extracted using Lucigen MasterPure ™ Complete DNA and RNA purification kits. Extracted DNA was sent to University of Washington PacBio Sequencing Services for PacBio HiFi sequencing and MiGS for Oxford Nanopore and illumina sequencing. Raw reads were cleaned using filtlong v0.2.1 and fastp v0.23.1, then assembled and polished using Trycycler v0.5.3 and Polypolish v0.5.0. Trycycler input files were created using Flye v2.9.1-b1780 for both types of reads, Hifiasm v0.18.5-r499 for PacBio reads, and Raven v1.8.1 for ONT reads. Assembled contigs were re-oriented with Circulator v1.5.5. Genes were predicted using Prokka v1.14.6. Pseudofinder v1.0 was used to remove pseudogenes. Pan-genome analysis of the three P. bonniea genomes was performed using Roary v3.13.0. For examination of the differences between genomes, whole genomes were aligned using progressiveMauve within Geneious Prime v2020.2.5. Results Host fitness We estimated the relationship between host fitness and symbiont infection prevalence by exposing native and nonnative D. discoideum hosts to three strains of P. bonniea at a range of multiplicities of infection. Native hosts were D. discoideum strains harboring their own P. bonniea symbiont strain when they were isolated from the wild. Host fitness decreased with increasing infection prevalence across all combinations of hosts and symbionts, but there was no difference between the native and nonnative host-symbiont combinations. This was regardless of whether native status was defined using a strict or lenient definition. Instead, symbiont strain identity significantly affected how host fitness responded to infection prevalence. For example, bb859 infections resulted in a significantly shallower slope in host fitness decline compared to bb395 and bb433 infections. The effects of bb395 and bb433 infections on host fitness were not significantly different from each other. These results support a significant effect of symbiont benevolence variation on host fitness during initial infection. Based on our results, bb859 is more benevolent while bb395 and bb433 are more malevolent to all hosts. Figure 3. Host fitness was negatively correlated with infection prevalence and differed in slope but not average infection prevalence among symbiont strains after a single social stage. Infection prevalence was estimated per host-symbiont-MOI sample as the percent... Table 1. Analysis of Deviance table for Host fitness with lenient native definition Symbiont transmission We estimated the relationship between symbiont transmission and symbiont infection prevalence by exposing uninfected amoebas to pre-infected amoebas during a manipulated social stage of the host life cycle. Horizontal transmission was detected when previously uninfected spores harbored P. bonniea at the end of this social stage. The degree of symbiont horizontal transmission increased with the infection prevalence of pre-infected amoebas that entered the social stage. This positive correlation confirms that the increase in infection is due to horizontal transmission rather than vertical transmission. This is consistent with previous reports that very few amoebas go through cell division during the social stage. As with host fitness above, native and nonnative host-symbiont combinations were no different in overall patterns of symbiont transmission, regardless of how native status was defined. Figure 4. The rate of horizontal transmission was positively correlated with pre-infection prevalence and also differed in slope and average infection prevalence among symbiont strains after a second social stage. Infection prevalence was estimated per host-symbiont-MOI... Table 2. Analysis of Deviance table for Symbiont transmission with lenient native definition In this experiment, infected bb859 reached higher infection prevalence and showed a higher rate of horizontal transmission compared to bb395 and bb433. Pre-infection was established in one social stage, and the experiment was performed in a subsequent social stage. The three P. bonniea strains used in this experiment do not significantly differ in their per amoeba-spore bacterial density. Therefore, higher infection prevalence in bb859 compared to the other strains does not necessarily indicate that bb859 is better at proliferation. However, bb859 symbionts transmitted at a significantly higher rate beyond that simply due to bb859 infections occurring at higher infection prevalence compared to the other two strains bb395 and bb433. When native hosts were leniently defined but not when strictly defined, infection prevalence and host type interacted to reveal that nonnative hosts became infected by bb859 at a slightly higher density compared to native hosts and therefore also transmitted symbionts at a higher level. Synthesis of host and symbiont fitness We observed a significant difference in infection prevalence between the two experiments that is likely due to differences in symbiont strain-specific virulence. The main difference between the design of the two experiments is that for Host fitness we used newly-infected amoebas, but for Symbiont transmission we used amoebas that had been infected in a previous vegetative stage, to minimize the potential for symbionts to be newly acquired from the environment and to maximize our ability to detect horizontal transmission among amoebas. In addition, we infected amoebas for the symbiont transmission experiment at a wider range of MOI compared to the host fitness experiment in order to achieve as wide a range of infection prevalence as possible. We found that we were unable to push the maximum of these ranges higher by using a higher MOI for the initial infection. Figure 5. Infection prevalence was significantly different when amoebas were observed after one vs. two social stages after infection. More malevolent strains reach lower infection prevalence among amoeba hosts compared to more benevolent... Table 3. Analysis of Deviance table for infection prevalence across experiments Combined observations from both experiments suggest that variation in symbiont benevolence leads to variation in symbiont prevalence among P. bonniea strains infecting amoeba hosts in the longer term. We observed no differences in infection prevalence after the first vegetative stage – social stage cycle ). But more malevolent strains bb395 and bb433 become significantly less prevalent among amoeba hosts compared to more benevolent strain bb859 over the course of two vegetative stage - social stage cycles ). A higher rate of horizontal transmission in benevolent strains compared to malevolent strains during social stages contributes to this result. Candidate virulence factors The three P. bonniea strains used in this experiment do not significantly differ in their per spore bacterial density. Yet the fact that we observe virulence variation in benevolence suggests that bb395 and bb433 possess malevolent virulence factors that bb859 lacks, or bb859 possesses one or more benevolent virulence factors that the other strains do not. Whole genome alignment revealed two structural variants each approximately 13 kilobases in size present in strains bb395 and bb433 and absent in bb859. These variants likely resulted from integration of plasmids as both regions have genes encoding putative plasmid recombinases near the 3’ end. We also identified an approximately 6 kilobase structural variant in strain bb859 that lacks closely-related homologs in the other sequenced genomes of Paraburkholderia symbionts of D. discoideum. Discussion The reduced-genome symbiont P. bonniea is able to persistently infect D. discoideum and form a facultative symbiosis in which only a fraction of hosts are associated with this symbiont. Based on our results, D. discoideum and P. bonniea are in a stable facultative symbiosis, where host-symbiont coevolution is primarily historical rather than ongoing. Host and symbiont strains responded similarly to association in native and nonnative combinations. We observed variation in virulence among P. bonniea strains but its effect did not vary for native and nonnative D. discoideum hosts. Strain level variation in symbiont virulence – virulence-transmission trade-off Horizontal transmission of Paraburkholderia symbionts was previously assumed, but we demonstrate it for the first time in this study. In addition, we found evidence that strain level variation in symbiont virulence affects transmission by enabling higher rates of horizontal transmission in benevolent strains compared to malevolent strains. The virulence-transmission trade-off hypothesis posits that if there is a biological link between symbiont virulence and transmission, symbionts should evolve toward a level of virulence where transmission is greatest. This hypothesized trade-off has proven difficult to observe for several reasons, including the influences of host range, multiple symbiont infections, and host population structure that can affect host-symbiont interactions in complex ways. However, recent meta-analyses indicate that there is partial support for the trade-off hypothesis in several biological systems. The three core predictions of the trade-off hypothesis are as follows: within-host symbiont replication rates have a positive relationship with symbiont virulence; within-host symbiont replication rates have a positive relationship with symbiont transmission rates; and symbiont virulence and transmission have a trade-off through the negative relationship between symbiont virulence and host recovery rates. Because we estimated host fitness and symbiont transmission at the social group level rather than at the individual amoeba host level, our evidence that supports each of these points may be an indirect test of the virulence-transmission trade-off, as the original theory is formulated based on investigating symbiont density in individual hosts. However, considering fitness at the population level can facilitate our understanding of how host defense and symbiont virulence evolve. We find support for each of the core predictions of the virulence-transmission trade-off hypothesis. Symbiont infection prevalence had a negative relationship with host fitness, and symbiont infection prevalence had a positive relationship with symbiont horizontal transmission. Lastly, variation in symbiont benevolence led to increased horizontal transmission of benevolent strains compared to malevolent strains. Transmission dynamics are an important missing piece of information in further understanding the evolution of the facultative symbiosis between D. discoideum and Paraburkholderia. Given the persistence of Paraburkholderia symbiont infections in the lab and the facultative aspect of the symbiosis itself, we expect these symbionts to transmit among hosts using both vertical and horizontal routes. We did not test for vertical transmission and specifically designed our experiment to use the social stage so that only horizontal transmission was possible. Our results clearly show the presence of significant horizontal symbiont transmission among D. discoideum amoebas in the social stage of their life cycle. The coexistence and relative influences of both types of transmission routes are better understood in other amoeba-bacteria symbioses. Lack of variation in host defense – ecology and geography Our results indicate that native hosts of P. bonniea do not possess enhanced host defenses to P. bonniea compared to nonnative hosts. These results contrast with evidence of host-symbiont coadaptation in P. hayleyella and its native hosts. Both P. hayleyella and P. bonniea have reduced genomes and are sister species to each other. The lack of host strain-specific counteradaptation to P. bonniea virulence variation may be related to the ecology of host and symbiont. P. bonniea is the rarest of Paraburkholderia symbionts of D. discoideum. Rare encounters between new hosts and P. bonniea may not have a significant impact on D. discoideum populations, particularly if D. discoideum itself is sparsely distributed across soil landscapes. The fitness cost of infection for rare P. bonniea may be insufficient for hosts to evolve defenses against it. Another potential reason why we did not find evidence of host defense variation may be because our native and nonnative hosts were collected from the same geographical locality. In other words, coevolution in this system may occur at the population level rather than at the strain level. Examples of strain-level coadaptation in facultative symbionts are limited. In pea aphids, coadaptation with their symbionts goes in both directions. Pea aphids from a population that typically carry Hamiltonella defensa were more likely to establish symbiosis when newly infected with Hamiltonella compared to hosts from another population. However, in a tripartite host-symbiont-pathogen system, host-by-symbiont and symbiont-by-pathogen genotype by genotype interactions affected how protective Regiella symbionts were to pea aphids against the fungal pathogen Pandora, but not in an way that supported coadaptation between native host and symbiont genotype combinations. Xenorhabdus spp. are obligate symbionts to various Steinernema spp. nematodes. Evidence of host-symbiont coadaptation has been found in a couple different pairings, including between strains of Xenorhabdus nematophila and Steinernema carpocapsae, and between Xenorhabdus bovienii strains and their various Steinernema species hosts. Alternatively, the difference in results between P. bonniea and P. hayleyella may be due to previous experimental approaches that do not account for host or symbiont fitness as a function of infection prevalence. We plan to apply the experimental approach of the current study to the relationship between D. discoideum and P. hayleyella, which is known to cause more detrimental fitness consequences to nonnative hosts. If previous results hold for P. hayleyella, it would provide support for the evolution of reduced antagonism in P. bonniea. Amoeba hosts experience only a mild reduction in fitness to P. bonniea infection compared to P. agricolaris or P. hayleyella. Reduced antagonism is a potential outcome of symbiosis that is favored when virulence-transmission tradeoffs are present and new hosts are rare. Both of these conditions appear to hold for P. bonniea and support our interpretation that the D. discoideum – P. bonniea relationship is a stable facultative symbiosis. Candidate virulence factors for benevolence variation We identified two structural variants that are present in the genomes of bb395 and bb433 but absent in bb859, as well as an additional structural variant that is present in the genome of bb859 but absent in the other two strains. We examined these regions for potential virulence factors that might contribute to the variation in benevolence we observed among P. bonniea strains. Several candidate genes may confer increased malevolence to bb395 and bb433. Among these, PB395_00119/ PB433_00119 encode a putative member of the peptidase S8 family that are known contributors to the pathogenesis of Streptococcus pneumoniae. Interestingly, there are no closely-related homologs in other sequenced Paraburkholderia genomes, but proteins with the highest similarity in Genbank are found in Burkholderia pseudomallei and Ralstonia solanacearum, which are respectively pathogens of mammals and plants. Potentially, this peptidase may be introduced into D. discoideum cells and modify host responses to infection. In the other putative plasmid integration site, PB395_02359/ PB433_02360 is a member of the Xenobiotic Response Element family of transcriptional regulators. It is most similar to a homolog in the opportunistic human pathogen Burkholderia cepacia complex. In these proteins, the putative DNA-binding domain is at the N terminus of the protein and the C-terminal portion of the protein contains a predicted peptidase domain. This architecture is similar to the AlpR gene in Pseudomonas aeruginosa which is involved in the pathway of programmed cell death and has been demonstrated as a virulence factor. One gene in particular appears to be an interesting candidate for a benevolence factor for strain bb859. PBONN_03430 encodes a putative member of a Type I secretion system known to secrete a wide variety of proteins from Gram negative bacteria. An interesting possibility is that the PBONN_03403 protein may be part of a complex that secretes proteins that modulate activities in D. discoideum cells to prevent host cell death and allow bb859 to transmit to other host cells. We are actively working to assess the role of these genes in P. bonniea virulence. Conclusions Our work demonstrates that ongoing coevolution is unlikely for D. discoideum and P. bonniea. The system instead represents a stable facultative symbiosis. Specifically associated host and symbiont strains in this system are the result of priority effects rather than ongoing host-symbiont coevolution, and presently unassociated hosts are simply uncolonized. In addition, we found evidence for a virulence-transmission trade-off without host strain specificity. A benevolent strain had a higher horizontal transmission rate compared to malevolent strains during the social stage of the host life cycle, regardless of host strain. Lastly, we identified candidate virulence factors in P. bonniea genomes, paving the way for future research in determinants of strain level variation in benevolence. Supplementary Material Supplement 1 Click here to view. Acknowledgements We thank Susanne DiSalvo, who generously shared the RFP-labeled P. bonniea strains, and the Strassmann-Queller lab who generously shared the D. discoideum strains used in this work. We thank past and current members of the Noh lab who contributed moral support for this project during its development. Lily Khadempour, Laura Runyen-Janecky, Chris Moore, and Judy Stone provided helpful comments that improved previous drafts. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health and its National Institute of General Medical Sciences by an Institutional Development Award under Grant Number P20GM103423 and Colby College startup funds. Footnotes Data availability Full genome sequences for P. bonniea strains are available through NCBI Genomes. Strain bb859 was submitted previously and bb395 and bb433 were newly submitted. Additional data and code supporting this work can be accessed at: Article information Version 2. bioRxiv. Preprint. 2023 Feb 17. doi: 10.1101/2023.02.16.528903 PMCID: PMC9949114 PMID: 36824889 This is a preprint. It has not yet been peer reviewed by a journal. The National Library of Medicine is running a pilot to include preprints that result from research funded by NIH in PMC and PubMed. Suegene Noh, 1, * Emily R. Larson, 1 Rachel M. Covitz, 2 Anna Chen, 1 Prachee R. Mazumder, 1 Ron F. Peck, 1 Marisa C. Hamilton, 3 and Robert A. Dettmann 4 Suegene Noh 1 Biology Department, Colby College, Waterville, Maine, USA Find articles by Suegene Noh Emily R. Larson 1 Biology Department, Colby College, Waterville, Maine, USA Find articles by Emily R. Larson Rachel M. Covitz 2 Department of Developmental, Molecular, and Chemical Biology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Find articles by Rachel M. Covitz Anna Chen 1 Biology Department, Colby College, Waterville, Maine, USA Find articles by Anna Chen Prachee R. Mazumder 1 Biology Department, Colby College, Waterville, Maine, USA Find articles by Prachee R. Mazumder Ron F. Peck 1 Biology Department, Colby College, Waterville, Maine, USA Find articles by Ron F. Peck Marisa C. Hamilton 3 University Program in Genetics and Genomics, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA Find articles by Marisa C. Hamilton Robert A. Dettmann 4 Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA Find articles by Robert A. Dettmann 1 Biology Department, Colby College, Waterville, Maine, USA 2 Department of Developmental, Molecular, and Chemical Biology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 3 University Program in Genetics and Genomics, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA 4 Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA * Corresponding author: ude.ybloc@hon.enegeus PMC Copyright notice This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which allows reusers to copy and distribute the material in any medium or format in unadapted form only, for noncommercial purposes only, and only so long as attribution is given to the creator. The complete version history of this preprint is available at bioRxiv. Articles from bioRxiv are provided here courtesy of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Preprints 