 Cullins are a core component of cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases, which regulate the degradation, function, and subcellular trafficking of proteins. CULs are post-translationally regulated through neddylation, a process that conjugates the ubiquitin-like modifier protein neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated protein 8 to target cullins, as well as non-cullin proteins. Counteracting neddylation is the deneddylase, COP9 signalosome, which removes NEDD8 from target proteins. Recent comparative genomics studies revealed that CRLs and the CSN are highly conserved in Amoebozoa. A well-studied representative of Amoebozoa, the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, has been used for close to 100 years as a model organism for studying conserved cellular and developmental processes owing to its unique life cycle comprised of unicellular and multicellular phases. The organism is also recognized as an exceptional model system for studying cellular processes impacted by human diseases, including but not limited to, cancer and neurodegeneration. Recent work shows that the neddylation inhibitor, MLN4924, inhibits growth and multicellular development in D. discoideum, which supports previous work that revealed the cullin interactome in D. discoideum and the roles of cullins and the CSN in regulating cellular and developmental processes during the D. discoideum life cycle. Here, we review the roles of cullins, neddylation, and the CSN in D. discoideum to guide future work on using this biomedical model system to further explore the evolutionarily conserved functions of cullins and neddylation. Keywords: COP9 signalosome, cullins, Dictyostelium discoideum, neddylation, SCF complex Neddylation, Cullins, and the COP9 Signalosome The continual turnover of proteins through degradation maintains cell homeostasis, facilitates signal transduction, and allows for progression through the cell cycle. One of the pathways cells use to degrade proteins involves the proteasome, where ubiquitin is the tag that marks proteins for degradation. In addition to ubiquitin, there are also ubiquitin-like modifiers that target both proteins and lipids to control their subcellular localization, macromolecular interactions, and enzymatic activity. Known ubiquitin-like modifiers include small ubiquitin-like modifier, ubiquitin fold modifier 1, ubiquitin-related modifier 1, ubiquitin-like modifier HUB1, and neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated protein 8. NEDD8 is highly conserved across eukaryotes and is conjugated to target proteins at a near-terminal lysine residue through a process known as neddylation. The modification was first observed in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae S phase kinase-associated protein 1 -Cullin-F-box complex, where Rub1, the S. cerevisiae ortholog of human NEDD8, was found conjugated to Cdc53p, the S. cerevisiae ortholog of cullin 1. In the SCF complex, the linker protein SKP1 bridges the interaction between the cullin and F-box protein, which targets specific substrates for ubiquitination. Cullins then serve as the scaffold for multi-subunit ubiquitin ligases. SCF is a member of the cullin–RING E3 ubiquitin ligase superfamily, which plays important roles in regulating a variety of proteins including transcription factors, cell cycle regulators, DNA damage response/repair proteins, and growth factor receptors. In addition, neddylation plays an important role in regulating the activity of subunits that form the proteasome and ribosomes. During proteotoxic stress, neddylation promotes ribosomal protein accumulation in the nucleus to protect the proteasome system and prevent dysfunction. During oxidative stress, neddylation regulates poly polymerase 1 activity to delay the initiation of PARP1-dependent cell death. Thus, neddylation has multiple essential functions in the cell. Figure 1 Neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated protein 8 is conserved across eukaryotes. Alignment of NEDD8 ortholog protein sequences in different eukaryote species, including those in plants, amoebozoa, fungi,... Many aspects of neddylation mirror and incorporate pathways that are associated with ubiquitination. Akin to ubiquitin, once NEDD8 is translated into an inactive precursor form, it requires cleavage of its short C-terminal amino acid extension to generate the mature form of the protein. Mature NEDD8 has an accessible C-terminal glycine residue positioned at amino acid 76 that is used to conjugate NEDD8 to the lysine of a target protein. NEDD8 C-terminal cleavage occurs through the actions of ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase isozyme L1 and UCHL3. UCHs also cleave the C-terminal extensions of ubiquitin. While UCHL1 and UCHL3 both bind to NEDD8, the hydrolytic processing of NEDD8 is carried out by UCHL3. Sentrin-specific protease 8 is another NEDD8 processing enzyme that exclusively targets NEDD8 and not ubiquitin. Like UCHL3, SENP8 also cleaves NEDD8 at the 5-amino acid C-terminal extension suggesting the functions of the two enzymes are redundant. Figure 2 An overview of the neddylation and deneddylation pathway. NEDD8 is processed into its matured form through both ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase isozyme and Sentrin-specific protease 8 proteolytic cleavage. NEDD8 is passed through a “baton”... Like ubiquitination, the conjugation of mature NEDD8 to target proteins follows an E1-E2-E3 cascade. After NEDD8 is cleaved, it is adenylated and activated by E1 in an adenosine triphosphate -dependent mechanism. E1 is a heterodimer of NEDD8-activating enzyme E1 regulatory subunit and ubiquitin-activating enzyme 3. Within E1, NEDD8 resides between NAE1 and UBA3 but binds directly with the latter. E1 then transfers NEDD8 to E2, which is comprised of ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme 2F and UBE2M. Both UBE2F and UBE2M can bind NEDD8. E2 receives assistance in the final step of neddylation from a few E3 ligases such as ring box 1/regulator of cullins 1, ring box 2/regulator of cullins 2, and defective in cullin neddylation 1, to transfer NEDD8 to the lysine of target proteins and initiate CRL assembly. Previous work showed that RBX1 and DCUN1D1 interact with the NEDD8-UBE2M intermediate to neddylate CUL1, CUL3, CUL3, and CUL4. CUL5 neddylation is carried out by RBX2 in association with UBE2F, but unlike RBX1, it is not known if DCUN1D1 also participates in the conjugation. Finally, CUL7 and CUL9 have been shown to bind to RBX1. Like ubiquitination, proteins can be polyneddylated. However, unlike ubiquitin, which has over 10,000 targets in humans, NEDD8 appears to be conjugated to a shorter list of proteins. For example, Jones et al. performed a targeted proteomics analysis to identify 496 NEDD8-modified and associated proteins in HEK293 cells, which included all human cullins. In addition, a recent study identified 1,101 unique neddylation sites on 620 human proteins in HEK293 cells. Cullins undergo neddylation at a consensus C-terminal neddylation motif and are conjugated specifically to a lysine residue found within the motif. Therefore, neddylation represents a unique but smaller pool of ubiquitin-like modification within the eukaryotic cell, where cullins are the major targets. The dynamic assembly of CRL complexes is modulated by cullin-associated NEDD8-dissociated protein 1, which functions as a SKP1/F-box protein exchange factor for CUL1. Neddylation of CUL1 and subsequent binding of SKP1 and a F-box protein causes the displacement of CAND1, thus allowing for CRL assembly. Without the incorporation of CAND1, there is inefficient degradation of target proteins. Neddylation also contributes to the enzymatic activity of the SCF complex by causing a conformational shift to improve ubiquitin transfer activity and E2 recruitment. The important role of this process is highlighted in studies that showed that the complete loss of neddylation is lethal. In humans, abnormalities in neddylation are linked to a variety of pathological conditions including cancer, neurodegeneration, autoimmune diseases, and other inflammatory diseases. Together, these findings suggest that neddylation is a key component of CRL regulation, and when aberrant, contributes to the pathogenesis associated with many human diseases. Deneddylation occurs through the actions of the COP9 signalosome, which is composed of nine subunits in humans. SENP8/DEN1, which participates in NEDD8 processing, also plays a role in disassembling CRLs. The CSN exists as two variant complexes containing CSN1-6, CSN8-9, and one of CSN7A or CSN7B, which have overlapping functions in the deneddylation of CRLs. However, CSN7B has been reported to have a unique function in adipogenesis and the DNA damage response. The CSN is conserved across eukaryotes including plants, invertebrates, yeast, fungi, and humans. CSN complexes that contain fewer than nine subunits have been observed in different eukaryotic clades, suggesting that the protein architecture of the complex has been prone to changes over time. However, a consistent hallmark is the conservation of the CSN5 subunit among different eukaryotes. As discussed above, the CSN subunits exhibit widespread abundance throughout both unicellular and multicellular eukaryotes. Amoebozoan genomes encode either a CSN with all the known subunits or all but CSN8 and CSN9 subunits. A representative model organism from Amoebozoa is the social amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum, which was identified as a species with a genome encoding an intact eight subunit CSN. D. discoideum emerged at least 600 million years ago and has been studied for close to a century. Various cullins have been identified as key regulators of multicellular development in D. discoideum. Furthermore, components of the neddylation pathway in metazoans are conserved in D. discoideum, and there is evidence supporting cullin neddylation during the life cycle. Here, we review the known and predicted roles of cullins and neddylation in D. discoideum to set the stage for future work that further examines how cullins and neddylation regulate conserved cellular and developmental processes. Table 1 Sequence similarity between neddylation pathway proteins and CSN subunits in humans and Dictyostelium discoideum. The Life Cycle of Dictyostelium discoideum D. discoideum belongs to a clade within the Amoebozoan known as the social amoebae, a term coined by Bonner after observing that unicellular D. discoideum amoebae could develop into multicellular fruiting bodies when prompted by starvation. In the 24-h asexual life cycle of D. discoideum, a starved population of amoebae aggregate to form complex multicellular structures in a time-dependent manner. After aggregating to form a mound, cells rise above the surface to form a finger, which then falls on the surface to form a motile pseudoplasmodium, or slug. As multicellular development continues, the slug forms a culminant where cells undergo terminal differentiation to form a fruiting body, the final stage of development. The fruiting body is composed of a mass of differentiated spores that sit atop a slender stalk of differentiated stalk cells. During differentiation, ~80% of the cells within the slug become pre-spore cells, which eventually differentiate into spores. The other ~20% differentiate into pre-stalk cells and become non-reproductive cells that comprise the stalk and two other segments of the fruiting body. These two other segments are composed of differentiated cells derived from the same cell type as the stalk cells and are referred to as the cup and basal disk cells. The D. discoideum life cycle highlights the evolution of many processes required for multicellular development, including but not limited to, cell–cell communication, cell–cell adhesion, and differentiation. Figure 3 The Dictyostelium discoideum life cycle. The asexual life cycle of D. discoideum occurs within 24 h. D. discoideum cells are unicellular during growth and divide by mitosis. Starvation triggers the onset of development. Starved amoebae undergo... Neddylation, Cullins, and the CSN in Dictyostelium discoideum Neddylation and Cullins in Dictyostelium discoideum In D. discoideum, nedd8 is expressed throughout development but peaks in expression after 4 h of development. This expression profile overlaps with the expression profiles of most cullin genes in D. discoideum, which peak in expression during aggregation. Unlike later diverging amorphea, the C-terminal extension is only one amino acid long for D. discoideum Nedd8. The D. discoideum genome also encodes a protein homologous to UCHL1 and UCHL3 in humans, Uch1, and an ortholog of human SENP8, Senp8. The D. discoideum E1 complex is a heterodimer comprised of orthologs of mammalian NAE1 and UBA3. There is only one potential E2 encoded by ube2M, which is similar in sequence to both UBE2M and UBE2F. The D. discoideum genome also encodes an ortholog of RBX1 and RBX2, Rbx1, that is proposed to function as an E3 in the organism, as well as an ortholog of DCUN1D1. Finally, D. discoideum contains an ortholog of human CAND1. Together, the predicted neddylation pathway in D. discoideum shares similarities to the well-established pathway in metazoans. In mammals, there are eight members of the cullin family. The D. discoideum genome encodes five proteins that all share sequence similarity with human cullins. Moreover, Sheikh et al. compared characteristic sequence motifs in cullins to show that CUL1 is most similar to CulA, CulE, and CulB, CUL3 is most similar to CulC, and CUL4B is most similar to CulD. BLASTp searches also show that the D. discoideum ortholog of anaphase promoting complex subunit 2 shares limited sequence similarity with human CUL1, CUL2, CUL3, CUL4A, and CUL4B. In mammals, anaphase promoting complex functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase that regulates cell cycle progression by mediating ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of target proteins. Since only CulE has previously been validated as a neddylated protein, we examined the sequences of other D. discoideum cullins to determine whether the neddylation motif is conserved. The alignment revealed that the cullin neddylation motif is highly conserved between cullins from D. discoideum and humans. While the residues upstream of the lysine are identical and conserved in D. discoideum cullins, there are differences in the two downstream residues. Adjacent to the lysine, CulD has a threonine rather than adhering to the amino acid sequence, indicating functional flexibility between the threonine and serine groups in D. discoideum. Similarly, CulE differs at the +2 position with a lysine residue that normally contains either an arginine, histidine, or glutamic acid residue. Since there is a highly conserved neddylation motif present in each of CulA, CulB, CulC, CulD, and CulE, there is potential for Nedd8 to be conjugated to all D. discoideum cullins. Finally, the D. discoideum genome encodes orthologs of eight human CSN subunits. Table 2 Sequence similarity between cullins in humans and Dictyostelium discoideum. Figure 4 Alignment of cullins from Dictyostelium discoideum and human. Sequences were aligned on MEGA7 using the MUSCLE alignment and displayed using ESPript 3.0. Colored residues indicate physiochemical properties and conservation at a position. Arrowhead marks... Cullin Gene Expression During the Dictyostelium discoideum Life Cycle The D. discoideum cullin genes are differentially expressed during development and peak in expression at different times during the developmental program. The expression of culB, culC, culD, and culE increase and reach peak levels during the first 8 h of development, followed by a decline throughout the remaining stages of development. Conversely, culA rises in expression throughout development and reaches its peak level after 20 h. Consistent with this, Mohanty et al. used an anti-CUL1 antibody to show that a cullin reaches peak levels after 16–20 h of development. Combined, these findings suggest that cullins may have specific roles during D. discoideum development. The CulE Interactome in Dictyostelium discoideum In Sheikh et al. identified the SCF interactome in D. discoideum by expressing FLAG-tagged CulE in amoebae. In the interactome, proteins orthologous to components of the mammalian SCF complex were identified, such as homologs of SKP1 and three F-box proteins. Using an antibody directed against D. discoideum Skp1, another co-immunoprecipitation was performed that identified CulE as a Skp1-interactor via Western blotting. F-box proteins have been shown to interact with cullins in D. discoideum. For example, FbxD has been identified as a CulE interactor. In addition, Mohanty et al. reported an in vivo interaction between CulA and FbxA using an antibody against human CUL1 that failed to detect a protein in culA − cells via Western blotting. However, since the antibody was not specific for CulA, and there is strong sequence similarity between cullins in D. discoideum, it is possible that another cullin was detected in the FbxA pull-down. Nonetheless, these observations suggest that the SCF complex associates with distinct cullins at different points in the life cycle to regulate specific processes during multicellular development. In addition, Skp1 modification affects the representation of F-box proteins in the Skp1 interactome suggesting that it influences the recruitment of F box proteins to the SCF complex. Figure 5 Skp1-Cullin-F-box complex interactome reveals components of the neddylation pathway and subunits of the CSN. Sheikh et al. identified proteins that interact with D. discoideum Skp1, FbxD, and CulE after performing co-immunoprecipitations... The CulE interactome also revealed that known mechanisms of SCF regulation are conserved in D. discoideum. For example, an ortholog of mammalian CAND1 was identified as an interactor suggesting that the mechanisms regulating CRL assembly and disassembly are similar in D. discoideum to what is observed in other eukaryotes. Furthermore, CulE was shown to interact with several proteins involved in neddylation and deneddylation such as Nedd8, Rbx1, and all the Csn subunits. As additional support for the neddylation of CulE, Western blotting for the CulE protein shows two distinct protein bands. In total, accumulated evidence strongly supports that not only is the neddylation machinery conserved in D. discoideum, but it also dynamically regulates the assembly of SCF complexes in D. discoideum by acting on cullins. The Roles of Cullins and Their Regulation During Dictyostelium discoideum Growth Roles of Neddylation and the CSN in Cell Proliferation While the role of neddylation is well established for Opisthokonta, until recently, it was unknown whether neddylation regulates the life cycle of organisms belonging to Amoebozoa. Recent work used the well-established NAE1 inhibitor, MLN4924, to reveal the roles of neddylation during D. discoideum growth and multicellular development. In Opisthokonta, neddylation regulates cell cycle progression and consequently, cell proliferation. In D. discoideum, MLN4924 significantly reduces cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner during the growth phase of the life cycle. In addition, counting factor-associated protein D, which is a secreted quorum sensing protein that modulates cell proliferation, was detected in the FbxD interactome. These findings indicate a conserved role for neddylation in regulating cell proliferation and support recent work linking neddylation to the proliferation of cancer cells. However, whether MLN4924 specifically affects CRLs in D. discoideum remains to be determined since non-cullin targets of neddylation have been reported in several organisms including S. pombe, A. thaliana, and Trypanosoma brucei. Figure 6 The roles of cullins, neddylation, and the CSN during the Dictyostelium discoideum life cycle. During growth, MLN4924 inhibits cell proliferation and folic acid-mediated chemotaxis. Loss of csn5 also inhibits cell proliferation. FbxD binds CfaD, which... Deneddylation of cullins occurs through the actions of SENP8 and the CSN. Deneddylation by the CSN occurs via the CSN5 subunit, which is a metalloprotease. For that reason, CSN5 has the highest selection pressure and is the most conserved of all the CSN subunits. Thus, in D. discoideum, Csn5 would be considered the essential subunit of the CSN required for the deneddylation of cullins. Consistent with this, loss of csn5 impairs cell proliferation in D. discoideum. Since reduced neddylation and impaired deneddylation both impact cell proliferation D. discoideum, these findings indicate that cell proliferation in D. discoideum requires efficient cycling of neddylation and deneddylation. Role of Neddylation in Folic Acid-Mediated Chemotaxis D. discoideum cells use chemoattractants to sense nutrient levels within the environment. During the growth or feeding stage of the life cycle, D. discoideum cells sense and undergo chemotaxis towards folic acid, which is a biomolecule secreted by bacteria. Our group observed reduced chemotaxis toward folic acid when cells were treated with MLN4924. Intriguingly, recent work supports a role for neddylation in regulating macrophage chemotaxis in chronic pancreatitis. Therefore, work in D. discoideum and humans indicates that neddylation plays an important regulatory role in chemotaxis. As a result, further probing of the chemotactic pathway in D. discoideum may improve our understanding of the mechanisms that CRLs use to regulate chemotaxis in humans. The Role of Cullins and Their Regulation During Dictyostelium discoideum Early Development CulA Is Required for cAMP-Mediated Chemotaxis During the early stages of multicellular development, D. discoideum amoebae aggregate by chemotaxis toward cyclic adenosine monophosphate, which is produced and secreted by starving cells. Intriguingly, several cullin genes increase their expression during this stage of the life cycle. Consistent with this, loss of culA delays aggregation. Using an assay that examines chemotaxis competence, Mohanty et al. showed that the response of culA − cells to cAMP was suboptimal suggesting that CulA has an early role in development by influencing cAMP-mediated chemotaxis during aggregation. As discussed above, the role of neddylation in regulating chemotaxis in D. discoideum is consistent with its role in regulating macrophage chemotaxis in chronic pancreatitis. In D. discoideum, cAMP controls the actions of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A, which is a signaling kinase that regulates the expression of genes required for inducing aggregation, cell-type differentiation, and culmination. Upstream of PKA activation, the cAMP phosphodiesterase, RegA, catalyzes the conversion of cAMP to 5′-adenosine monophosphate to prevent PKA activation. As a result of its regulatory role during aggregation, the level of RegA protein peaks at this stage of the developmental program. However, loss of culA or fbxA causes the level of RegA protein to remain high even after aggregation. When culA − cells express a constitutively active PKA protein, the observed defects in aggregation and chemotaxis are absent. Since constitutively active PKA functions irrespective of cAMP levels, this supports the notion that abnormally high amounts of RegA interfere with cAMP levels to dysregulate PKA activity. In conclusion, there is a significant role for CulA, and the SCF complex it functions with, in early development where it regulates the ubiquitination and degradation of RegA to maintain intracellular cAMP levels for PKA activation. The SCF-dependent ubiquitination of RegA also appears to be dependent on extracellular signal-regulated kinase, an ortholog of mammalian mitogen-activated protein kinase. In D. discoideum, ErkA phosphorylates RegA to inhibit its activity and this phosphorylation could then prime RegA for SCF-mediated ubiquitination of RegA. Additional work is required to determine if ErkA also directly regulates components of the SCF complex in D. discoideum. Intriguingly, ectopic expression of mouse Cul1 restored RegA degradation in culA − cells suggesting that the functions of mouse CUL1 and D. discoideum CulA are conserved. Role of Neddylation During Aggregation During D. discoideum development, cullins are differentially regulated and this is possibly linked to their roles in developmental processes at specific time points. Most cullin genes peak in expression during the first 12 h of development when cells aggregate to form multicellular mounds. In addition, genes involved in the conjugation of Nedd8 to cullins such as nedd8, uch1, nae1, ube1C, ube2M, and rbx1 all follow a similar pattern of expression to the cullin genes, where they peak in expression during the first 12 h of development and then decline in expression throughout the remaining stages. These data suggest that transcriptional changes in genes associated with neddylation occur in tandem with changes in the expression of cullin genes. Since neddylation promotes CRL assembly, this would allow for timely assembly of CRLs early in development to mediate the initiation of development and aggregation. In addition, CRL assembly and disassembly are thought to occur at least as frequently as new substrate selection. Consistent with this, the CSN subunits in D. discoideum also peak in expression during the first 12 h of development. Combined, these results indicate that CRL assembly and disassembly are regulated by cycles of neddylation and deneddylation and that this cycling plays an important role in regulating the early stages of D. discoideum development. Treatment of D. discoideum cells with MLN4924 delayed aggregation in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, this delay persisted even after 24 h, where cells were still unable to form compact mounds. Similarly, loss of culA was shown to impact cAMP-mediated chemotaxis and delay aggregation. Since neddylation inhibition phenocopies this result, it suggests that SCF complex assembly is inhibited when neddylation does not occur, which is consistent with observations in human cells. These results also reveal that by upregulating the expression of nedd8 and cullins during cell aggregation, D. discoideum utilizes neddylation as a mechanism to facilitate the timely assembly of the SCF complex. Therefore, the mechanism underlying how neddylation influences cell aggregation is likely tied to its regulation of the SCF complex. Finally, MLN4924 also affects the secretion of the quorum sensing protein conditioned medium factor A during aggregation. Upon starvation, amoebae begin secreting CmfA, which acts as a trigger for gene expression, as a high density of starved cells correlates to a high concentration of CmfA. Once a CmfA threshold is reached, cells upregulate the expression of developmental genes, including spore coat protein and cysteine protease D, and aggregate through cAMP-mediated chemotaxis. Inhibition of neddylation by MLN4924 increases the intracellular and extracellular amounts of CmfA. While CmfA was not identified as an interactor of the D. discoideum SCF complex, the effect of MLN4924 on its intracellular and extracellular levels suggests it is regulated by neddylation. The Roles of Cullins and Their Regulation During the Mid-to-Late Stages of Dictyostelium discoideum Development Roles of Cullins and Their Regulation During Slug Formation and Migration A potential explanation for how cullins influence cell-type differentiation involves the process of autophagy. Autophagy is a metabolic pathway that degrades intracellular material through lysosomal digestion. Autophagy is a required pathway for D. discoideum development and influences cell differentiation. In mammalian cells, the roles of cullins in regulating autophagy are well-established and occur at different steps in the autophagy pathway. In general, cullins regulate the ubiquitination of proteins belonging to the autophagy machinery, mTOR activation, and the activation transcription factors. There also appears to be a link between cullins and autophagy in D. discoideum. During the transition from mounds to slugs, mounds form a single tip. However, culA − and culB − cells form multi-tipped mounds during development, which is characteristic of D. discoideum mutants with defects in the autophagy pathway. These results indicate that cullins may influence autophagy in D. discoideum thereby impacting cell differentiation. However, at present, this link remains to be experimentally determined for the D. discoideum cullins. Role of the SCF Complex in Oxygen Sensing Chemical and physical cues from the environment are critical for regulating D. discoideum development, an organism normally found in soils worldwide. Accessible oxygen influences slug polarity and migration, cell differentiation, and other aspects of multicellular development. However, the way this oxygen is sensed by D. discoideum differs from what occurs in metazoans. Before the evolution of metazoans, single-celled eukaryotes like D. discoideum and Toxoplasma gondii lacked the hypoxia inducible factor system for oxygen sensing. Instead, these protozoans relied on modifying the SCF complex to mediate oxygen sensing and the mechanism behind this has been well studied in D. discoideum. In D. discoideum, regulation of the SCF complex allows for oxygen sensing and this occurs via post-translational modifications. Skp1 of the SCF complex is post-translationally modified at Pro143 through prolyl hydroxylation via the prolyl hydroxylase gene. Since phyA is a direct oxygen sensor, the presence of oxygen functions as the initial stimuli for Skp1 hydroxylation. Following hydroxylation, Skp1 is O-glycosylated through the actions of several glycosyltransferases including GlcNAc transferase, poly-glycosyltransferase, and alpha-gal-transferase. Glycosylation then promotes the association of Skp1 with F-box proteins and allows for the rapid assembly of the SCF complex to regulate culmination and spore formation, and perhaps other oxygen-dependent developmental pathways. In conclusion, this represents a novel post-translational modification of the SCF complex that is utilized for oxygen-dependent development in D. discoideum. Cullins and Neddylation Influence Cell-Type Differentiation After aggregation, D. discoideum cells undergo cell-type differentiation to become pre-spore or pre-stalk cells, which each express cell-specific markers; extracellular matrix protein A for pre-stalk; and spore coat protein 60 for pre-spore. When these markers were examined post-aggregation in culA − cells, ecmA expression was absent and cotC expression was decreased. In addition, an altered ratio of pre-stalk to pre-spore cells was reported in fbxA − cells and overexpression of FLAG-tagged FbxD has been shown to delay fruiting body formation. Finally, inhibiting neddylation with MLN4924 was shown to impair fruiting body formation. Collectively, these findings indicate that CulA, FbxA, FbxD, and neddylation have roles in cell differentiation. Cullin genes in D. discoideum have selective roles in cell differentiation. Unlike what was seen with loss of culA, culB − cells express ecmA precociously and have a propensity to form pre-stalk cells. Moreover, culB − cells that express constitutively active PKA differentiate into stalk cells prior to even reaching the mound stage of development. In addition, PKA activity is antagonistic with the loss of culB, worsening the phenotype, and contrasting work with culA − cells. These results suggest that CulB has non-CRL differentiation functions or is utilized in another unique CRL complex involved in regulating differentiation in D. discoideum. Previous work suggests that cell-type differentiation in D. discoideum may also be influenced by culD and culE. In a recent study examining the expression of genes in different cell-types after differentiation, culD and culE transcripts were both preferentially upregulated in spores and downregulated in stalk cells. Altered expression in specific cell types may occur to directly facilitate the terminal differentiation or allow for functions related to the distinct roles of the cell types. Future work examining these two cullin genes will help elucidate how culD and culE contribute to cell differentiation during multicellular development. Conclusion D. discoideum is a well-established model organism that has been studied for close to 100 years. Its 24-h life cycle is comprised of unicellular and multicellular phases that allows for a detailed examination of a multitude of fundamental cellular and developmental processes in the context of a whole organism. D. discoideum can be cultured rapidly and inexpensively at room temperature in liquid medium or on non-nutrient agar with bacteria. Importantly, D. discoideum is genetically tractable and a variety of expression constructs have been generated to facilitate studies on protein localization and function. For these and other reasons, it has also been used as a high-throughput biomedical model for studying variety of human diseases. Regulated protein degradation is an essential process in all eukaryotes. In D. discoideum, CRL-mediated ubiquitination regulates complex processes associated with growth and multicellular development. In addition, inhibiting neddylation with MLN4924 impacts cell proliferation, chemotaxis, aggregation, and multicellular development. As a result, future work in D. discoideum has the potential to enhance our understanding of the cellular and developmental roles of cullins, neddylation, and the CSN. For example, cell migration is an important physiological process that occurs during wound healing, embryonic development, and disease. D. discoideum is an ideal model system for studying fundamental aspects of cellular migration, particularly the mechanisms underlying chemotaxis. As discussed in this review, neddylation regulates the migration of a variety of cell types. Since MLN4924 inhibits cell migration during D. discoideum development, and CulA plays an important role in cAMP-mediated chemotaxis, D. discoideum can be used to further explore the role of neddylation and cullins in regulating cell migration and chemotaxis in normal and diseased cells. In addition, neddylation has been linked to autophagy regulation in esophageal and liver cancer. Since the mechanisms regulating autophagy in D. discoideum are like those that regulate autophagy in mammals, D. discoideum can be used to increase our understanding of how neddylation regulates autophagy. Finally, although there are significant differences between metazoan and D. discoideum development, studying the roles of neddylation and cullins in regulating multicellular development in D. discoideum may uncover conserved developmental roles that can then be validated in mammalian models and humans. This is important since there is a need to better understand the mechanisms regulating timely protein degradation events during metazoan development, as recent studies have reported an essential role for neddylation in cardiac development. Thus, D. discoideum can be used as a model system to better understand different aspects of the neddylation pathway and CSN during development, which has implications for several diseases revolving around dysregulated neddylation. Together, this review highlights the use of D. discoideum as a model system to better understand the conserved cellular and developmental roles of cullins, neddylation, and the CSN. Author Contributions SM and RJH: conceptualization. WDK and SM: writing—original draft. WDK, SM, and RJH: writing—review and editing. RJH: supervision and funding acquisition. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version. Funding This work was supported by a Discovery Grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. WDK was supported by a Queen Elizabeth II Graduate Scholarship in Science and Technology. Conflict of Interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Publisher’s Note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Glossary AgtA Alpha-gal-transferase Anapc2 Anaphase promoting complex subunit 2 cAMP Cyclic adenosine monophosphate CAND1 Cullin-associated NEDD8-dissociated protein 1 cAMP Cyclic adenosine monophosphate Cdk Cyclin-dependent kinase CfaD Counting factor-associated protein D CmfA Conditioned media factor A CotC/SP60 Spore coat protein SP60 CRL Cullin–RING ligase CSN COP9 signalosome CUL Cullin DCUN1D1 Defective in cullin neddylation 1 EcmA Extracellular matrix protein A ErkA Extracellular signal-regulated kinase Fbx F-box-containing protein GntA GlcNAc transferase MAPK Mitogen-activated protein kinase MTOR Mammalian target of rapamycin NAE1 NEDD8 activating enzyme E1 regulatory subunit NEDD8 Neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated protein 8 PARP1 Poly polymerase 1 PgtA Poly-glycosyltransferase PhyA Prolyl hydroxylase PKA Protein kinase A RBX1/ROC1 Ring box 1/regulator of cullins 1 RBX2/ROC2 Ring box 2/regulator of cullins 2 SCF Skp1-Cullin-F-box SENP8/DEN1 Sentrin-specific protease 8 SKP1 S phase kinase-associated protein 1 SUMO Small ubiquitin-like modifier UBA3 Ubiquitin-activating enzyme 3 UBE2F Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2F UBE2M/UBC12 Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2M UCHL Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase isozyme UFM1 Ubiquitin fold modifier 1 URM1 Ubiquitin-related modifier-1 Open in a separate window Article information Front Physiol. 2022; 13: 827435. Published online 2022 Mar 1. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2022.827435 PMCID: PMC9108976 PMID: 35586714 William D. Kim, 1, † Sabateeshan Mathavarajah, 2, † and Robert J. Huber 3, *, † William D. Kim 1 Environmental and Life Sciences Graduate Program, Trent University, Peterborough, ON, Canada Find articles by William D. Kim Sabateeshan Mathavarajah 2 Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada Find articles by Sabateeshan Mathavarajah Robert J. Huber 3 Department of Biology, Trent University, Peterborough, ON, Canada Find articles by Robert J. Huber 1 Environmental and Life Sciences Graduate Program, Trent University, Peterborough, ON, Canada 2 Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada 3 Department of Biology, Trent University, Peterborough, ON, Canada Corresponding author. Edited by: Julien Licchesi, University of Bath, United Kingdom Reviewed by: Christopher West, University of Georgia, United States; Francisco Velazquez, University of Buenos Aires, Argentina *Correspondence: Robert J. Huber, ac.utnert@rebuhtrebor † These authors have contributed equally to this work This article was submitted to Integrative Physiology, a section of the journal Frontiers in Physiology Received 2021 Dec 2; Accepted 2022 Feb 3. Copyright © 2022 Kim, Mathavarajah and Huber. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License. The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author and the copyright owner are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. Articles from Frontiers in Physiology are provided here courtesy of Frontiers Media SA 