 Mucolipidosis type IV, a devastating neurological lysosomal disease linked to mutations in the transient receptor potential channel mucolipin 1, TRPML1, a calcium permeable channel in the membranes of vesicles in endolysosomal system. TRPML1 function is still being elucidated and a better understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of Mucolipidosis type IV, may facilitate development of potential treatments. We have created a model to study mucolipin function in the eukaryotic slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum by altering expression of its single mucolipin homologue, mcln. We show that in Dictyostelium mucolipin overexpression contributes significantly to global chemotactic calcium responses in vegetative and differentiated cells. Knockdown of mucolipin also enhances calcium responses in vegetative cells but does not affect responses in 6–7 h developed cells, suggesting that in developed cells mucolipin may help regulate local calcium signals rather than global calcium waves. We found that both knocking down and overexpressing mucolipin often, but not always, presented the same phenotypes. Altering mucolipin expression levels caused an accumulation or increased acidification of Lysosensor Blue stained vesicles in vegetative cells. Nutrient uptake by phagocytosis and macropinocytosis were increased but growth rates were not, suggesting defects in catabolism. Both increasing and decreasing mucolipin expression caused the formation of smaller slugs and larger numbers of fruiting bodies during multicellular development, suggesting that mucolipin is involved in initiation of aggregation centers. The fruiting bodies that formed from these smaller aggregates had proportionately larger basal discs and thickened stalks, consistent with a regulatory role for mucolipin-dependent Ca 2+ signalling in the autophagic cell death pathways involved in stalk and basal disk differentiation in Dictyostelium. Thus, we have provided evidence that mucolipin contributes to chemotactic calcium signalling and that Dictyostelium is a useful model to study the molecular mechanisms involved in the cytopathogenesis of Mucolipidosis type IV. Keywords: mucolipidosis IV, calcium signalling, acidic vesicles, lysosomes, endocytosis, plasma membrane, aggregation, growth 1 Introduction Transient receptor potential mucolipins belong to a conserved family of ion channels, which localize to the membranes of components of the endocytic pathway. The three mammalian mucolipin homologues, TRPML1, TRPML2 and TRPML3, are encoded by the genes MCOLN 1–3. TRPML channels are non-selective cation channels permeable to a range of cations. Alongside two pore channels, TRPML channels are believed to facilitate endolysosomal Ca 2+ signalling which regulates trafficking and sorting of the membranes of endocytic vesicles, organelle homeostasis, compartmental acidification and homotypic and heterotypic vesicle fusion and reformation. Additionally, TRPML1 is implicated in regulation of autophagy, mechanistic target of rapamycin and transcription factor EB signalling. Loss of function mutations in TRPML1, causes the neurological disease Mucolipidosis Type IV, and TRPML-associated dysfunction in the endolysosomal system is implicated in other neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, TRPMLs may underpin the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative disease more generally and are suggested to be a therapeutic target. It is not well understood how loss TRPML1 function causes lysosomal storage and neuronal dysfunction, but it is believed that Ca 2+ signalling plays a central role. The vesicles of the endolysosomal system are essential to maintenance of cellular homeostasis through macromolecule recycling and are important Ca 2+ storage organelles which are integral to cellular Ca 2+ signalling and can help regulate ER calcium signals by sequestering calcium. Ca 2+ -dependent signalling is thought to regulate the soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive-factor attachment protein receptors complex proteins, which are proteins involved in the fusion of vesicle membranes. Alongside SNAREs, the protein early endosome antigen-1 is necessary for vesicle tethering prior to fusion, and is regulated by Ca 2+ /calmodulin dependent signalling through its IQ domain. TRPML specific perilysosomal calcium signals have been notoriously difficult to measure due to the localised nature of the signals which are often clouded by larger global calcium signals. In an attempt to resolve the local calcium signals genetically encoded calcium sensors directly tagged to TRPML1 have been used to measure local calcium transients. The TRPML agonist ML-SA1 stimulates calcium release into the cytoplasm, which in some cell types is independent of extracellular and ER calcium pools. However, some evidence shows that TRPML channels can affect ER calcium release and activate influx of calcium across the plasma membrane to contribute to global calcium signals, and small calcium release from the acidic stores can prime and amplify calcium release from the ER. A variety of model organisms have been used to study TRPML proteins including the mouse, zebrafish, Drosophila, C. elegans and yeast. One important cellular model, the eukaryotic social amoeba, Dictyostelium, encodes a single mucolipin homologue, mcln which has been the subject of only a limited number of studies. Dictyostelium is a well-established model to study neurodegenerative and lysosomal disease. This model organism has been extensively employed to study neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, a group of lysosomal diseases linked to mutations in the genes, CLN1–CLN8 and CLN10–CLN14. Therefore, Dictyostelium is an ideal model to study lysosomal disorders and mucolipin function. In other work, expression of FLAG-tagged mucolipin was used to show that the protein localizes predominately to post-lysosomes, but may also be present in other endocytic compartments, and accordingly controls lysosome exocytosis. Evidence suggests that mucolipin is involved in Ca 2+ homeostasis and signalling because knockout cells had reduced Ca 2+ concentrations in secretory lysosomes and are also defective in rheotaxis, a calcium-regulated mechanosensing mechanism. The role of this putative channel in Ca 2+ signalling has not been studied, so it was of particular interest to investigate the role of mucolipin in chemotactic calcium signalling in Dictyostelium. Dictyostelium is a well-established model to study calcium signalling, and cells experience cytosolic calcium transients when stimulated with various extracellular stimuli including the chemoattractants cAMP and folic acid. These Ca 2+ signals originate from the extracellular environment, the endoplasmic reticulum and the contractile vacuole. Other intracellular Ca 2+ stores including mitochondria, acidocalcisomes and vesicles of the endocytic pathway are likely to also contribute to the calcium responses. Given the localisation of mucolipin at the post-lysosomes and potentially other vesicles of the endocytic pathway, we decided to determine if mucolipin and these endocytic vesicles are involved in cytosolic Ca 2+ responses to chemoattractants. To achieve this, we created mucolipin overexpression and knockdown strains which coexpress the calcium-sensitive luminescent protein apoaequorin which allowed us to analyze real-time chemotactic induced cytoplasmic Ca 2+ responses. Our experiments revealed that when overexpressed, mucolipin is involved in chemoattractant-elicited Ca 2+ responses because overexpression strains had enhanced responses to both cAMP and folic acid. Surprisingly, chemoattractant Ca 2+ responses in knockdown strains were also enhanced, but only in vegetative cells. Responses in aggregation-competent cells were not affected in the knockdown strains, suggesting that, unless overexpressed, mucolipin is not a major contributor to cAMP-mediated calcium responses. However, it may be involved in local Ca 2+ signalling associated with changes in the vesicle trafficking pathways throughout the developmental cycle, in particular aggregation center formation and autophagic cell death. In other work, the cellular phenotypes of growth, endocytosis and multicellular development were found to be unaffected in mucolipin knockout cells created from the parental strain DH1-10. Therefore, we decided to analyze these phenotypes in our strains which were created from the parental strain AX2. We discovered that mucolipin expression did affect growth rates and nutrient uptake via macropinocytosis and phagocytosis in AX2. Surprisingly however, the phenotypes were not linear in that both increasing and decreasing expression of mucolipin often, but not always, resulted in the same phenotypic outcome. Both overexpression and knockdown strains had increased fluorescence in cells stained with Lysosensor blue, indicating either increased acidification of the vesicles or increased abundance of the vesicles. Phagocytosis and pinocytosis rates were upregulated, but this did not correlate with an increase in growth rates, which suggests defects in catabolism, in endocytic vesicle trafficking or in endolysosomal breakdown of macromolecular contents. Mucolipin is involved in the regulation of aggregation as both overexpression and knockdown strains formed smaller, more numerous slugs and fruiting bodies than AX2, a phenotype that is also present in other Dictyostelium lysosomal disease models of NCL. Increased numbers of cells entering the autophagic cell death pathway were also evident in mucolipin mutants because they had thickened stalks compared to AX2. Our results suggest that normal growth and development of Dictyostelium is sensitive to mucolipin expression, and our strains show similar phenotypes to other Dictyostelium lysosomal disease models further affirming that Dictyostelium is an ideal model to study lysosomal disease. 2 Materials and Methods 2.1 Gene Cloning and Sequence Analysis To create a mucolipin overexpression construct, the 2,599 bp mcln genomic DNA was amplified in two sections from parental strain AX2 genomic DNA using the primers MUF and MuMR for the 5′ fragment, and MuMF and MUR2 for the 3′ fragment. A three fragment ligation allowed the full length genomic DNA to be cloned into the bacterial vector pZErO™-2 with the restriction enzyme Bam HI. To join the 5′ and 3′ fragments of the gene together, the primers used in amplification of the two fragments spanned a region of the gene that encodes the restriction site Kpn I this allowed seamless ligation of the two gene fragments. The full-length gene was then subcloned for overexpression into the Dictyostelium vector pA15GFP using the restriction cut sites Cla I and Xho I, this plasmid was named pPROF638. To create the mcln antisense RNA inhibition plasmid a fragment encoding 1411bp of the gene from position 1365bp to position 3776bp in the gDNA sequence was amplified via PCR with the primers MuMF and MUR2 from genomic DNA extracted from vegetative AX2 cells using DNAzol ®. The products were then cloned into pZErO™-2 using Bam H1 and Kpn 1 and subcloned into the Dictyostelium expression vector pDNeo2 with Bam H1 and Kpn 1. Clones were verified by restriction digestion as well as sequencing at the Australian Genome Research Facility, Brisbane, Australia. Sequence analyses, alignments, and database searches were conducted using Web-based software through DictyBase.org, ExPASy and the Australian Genome Research Facility. 2.2 Strains and Culture Conditions All experiments were conducted with Dictyostelium parental strain AX2, and transformants derived from it. Each transformant strain carried multiple copies of the constructs: 1) pPROF120 and pPROF650 ; 2) pPROF120 and pPROF652 and 3) pPROF120 and pPROF638. The Ca 2 /DNA coprecipitation method was used to isolate all transformants, by cotransformation with both plasmids. Transformants were selected as isolated colonies on lawns of Micrococcus luteus on standard medium agar. D. discoideum cells were grown on lawns of Enterobacter aerogenes as a food source on SM nutrient agar and incubated at 21°C for 3–4 days and subcultured as required from a single colony. To prepare liquid cultures, 5–10 spores were inoculated into a well of a 24-well Costar plate containing 1.5 ml HL5 axenic medium Bacto™ proteose peptone; 0.5% Bacto™ yeast extract; 2.8 mM Na 2 HPO 4 ·2H 2 O; 2.6 mM KH 2 PO 4 ; 1% glucose pH 6.4) supplemented with geneticin, ampicillin, streptomycin and tetracycline, and incubated at 21°C to allow spores to germinate and form amoebae. Once confluence was reached 1 ml of culture was inoculated into 10 ml HL5 in T25 flask and cells were grown to the density of 1–2 × 10 6 cells ml −1 shaking at 150 rpm and 21°C. Strains were then subcultured at least once into HL5 without antibiotics and grown for 24–48 h prior to use in phenotypic assays to remove possible effects of the antibiotics on phenotypic readouts. Unless otherwise stated, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 500 × g for 5 min. 2.3 Estimation of Plasmid Copy Number Genomic DNA was extracted from transformants using DNAzol ®. Quantitative Southern blot was used to estimate plasmid copy number of mcln overexpression strains. DNA loaded gels were stained with SYBR® Green I nucleic acid gel stain and DNA was quantified using the Storm 860 Fluroimager in fluorescence mode. Southern blots of the same DNA samples were quantitated using fluorescein-labelled DNA probes, in conjunction with anti-fluorescein alkaline peroxidase conjugate antibody, and enhanced with the chemi-fluorescein substrate. The Storm 860 Fluroimager fluorescence mode was used to quantitate Southern blots. Quantitative real time PCR was used to estimate plasmid copy number in mcln antisense RNA strains. SYBR ® Green was used for amplicon detection of a 135 bp fragment of mcln with the primers MF1.1 and MR1.2, within the genomic DNA extracts, and to construct a standard curve, over a range of DNA concentrations using purified pPROF650 as a template. To quantify genomic DNA extracts a 100 bp filamin amplicon was amplified with the primers FIL1588F and FIL1688R in genomic DNA from all strains, and the concentrations calculated from a standard curve. The PCR amplification used 35 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 30 s, annealing at 58°C for 30 s and extension and data collection at 72°C for 1 min. 2.4 Expression Analysis Quantitative real time RT-PCR was used to quantitate expression levels of mcln messenger RNA. RNA was collected from 10 7 vegetative cells or developing cells harvested from water agar at the time points indicated over the course of development, and extracted using TRIzol ®. The iScript™ One-Step RT-PCR Kit with SYBR ® Green was used for amplicon detection of a 135 bp fragment of mcln with the primers MF1.1 and MR1.2, and a 100 bp amplicon of the constitutively expressed protein filamin, with the primers FIL1588F and FIL1688R. A total RNA template of 50–100 ng was added to the total reaction mixture of 50 μl; cDNA synthesis was performed at 50°C for 10 min, and the PCR amplification used 35 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 30 s, annealing at 58°C for 30 s and extension and data collection at 72°C for 1 min. Expression levels were normalised against the filamin levels to adjust for loading and then measured relative to AX2 controls. 2.5 Protein Techniques 2.5.1 Antibody Production A polyclonal antibody called anti-MUECD directed against the Dictyostelium mucolipin was used in the study. A 200aa His-tagged portion of mucolipin was expressed in E. coli and purified by Genscript ®. Polyclonal antibodies directed against MUECD were raised in a rabbit by the Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science, and affinity purified as described previously. 2.5.2 Western Blot Cells were grown in HL5 medium and 1 × 10 6 cells harvested and lysed in 100 µl 1 × Bolt LDS sample buffer with a protease inhibitor 1 cocktail on ice from 30 min then centrifuged at 1,200 rpm for 2 min. 10 µl of lysate was mixed with 1% Bolt sample reducing agent was incubated at 70°C for 10 min then loaded onto a Bolt™ 4–12%, Bis-Tris-Plus, 1.0 mm, Protein Gel, 12-well with the Broad Multi Color Pre-Stained Protein Standard and subject to electrophoresis. To visualise the protein bands, protein was transferred to PVDF membrane for 1 h at 100 V at 4°C. Protein was visualised on the membrane by staining with No Stain Protein Labelling Reagent as per the manufactures instructions, and visualised on a Bio Rad Chemidoc MP imaging system. Membraned we then blocked with 1% casein in 1 × TBS for 3 h RT and probed with polyclonal rabbit anti-MUECD 1:500 in 1% casein in 1 × TBS with 0.1% Tween-20 for 2 h RT. The SNAP i.d. ® 2.0 Protein Detection System was used for application of anti-rabbit HRP conjugate 1: 10,000 in TBS-T as per manufacturer’s instructions. Bands were detected with Clarity Western ECL substrate, with chemiluminescence imaged on Amersham Imager 600. The intensities of the total loaded protein in each lane and specific antigen bands were quantified digitally using the Image Quant TL 1D v 8.1 software 19. 2.6 Determination of Growth Rates 2.6.1 Growth on Bacterial Lawns Growth rates of Dictyostelium on lawns of bacteria were measured as previously described. Lawns of E. coli B2 were prepared on normal agar. An aliquot of 20 μl of Dictyostelium culture at a density of 1 × 10 6 cells ml −1, was inoculated onto the center of each lawn and incubated at 21°C for 100 h, during which time the plaque diameter was measured at intervals of 8–12 h. The recorded values were analyzed by linear regression using the “R” environment for statistical computing and graphics to determine the plaque expansion rate. 2.6.2 Growth Rates of Axenically Growing Cultures Generation times of axenically growing Dictyostelium cultures was measured as previously described. Cultures of Dictyostelium were grown to exponential phase in HL5 medium to a density of ∼1–2 × 10 6 cells ml −1 and were used to inoculate 50 ml of fresh HL5 medium to an initial density of 1 × 10 4 cells ml −1. Cultures were incubated at 21°C on an orbital shaker at 150 rpm for 100 h, during which time cell densities were determined at 8–12 h intervals, by counting 10 μl aliquots using a hemocytometer. The cell densities were then analyzed by log-linear regression using the “R” programming environment computer software to determine the generation time from the exponential growth curve. 2.7 Measurements of Macropinocytosis Rates Measurements of macropinocytosis rates as previously described, were performed using fluorescein isothiocyanate -dextran. Cultures of axenically growing Dictyostelium cells were harvested, and resuspended in fresh HL5 medium and shaken at 150 rpm for 30 min at 21°C, and after the addition of FITC-dextran, duplicate aliquots at time points 0 and 70 min were lysed in 0.25% Triton X-100 in 100 mM Na 2 HPO 4, pH 9.2 and the fluorescence of the lysate was measured in a Modulus fluorometer using the. The cell density, increase in fluorescence over 70 min, and a separate calibration curve relating fluorescence signal to the volume of fluorescent medium, were used to calculate the hourly rate of uptake of medium. 2.8 Measurements of Phagocytosis Rates The rate of uptake of E. coli expressing the fluorescent protein DsRed was used to measure phagocytosis rates in Dictyostelium strains. DsRed-expressing E. coli cells were harvested from NB cultures, grown at 37°C shaking for 24 h and resuspended to a density of 2–4 × 10 10 bacteria ml −1 in 20 mM Sorenson’s buffer. The density and fluorescence of the bacterial culture in a given experiment, were used to determine the fluorescence signal per million bacteria. A separate calibration curve was used to determine the relationship between OD600 and the density of the bacterial suspension. Cultures of Dictyostelium were harvested, washed, and resuspended in Sorenson’s buffer at 1 × 10 6 cells ml −1 and starved for 30 min at 21°C shaking. Following the 30 min incubation 1 ml of the prepared DsRed-Ec suspension was added to the Dictyostelium cultures and immediately duplicate 0 T aliquots were removed and added to preprepared ice cold 20 mM Sorenson’s buffer containing 5 mM sodium azide. The remaining amoebae were allowed to uptake DsRed-Ec for 30 min with shaking. During this time amoebae in the 0 T samples were collected by centrifugation at 1, 000 × g for 30 s and cells washed with 20 mM Sorenson’s buffer containing 5 mM sodium azide, resuspended in 3 ml of 20 mM Sorenson’s buffer and counted using a hemocytometer. After 30 min of uptake duplicate T30 aliquots of the amoebae/DsRed-Ec suspension we removed and added to preprepared ice cold 20 mM Sorenson’s buffer containing 5 mM sodium azide and the amoebae washed free of bacteria. A Modulus fluorometer 9200-003 fitted with a specially constructed module designed for DsRed-Ec was used to measure fluorescence in samples that had been lysed by the addition of 0.25% Triton X-100 in Na 2 HPO 4. Increase in fluorescence over 30 min was used to calculate ingestion of DsRed-Ec cells per hour by a single amoeba. ΔF = difference in fluorescence over the course of the assay. Uptake = ΔF × 10 6 /total cell count /time. 2.9 Quantification of Aggregate Size Quantification of aggregate size was achieved by determining the number of cells in individual slugs. Strains were grown to exponential phase in HL5 medium and 1 × 10 7 cells were harvested, washed 2 × in PBS and resuspended in 1 ml 1 × PBS. The suspension was then inoculated onto a water agar plate in a 1 cm × 5 cm line, to give a density of 2 × 10 6 cells/cm 2 and allowed to dry. The plate was placed in a dark container with a single point of light source and incubated at 21°C until slugs had formed and migrated away from the point of inoculation. Individual slugs were then isolated using a sterile needle and resuspended in 100 μl of saline and dissociated by repeat pipetting. The number of cells per slug was then calculated after counting the number of cells in duplicate 10 μl suspensions using a hemocytometer in 30 individual slugs for each strain. 2.10 Morphology, Quantification of Number of Fruiting Bodies and Quantification of Sorus Area Mature fruiting body morphology was observed, after multicellular development on lawns of Enterobacter as described previously. Images were taken after 24 h of development. Photographs were taken using from above or from the side on an excised piece of agar using a Moticam 2300 camera attached to an Olympus SZ61 stereomicroscope. To quantify the number of fruiting bodies images were taken from above at the same magnification for all strains. The number of fruiting bodies in the same area of photograph were counted and the means calculated. Sorus area was quantified from the same photographs of fruiting bodies from above using the ImageJ measurement tool. The area was then converted to volume on the assumption that the sorus is approximately spherical using equation and presented as mm 3. 2.11 Quantification of LysoSensor™ Blue DND-167 Staining in Cells Dictyostelium cells were grown in HL5 medium to a density of 1–3 × 10 6 cells ml −1 1 × 10 7 cells were harvested and diluted 1:10 in Lo-Flo HL5 either with or without 500 nM LysoSensor™ Blue DND-167 and incubated covered in foil at 21°C shaking for 30 min. Cells were washed twice with 1 × PBS and resuspended to a density of 0.5 × 10 6 cells ml −1 in PBS and the fluorescence of a 2 ml sample measured in a Modulus™ 9200-003 fluorometer using the UV module kit 9200-041. The background fluorescence of the cells that had not been dyed was subtracted from the fluorescence recorded from the Lysosensor Blue stained cells. 2.12 LysoSensor Blue DND-167 Imaging of Live Cells Cells were grown in HL5 medium to a density of 1–3 × 10 6 cells ml −1. An aliquot containing 10 6 cells were harvested and resuspended in Lo-Flo HL5 containing 500 nM LysoSensor Blue DND-167 and incubated at 21°C shaking for 30 min. Cells were washed 2 times in 1 × PBS, resuspended to a density of 1 × 10 6 cells ml −1 and 10 μl of suspension mounted onto microscope slides. Live cells were viewed through the DAPI filter with an Olympus BX61 fluorescent microscope. 2.13 Measurement of Cellular Autofluorescence Cells were harvested and processed in the same manner as Section 2.11, however omitting the treatment with LysoSensor ™ Blue DND-167. Fluorescent readings of 1 × 10 6 cells were recorded immediately after two washes in 1 × PBS with the UV module kit 9200-041. 2.14 Calcium Experiments 2.14.1 Dictyostelium Culture and Development Expression of the Ca 2+ sensitive luminescent protein aequorin, in each Dictyostelium, strain was used to measure cytosolic Ca 2+ concentration. Dictyostelium cultures were grown and allowed to develop as described previously. Axenic cultures in HL5 medium were grown to a density of 1–2 × 10 6 cells ml −1, and 1 × 10 8 cells were harvested, washed twice in 20 ml of MES-DB, resuspended in MES-DB or HL5 to a final density of 2 × 10 7 cells ml −1 and loaded with 5 μM Coelenterazine-h. Cultures were incubated at 21°C shaking at 150 rpm for 4 h or 7 h. 2.14.2 Aequorin Consumption and In Vivo Ca 2+ Measurements Aequorin consumption was carried out as previously described. All measurements were taken inside a Lumitran ® model L-3000 photometer. During measurements, the cells were stirred at 100 rpm in 20 ml sample vessels and placed in front of a photomultiplier. Luminescence signals were recorded from 5 ml cell suspensions stimulated with 1 μm chemoattractant, either cAMP or folic acid. The signal was captured by a model PCI-20428 multifunction I/O data acquisition board. The signal was then converted into values of cytosolic calcium concentration on a PC using in-house purpose-designed software. 2.15 Statistical Analysis Data was analysed in Excel. Means were compared using independent t-tests or One-Way ANOVA, with pairwise comparisons made by the Least Squares Difference method. Significant correlations were determined by Pearson product-moment, Spearman’s rank and Kendall’s rank correlation coefficients. 3 Results 3.1 Developmental Expression of mcln Over 24 h The expression profiles of many Dictyostelium genes change throughout development. To determine the mcln mRNA expression levels throughout development, AX2 cells were developed on water agar plates for 24 h, and RNA extracts were taken at 2-h intervals. Semiquantitative RT-PCR was used to assess the relative expression of mcln in cells at these time points. Expression changed throughout development, rising slightly during early differentiation in response to the onset of starvation, falling to a trough at 8 h, but then increasing rapidly to a maximum at 10 h during aggregation. Expression remained at high levels during subsequent multicellular development. The measured developmental expression profile is similar to the RNA-Seq expression profile of D. discoideum AX4 published on DictyBase, which shows increased mcln expression over the course of development. Subtle differences in the patterns of expression in our experiments compared to those published on DictyBase could arise from differences in the parental strain used and also from the fact that in our experiments the cells were developed on water agar, as opposed to filters. This expression pattern suggests important roles for mucolipin-dependent calcium signalling in early starvation-induced differentiation, in chemotactic aggregation and subsequently during the multicellular stages of the life cycle. FIGURE 1 mcln mRNA expression increases throughout development in Dictyostelium AX2 and AX4. Semiquantitative RT-PCR was used to determine the mcln expression in AX2 throughout development presented normalised to filamin expression. RNA was extracted from... 3.2 Genetic Alteration of Dictyostelium Changes mcln mRNA Expression Dictyostelium strains were created by transformation with expression constructs to either knockdown expression via antisense mRNA inhibition or overexpress the protein. Integration of the plasmid construct occurs randomly in the genome by recombination and rolling circle replication, therefore each strain contains different numbers of the plasmid constructs thus different levels of expression. For this reason, the copy number of the plasmid in each strain was determined, as was the mRNA expression level. As expected, antisense inhibition caused a measurable decrease in mRNA transcripts and overexpression caused an increase in mRNA transcripts. The relative mRNA expression was correlated with the copy number of the plasmid construct in the strains. FIGURE 2 Plasmid copy number of mucolipin strains was correlated with mRNA expression levels in the transformants. Semiquantitative RT-PCR was performed to determine mRNA expression levels in each strain. Copy numbers of overexpressing strains were determined... 3.3 Overexpressed Mucolipin Can Be Detected in Western Blot We created a polyclonal antibody directed against a 200aa portion of Dictyostelium mucolipin, anti-MUECD. In a western blot this antibody detected multiple bands so was not suitable to be used for localisation studies. To determine if any of these bands did represent mucolipin, we tested the antibody the against mucolipin knockout cell lysate and ran these proteins alongside protein extracted from DH1-10, AX2 and our mucolipin overexpression and knockdown strains. Indeed, there were two bands absent in the mucolipin knockout lysate but present in the mucolipin overexpression strains which ran at approximately 95 and 120 kDa. The 120 kDa band was also detected in DH1-10. It was not observed in the knockout strain derived from DH1-10, despite a similar protein loading in the gel. These bands were not detected in AX2 or our mucolipin antisense strains, presumably because the wild type and knockdown expression levels for mucolipin were insufficient for detection by our antibody. Mass spectrometry analysis of bands excised from a Coomassie Blue-stained Bis-Tris-Plus gel confirmed the presence of mucolipin in these two bands, but not the smaller molecular weight bands. We thus confirmed that there are two genuine mucolipin bands—one at the predicted MW position ∼95 kDa and one running at ∼120 kDa. There are two possible explanations for the presence of two bands. Firstly, the upper band could be a posttranslationally modified form of the protein as is reported for human TRPML1, and the lower band could be the native nonglycosylated protein. Secondly, the upper band could be the native, full-length protein running a little more slowly than expected, and the lower band could be a cleavage product. The human TRPML1 has a proteolytic cleavage site in the intralumenal loop between transmembrane domains 1 and 2, and this cleavage is believed to be involved in regulation of channel activity. Since we confirmed that these bands represented mucolipin, we were able to confirm by quantification that mucolipin expression is increased in our overexpression strains, and the protein expression was significantly correlated with copy number of the overexpression plasmid construct. FIGURE 3 Mucolipin can be detected in protein extracted from overexpression strains. Total protein extracted from AX2, four representative mucolipin overexpression strains, three representative mucolipin knockdown strains, DH1-10 and mucolipin knockout, were... 3.4 Mucolipin Contributes to Chemotactic Calcium Signals in Dictyostelium TRPMLs are thought to be important for Ca 2+ signalling events associated with Ca 2+ -dependent fusion/fission events of membranes along the late endocytic pathway. In Dictyostelium DH1-10 cells, knockout of mucolipin reduces Ca 2+ concentrations in secretory post-lysosomes, measured using dextran-coupled fluorophores suggesting a role in regulation of calcium homeostasis/signalling. To further investigate the role of mucolipin in Ca 2+ signalling, and the possible contribution of the acidic stores to chemotactic Ca 2+ responses, we measured the cytosolic Ca 2+ transients in vegetative cells, and in aggregation competent cells in mucolipin knockdown and overexpressing strains. All strains also ectopically expressed a recombinant Ca 2+ -sensitive luminescent protein, apoaequorin, to allow real time recordings of cytosolic Ca 2+ responses. These chemotactic Ca 2+ responses have been well characterized in wild type cells expressing apoaequorin. In this work we compared the mutants’ Ca 2+ responses with wild type responses to gain insight into the molecular mechanisms involved. Representative real-time recordings of cytosolic calcium concentration in wild type aequorin-expressing strain, mucolipin knockdown strain and mucolipin overexpression strain when stimulated with 1 μM chemoattractant are shown in Figure 4A. FIGURE 4 Cytosolic calcium responses to cAMP and folic acid stimulation. Representative real time recordings of cytoplasmic Ca 2+ responses to chemoattractants. Upper panel: Real time recordings of Ca 2+ responses to 1 μM folate in vegetative... 3.4.1 Overexpression of Mucolipin Enhances the Ca 2+ Responses to cAMP and Folic Acid Real time recordings of the Ca 2+ responses for control, knockdown and overexpression strains to both cAMP and folic acid were recorded over multiple experiments and analysed. As there was no correlation between the various parameters and plasmid copy number, data was pooled for all transformants within each group for combined analysis. Overexpression of mucolipin significantly enhanced Ca 2+ response magnitudes to both folic acid and cAMP compared to the control. The response magnitudes were increased compared to the control by an average of 46.4% and 28.0% for the folic acid responses and cAMP responses respectively. This result suggests, mucolipin is involved in Ca 2+ chemotactic calcium responses and because the channel localises to post-lysosomes and possibly other endocytic compartments, the results suggest that these vesicles are also involved in the calcium response. 3.4.2 Knockdown of Mucolipin Increases Ca 2+ Response Magnitudes in Vegetative Cells, but Not in Aggregation Competent Cells Given that overexpression of mucolipin enhances the responses to folic acid and cAMP, it was expected that knockdown of mucolipin would reduce the magnitude of calcium responses. Surprisingly, the magnitude of the Ca 2+ responses to 1 µM folic acid was significantly increased in knockdown strains compared to the control. Contrary to the folate responses, the magnitude of the cAMP Ca 2+ responses in aggregation competent cells were slightly reduced in mucolipin knockdown strains compared to the control, but the difference did not reach statistical significance. 3.5 The Role of Mucolipin in the Endocytic Pathway Dictyostelium mucolipin overexpression and knockdown strains both exhibit increased Ca 2+ signalling in vegetative cells. As Ca 2+ plays an important role in the endocytic pathways it was of interest to assess the role of mucolipin in these processes. 3.5.1 Overexpression and Knockdown of Mucolipin Increases Fluorescence of Cells Stained With LysoSensor™ Blue DND-167 One of the hallmarks of MLIV cells is an accumulation of hybrid late endosome-lysosome compartments with defective exit of lipids from LELs to the trans-Golgi network. The connection between Ca 2+ release via TRPMLs and build-up of hybrid LELs is somewhat undecided. To assess this phenotype in AX2 Dictyostelium cells, we stained vegetative mucolipin knockdown and overexpressing cells with LysoSensor™ Blue DND-167 which has a pK a of is ∼5.1 and accumulates in acidic vesicles. There was a significant increase in fluorescence in the mutants compared to AX2 representative images of live stained cells are presented in Figure 5C. This could reflect an increase in lysosomal mass, or because the fluorescence of LysoSensor™ Blue DND-167 increases as the pH decreases, our results could reflect increased acidification of the lysosomes. FIGURE 5 Altering mucolipin expression causes accumulation or increased acidification of vesicles stained with LysoSensor TM Blue DND-167 but does not cause autofluorescence. Quantification of LysoSensor™ Blue DND-167 was performed by measuring the... 3.5.2 Altering Mucolipin Expression Does Not Cause Autofluorescence Accumulation of autofluorescent material has been observed in MLIV cell lines and is thought to be related to specific compounds stored in the lysosomes. Autofluorescence is also a hallmark of NCL, and has been detected in some Dictyostelium NCL models. In the cln3 model, cln3 − cells do not accumulate autofluorescent material during the growth stage, however in starved cln3 − cells autofluorescent material was detected. In the cln2 lysosomal disease model, mutants with knockdown and knockout of the tpp1/cln2 gene, which encodes the lysosomal protein tripeptidyl peptidase I, a soluble lysosomal aminopeptidase, accumulate cellular autofluorescent material. Therefore, we measured autofluorescence in Dictyostelium mucolipin knockdown and overexpression strains under UV light. No increase of autofluorescence was detected in any of our mucolipin mutants. This phenotype in Dictyostelium lysosomal disease models seems to be specific to the particular disease gene in question. 3.5.3 Knockdown of Mucolipin Increases Macropinocytic Uptake, but Decreases Growth Rates of Cells in Liquid Medium, While Overexpression Does Not Affect Growth or Macropinocytosis An analysis of uptake of medium as compared to growth rates can indicate whether ingested nutrients are efficiently catabolised. The rate of fluid uptake by macropinocytosis was increased in mucolipin knockdown strains and correlated with plasmid copy number, however overexpression had no affect. Surprisingly the growth rates of mucolipin knockdown strains were slower than AX2 and similarly correlated with plasmid copy number, while overexpression had no affect. FIGURE 6 Mucolipin knockdown affects macropinocytic uptake and growth rates of cells in HL5 medium. Consumption of HL-5 medium containing FITC dextran via macropinocytosis in knockdown strains, overexpression strains of mucolipin transformants were slightly but not significantly elevated compared to AX2. The rates of phagocytosis in mucolipin transformants and AX2 control were assayed by measuring the uptake of fluorescently labelled live E. coli cells. Surprisingly, unlike the plaque expansion rates on bacterial lawns, both overexpression and knockdown of mucolipin significantly increased the rates of phagocytosis of E.coli. These results indicate although these transformants are engulfing bacteria at a faster rate than AX2, this does not significantly increase the growth rates. FIGURE 7 Mucolipin expression did not affect plaque expansion rates but increased phagocytosis rates. Plaque expansion rates were measured from linear regressions of plaque diameters vs. time during growth at 21°C on an E. coli B... 3.6 Mucolipin Expression Affects Dictyostelium Multicellular Development Multicellular development in Dictyostelium is initiated by starvation upon which the cells undergo a developmental program leading to multicellular morphogenesis and culmination into mature fruiting bodies consisting of a spore droplet, stalk and basal disc. The stalk cells undergo autophagic cell death and so are nonviable. The developmental timing of expression of mucolipin suggests it is involved in chemotactic aggregation and progression through multicellular morphogenesis, likely through mucolipin-dependent calcium signalling, and its effects on the endocytic system. Calcium signalling plays an important role during development, from chemotactic aggregation to cell type differentiation. To investigate how expression levels of mucolipin affect multicellular morphogenesis in Dictyostelium, knockdown and overexpression strains were observed at the slug and fruiting body stage. Both knockdown and overexpression strains formed smaller fruiting bodies than AX2. In high copy number strains, the stalks and basal disks of the fruiting bodies appear thickened indicating increased stalk cell differentiation, fruiting bodies were more numerous and formed smaller sori. We then determined if the smaller fruiting bodies were the result of small aggregate and slug formation in the mutants. Indeed, both knockdown and overexpression strains developed into smaller slugs containing fewer cells compared to AX2. The aggregate size was quantified by determining the number of cells per slug, revealing a dramatic copy number-dependent reduction in slug size in both overexpression and knockdown strains. This phenotype is also present in cln2 knockdown mutants, and similarly cln3 − and cln5 − mutants have increased numbers of tipped mounds, fingers, slugs and fruiting bodies for the same density of cells. FIGURE 8 Mucolipin knockdown and overexpression strains form smaller more numerous fruiting bodies. AX2 wild type, mucolipin KD strain HPF817 and mucolipin overexpression strain HPF825. Cells grown on lawns of... FIGURE 9 Slug sizes are smaller in mucolipin knockdown and overexpression strains and is copy number dependent. Slugs formed after ∼16 h of development on water agar. Mutants formed smaller slugs than AX2 Scale bars = 1 mm. Both... 4 Discussion In this study we have used the model organism Dictyostelium to investigate if mucolipin expression can affect global calcium signals during chemotactic calcium responses. Gross suggested that the Dictyostelium acidic stores, which includes the endolysosomal vesicles, the contractile vacuole system and the acidocalcisomes, can release Ca 2+ and increase cytosolic Ca 2+ during chemotaxis. A selection of calcium channels have been identified to be associated with the acidic stores including the P2X receptors of the contractile vacuole, the two pore channel, and mucolipin. Given that mucolipin resides in late endosomes and other endocytic vesicles, we hypothesized that mucolipin could contribute to calcium release from these stores. We measured cytosolic Ca 2+ responses to chemoattractants in mucolipin knockdown and overexpression transformants using the luminescence of the Ca 2+ -sensitive luminescent protein, apoaequorin, which we ectopically expressed in the same cells. We found that overexpression of mucolipin significantly increased the magnitudes of the cytosolic Ca 2+ responses to folic acid and cAMP. While we cannot determine if the increased calcium influx into the cytosol is the result of direct release of calcium from the endocytic compartments through mucolipin itself, our results do implicate mucolipin in cytosolic calcium signalling. Lima et al. provided evidence of mucolipin involvement in calcium homeostasis because knockout cells grew faster in calcium-depleted medium and had reduced lumenal calcium concentrations in the post-lysosomes, below 0.2 µM, much lower than the 1–3 µM of the wild type control. In other cell types TRPML1 has been shown to affect lysosomal pH, therefore, knocking out mucolipin in Dictyostelium could affect the proton/Ca 2+ exchange between the vesicle lumen and cytoplasm, thereby reducing steady state Ca 2+ levels in the lumen as has been reported. This could in turn mean that overexpressing mucolipin may result in elevated resting lumenal Ca 2+, again because of the disturbed pH gradient across the vesicle membrane. This, and the greater number of available channels could then facilitate the larger responses in our overexpressing strains. Lima et al. hypothesized that mucolipin may be responsible for transfer of calcium from the cytosol to the lumen where the vesicles meet high local cytosolic calcium concentrations. Our results suggest that, at least when overexpressed, mucolipin significantly contributes to cytosolic signals, thus could function as a calcium release channel. It is possible that the channel could work both ways depending on the particular cellular requirements. As stated previously, in other cell types TRPML channels are known to regulate localised calcium signals, as well as global calcium waves via activation of ER and plasma membrane calcium flux. The same may be true in Dictyostelium —if mucolipin is capable of activating calcium release from ER and across the plasma membrane, then overexpressing the channel would enhance the cytosolic calcium responses as we observed in our experiments. It is also possible that overexpression of mucolipin results in expression at the plasma membrane, as this has been reported for TRPML1 expression in HEK293 cells, or it may be translocated there during exocytosis as TRPML1 is in Xenopus oocytes. The Dictyostelium channels responsible for plasma membrane and ER calcium release are still not confirmed. Contenders are IplA, a channel related to the mammalian ER IP 3 receptors and pkd2 the Dictyostelium polycystin-2, another member of the TRP superfamily. Both IplA and pkd2 have been localised to the plasma membrane. However, IplA localises primarily to unidentified cytoplasmic inclusions, and it has not been determined whether this includes the ER. Some studies have found that knockout of IplA abolishes calcium responses to chemoattractants, however another reported that the Ca 2+ response to high concentrations of cAMP is maintained but smaller. Calcium responses to cAMP and folic acid are retained in pkd2 knockout cells. Therefore, clarification of which channels involved in ER and plasma membrane calcium signalling is still necessary. Future work to investigate if mucolipin contributes to calcium influx across the plasma membrane and release from the ER calcium could include measurement of the uptake of 45 Ca 2+ from the extracellular milieu, treatment of overexpression cells with thapsigargin to reduce ER calcium content, and with EGTA to chelate extracellular calcium. We also analysed cytosolic calcium signals in mucolipin knockdown strains, and were surprised to find that reducing mucolipin expression resulted in larger, rather than smaller Ca 2+ responses. However, this occurred only in vegetative cells, the magnitudes of the calcium responses in differentiated cells stimulated with cAMP were not significantly different from controls. The enhanced Ca 2+ responses observed in our vegetative mucolipin knockdown strains might be caused by a decrease in Ca 2+ buffering capacity by the acidic stores. Lysosomes can shape calcium signals by tempering cytosolic calcium released from the ER. It has been reported that the ability of lysosomes to buffer Ca 2+ in lysosomally diseased cells is greatly reduced, possibly because of the accumulation of undigested lysosomal cargo. Furthermore, buffering of cytosolic calcium by the mitochondria is defective in MLIV cells. As calcium buffering is a mechanism involved in tempering calcium responses, loss of buffering capacity could actually result in enhanced global calcium signals. A similar mechanism has been demonstrated in Dictyostelium cells lacking the ER calcium binding proteins calnexin and calreticulin, as these strains had much larger calcium responses to chemoattractants than control cells. Since our mucolipin knockdown strains exhibited increased, as opposed to decreased, cytosolic Ca 2+ signals during the vegetative phase of the lifecycle, it was surprising to find that when these strains were allowed to differentiate to aggregation-competence, their Ca 2+ responses to cAMP were unaffected. Similarly, Chang et al. reported that in Dictyostelium TPC-null cells the magnitude of cAMP-mediated Ca 2+ responses was comparable to that in wild type AX2 cells. Together these results suggest that mucolipin-dependent calcium signalling is not a major contributor to cytosolic calcium responses at this stage of development. Instead the role of mucolipin in the differentiated cells may be restricted to regulating local calcium signalling. Accordingly, the cAMP responses in the TPC null cells were slightly delayed in the time of onset, and this may be related to local calcium release from the acidic stores in “priming” ER calcium release, but this will require further investigation. In previous work, the cellular phenotypes of growth, endocytosis and multicellular development were unaffected in mucolipin knockout cells created from the parental strain DH1-10. Since our strains were made in the parental strain AX2, we wanted to also characterise these phenotypes in our strains. We found that surprisingly our strains did have abnormal phenotypes and many, but not all of these, presented similarly in the knockdown cells as overexpression cells. Furthermore, some of the phenotypes in our strains were similar to those reported in Dictyostelium NCL models. Phagocytosis rates were increased in both mucolipin knockdown and overexpression cells. This may be directly related to the increased calcium signalling in these strains as evidence suggests that calcium is involved in phagocytosis. Pinocytosis rates were increased in knockdown strains, but unaffected in overexpression strains which suggests the defect is not directly caused by the abnormal calcium signalling. The involvement of Ca 2+ in macropinocytosis is unclear. Extracellular Ca 2+ is not essential, but both liberation of intracellular Ca 2+ by caffeine treatment and inhibition of Ca 2+ transport by La 3+ treatment reduces macropinocytosis. However, both caffeine and La 2+ can affect other processes. Our results suggest different roles for mucolipin function in macropinocytosis and phagocytosis. When measuring growth rates, we expected that the increase in phagocytosis rates would correlate with an increase in growth rates on bacterial lawns, however both knockdown and overexpression strains grew normally on E. coli. Furthermore, axenic growth rates were slightly reduced in knockdown strains, so again did not correlate with the increase in pinocytic uptake. This phenotype was also present in cln2 knockdown mutants and together these results may represent the presence of compensatory feedback pathways that upregulate rates of endocytosis as a response to nutrient deprivation caused by defective endolysosomal trafficking. This kind of reverse coupling of growth and endocytosis rates has also been observed in relation to other Dictyostelium lysosomal proteins. A Dictyostelium knockout of alyA has 40% reduction in total lysozyme activity, exhibits slow growth on bacterial lawns but increased phagocytosis of fluorescently labelled yeast cells due to a compensatory pathway. Knocking down expression of lysosomal Tpp1 caused reductions in the growth rate in liquid medium, slower plaque expansion rates on bacterial lawns, but elevated rates of phagocytosis. These effects were mediated by reduced activity of the Dictyostelium TORC1 signalling pathway, being mimicked by rapamycin treatment and Rheb knockdown, and rescued by Rheb overexpression. Other Dictyostelium NCL models have shown varying phenotypes in their growth and nutrient uptake phenotypes. Mutants lacking cln3 and cln5 displayed enhanced proliferation in HL5 medium, however pinocytic uptake was not significantly different from AX3, and the cln3 − phenotype was rescued by overexpression of GFP-cln3. Combined these results indicate abnormalities in nutrient uptake and growth and the pathways that connect them in the different lysosomal disease models. The defects in catabolism that we observed in our strains could also be caused by disruptions in mucolipin-mediated Ca 2+ -dependent vesicle fragmentation/fusion which is characteristic of MLIV and other MLIV models. We observed that mucolipin knockdown and overexpression strains had increased fluorescence when stained with Lysosensor Blue. This may be linked to accumulation of Lysosensor Blue-stained vesicles as a result of Ca 2+ -dependent increases in homotypic or heterotypic vesicle fusion during the endosomal mixing stage and subsequent failure to progress through to exocytosis. Studies in other models reported that the defective membrane trafficking can be caused by both knockout and overexpression of TRPMLs causing accumulation of large hybrid late endosome-lysosomal compartments as well as enlargement and clustering of endosomes. In Dictyostelium DH1-10 mucolipin knockout cells, a significant increase in generation of post-lysosomes was reported, however as this was coupled with enhanced rate of post-lysosome fusion with the plasma membrane, and subsequent exocytosis, so that there was no measurable build-up of vesicles. We did not measure exocytosis rates in our strains, so further experiments could determine if exocytosis is blocked in our strains and account for the accumulation. Alternatively, because Lysosensor Blue fluorescence increases as the pH becomes more acidic, the increased fluorescence in our knockdown and overexpression strains could also be caused by a decrease in the pH of the vesicles. Dysregulated lysosomal pH is common to lysosomal storage disease cells, however this is generally linked to increased pH as reported in MLIV fibroblasts type and most NCLs. However, decreased lysosomal pH has been described in some MLIV fibroblasts. It is important to note that Dictyostelium cells lacking mucolipin exhibited no change in the pH of endosomal compartments. A further consequence of dysfunctional catabolism, retention of unprocessed nutrients and decreased release of amino acids from the vesicles, could be that the cells are in a state of partial starvation and this would favour the initiation of aggregation. In support of this, both mucolipin knockdown and overexpression strains exhibited increased numbers of aggregation centers and accordingly formed slugs and fruiting bodies significantly smaller than those of AX2. This implicates mucolipin in activation of aggregation center formation and could be linked to calcium-dependent regulation of developmental processes. The same phenotype is present in IplA − cells which form smaller mounds and fruiting bodies due to fragmented aggregation streams. Similar phenotypes are also present in other Dictyostelium lysosomal disease models. Mutants with knocked down cln2 / tpp1 form smaller aggregates and fruiting bodies, and cln2 / tpp1 − mutants progress faster through development. Cells lacking cln3 and cln5 exhibit precocious development, increased numbers of tipped mounds, fingers and slugs, similar to our mucolipin strains. Interestingly, the precocious development in cln3 − cells was rescued by chelation of calcium with EGTA. This implicates Cln3 in calcium regulation, likely due to its localisation at the contractile vacuole, a major calcium regulatory organelle, and suggests calcium dysregulation may be common to lysosomal disease cells. In addition to the increased numbers of aggregates formed in our knockdown and overexpression mutants, an increased proportion of the cells in the aggregates appear to be entering the autophagic cell death pathway. This was suggested by the proportionately thicker stalks and enlarged basal disks, a phenotype associated with increased autophagic cell death. This is another phenotype common among Dictyostelium lysosomal disease mutants. It is also present in tpp1 knockdown cells where it is mediated by reduced TORC1 signalling. Furthermore, enhanced autophagy has been reported in tpp1 knockout cells and cln5 − cells display aberrant autophagy. TPC knockout cells also accumulate autophagosomes which further implicates calcium signalling through the acidic stores in autophagic processes. As autophagic cell death occurs late in the developmental cycle during stalk formation, it is possible that during autophagy, mucolipin together with other calcium channels in that location could play similar roles in generating a local Ca 2+ cloud to facilitate fusion of the autophagosome and lysosome during formation of the stalk cell vacuole. Schaap et al. showed that a sustained elevation of resting cytoplasmic Ca 2+ levels mediates late stalk gene induction by the morphogen DIF in Dictyostelium. Mucolipin could play a role in this process. In that case, as we have seen in the endolysosomal pathway, mucolipin overexpression and knockdown would both cause increased Ca 2+ signals and subsequent disturbances in autophagolysosome formation, possibly explaining the stalk phenotype. An increase in cellular autophagic vacuoles is a characteristic associated with MLIV is observed both in mouse models, and Drosophila mucolipin knockout flies. The underlying nature of the autophagic defect may be related to disruption in signalling by the nutrient stress sensor mTORC1, a key regulator of autophagy. One study has shown that mTORC1 can directly phosphorylate TRPML1 to negatively regulate channel activity and decrease autophagy. To add further complexity, recent evidence has revealed that TRPML1 Ca 2+ release can regulate mTORC1 autophagic pathways through a nutrient-sensitive negative feedback loop. Furthermore, TRPML1 is directly involved in the Ca 2+ /calmodulin dependent protein kinase β activation of AMP-activated protein kinase. AMPK in turn inhibits TORC1 and thereby activates autophagy. The nature of these complex signalling pathways still needs to be unravelled, therefore our study supports the view that Dictyostelium offers a tractable, simple model for MLIV cytopathology. The results suggest it would be valuable in future experiments to investigate further the signalling pathways involved in mucolipin Ca 2+ signalling-dependent regulation of cellular growth and autophagy through Dictyostelium TORC1. This is of particular interest because the role of Ca 2+ signalling in regulation of mTORC1 autophagy pathways is evident, but details are still unclear, as are mTORC1-TRPML signalling pathways. Therefore, it would be relevant to explore whether the growth and developmental defects can be rescued by genetically altering Dictyostelium TORC1 and Dictyostelium AMPK expression in mucolipin knockdown and overexpression backgrounds. The results we have presented here highlight common phenotypes amongst Dictyostelium lysosomal disease models suggesting they may share common pathologies. We have also shown that both increasing and decreasing mucolipin expression levels can cause the same phenotypic outcome. Our results are similar to other studies where reports of both increased and decreased expression of mucolipin proteins can cause problems along the endocytic pathways. For example, when TRPML3 is knocked down there are defects in endosomal acidification and also increased homotypic endosomal fusion, while when TRPML3 is overexpressed, endosomes become enlarged. In C. elegans, both mucolipin knockout and some overexpression coelomocytes, exhibited the formation of large vacuoles. Similarly, overexpression of TRPML1 results in accumulation of enlarged endosomes containing both early and late endocytic markers and induces an aberrant distribution of these compartments within the cell. These combined reports show that the endocytic pathway is clearly impacted by disturbances in both directions in the expression levels or activities of mucolipin proteins and the resultant alterations in Ca 2+ signalling. 