 Background and Purpose Cannabidiol has been shown to differentially regulate the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 in preclinical models of disease, where it reduces activity in models of epilepsies and cancer and increases it in models of multiple sclerosis and psychosis. Here, we investigate the effects of phytocannabinoids on mTORC1 and define a molecular mechanism. Experimental Approach A novel mechanism for phytocannabinoids was identified using the tractable model system, Dictyostelium discoideum. Using mouse embryonic fibroblasts, we further validate this new mechanism of action. We demonstrate clinical relevance using cells derived from healthy individuals and from people with MS. Key Results Both CBD and the more abundant cannabigerol enhance mTORC1 activity in D. discoideum. We identify a mechanism for this effect involving inositol polyphosphate multikinase, where elevated IPMK expression reverses the response to phytocannabinoids, decreasing mTORC1 activity upon treatment, providing new insight on phytocannabinoids' actions. We further validated this mechanism using mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Clinical relevance of this effect was shown in primary human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, where CBD and CBG treatment increased mTORC1 activity in cells derived from healthy individuals and decreased mTORC1 activity in cells derived from pwMS. Conclusion and Implications Our findings suggest that both CBD and the abundant CBG differentially regulate mTORC1 signalling through a mechanism dependent on the activity of the upstream IPMK signalling pathway, with potential relevance to the treatment of mTOR‐related disorders, including MS. Keywords: cannabidiol, cannabigerol, IPMK, mTORC1, multiple sclerosis Abbreviations 4EBP1 eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E‐binding protein 1 IP 6 inositol hexaphosphate IPMK inositol polyphosphate multikinase MS multiple schlerosis mTOR mechanistic target of rapamycin PBMCs peripheral blood mononuclear cells pwMS people with MS REMI restriction enzyme‐mediated insertion RIPA radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer What is already known Deregulated mTORC1 signalling is found in numerous disorders including multiple sclerosis, epilepsy and cancer Specific phytocannabinoids show both inhibitory and activatory effects on mTORC1 without a known mechanism What this study adds We show that specific phytocannabinoids differentially regulate mTORC1 dependent upon IPMK function We demonstrate these mechanisms in primary PBMCs derived from pwMS What is the clinical significance Investigating IPMK signalling in mTORopathy‐related diseases may provide new insight to disease function Cannabigerol, a largely unexplored phytocannabinoid, may provide a new therapeutic approach for mTORopathy treatment 1. INTRODUCTION Spasticity associated with multiple sclerosis can be treated with a combination of phytocannabinoids, containing the non‐euphoric compound cannabidiol and the euphoric Δ 9 ‐tetrahydrocannabinol. CBD and THC represent the most studied of over 100 phytocannabinoids and a range of molecular studies has suggested various mechanisms of action for them. In contrast, cannabigerol is one of the most abundant phytocannabinoids found in the cannabis plant and represents a relatively unstudied compound without indication of efficacy in MS treatment or insight to molecular mechanisms. Conflicting studies have proposed that CBD either enhances or reduces mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 signalling in preclinical models. For example, a mouse model of MS shows reduced mTOR activity in neurons and CBD treatment restored mTOR signalling, yet mTOR is activated in immune cells in this disease and reducing mTORC1 signalling provides a therapeutic mechanism. Similarly, in a rat model of induced schizophrenia, mTOR signalling is reduced, whereas CBD treatment increased mTOR activity and reversed symptoms. In contrast, several preclinical studies focused on tuberous sclerosis complex ‐associated epilepsy and breast cancer, showing pathology‐associated elevated mTORC1 activity and showing that CBD treatment reduced pathway activity. Despite numerous suggested mechanisms for CBD on the G protein‐coupled receptor 55, adenosine signalling, transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 and the folate one‐carbon cycle, these mechanisms do not provide direct insight to the effect of these phytocannabinoids on mTOR signalling. The model system Dictyostelium discoideum has been instrumental in identifying molecular mechanisms of action of a range of drugs and natural products. This organism contains many human protein orthologues and conserved signalling pathways linked to disease‐related processes and enables a range of advantageous research approaches, including the ability to screen mutant libraries providing an unbiased approach to identifying cellular mechanism of action of drugs, including effects of CBD on cell growth and folate one‐carbon metabolism. Characterisation of related molecular effects and restoration of sensitivity by the expression of human orthologous proteins provide insight to the mechanism of action of the compound translatable to mammalian models. In this study, we investigate the mechanism and specificity of phytocannabinoids in mTORC1 regulation. We show that in D. discoideum, both CBD and CBG enhance mTORC1 activity and, focusing on CBG, we identify that genetic changes leading to increased expression of inositol polyphosphate multikinase reduce the CBG‐dependent inhibitory effect on growth. Surprisingly, we show that increased expression of D. discoideum or human IPMK elevates mTORC1 activity but inverts the effect of CBG and CBD on mTORC1, resulting in a CBG‐ and CBD‐dependent reduction in mTORC1 activity. We then confirm a role for IPMK in regulating mTORC1 activity in both mouse embryonic fibroblasts and in a clinical setting, where peripheral blood mononuclear cells derived from healthy individuals show an increased mTORC1 activity upon treatment with CBG, CBD and a mixture of CBD and THC. Conversely, cells from people with MS show elevated mTORC1 activity that is reduced following phytocannabinoid treatment. 2. METHODS 2.1. Western blot analysis of mTOR activity: WT, IPMK +, PKBA − and PKB − /PKGB − Briefly, D. discoideum cells were treated with purified plant‐derived CBG, CBD, cannabidiolic acid and cannabidivarin or a PI3K inhibitor for 1 h or with a vehicle dimethyl sulfoxide ‐only control. Protein extracts were separated by SDS‐PAGE gel electrophoresis, transferred onto a PVDF membrane, analysed for p4EBP1 levels and imaged using a horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary antibody in combination with an Odyssey Chemifluorescent Substrate Kit. This antibody showed specific binding to both D. discoideum and human proteins of the correct molecular weight. MCCC1 was used as a loading control as previously reported. For GefS levels, PVDF membranes were probed for p‐PKB substrate and imaged using a IRDye® 800CW goat anti‐rabbit IgG secondary antibody. In these and the following D. discoiduem and MEF experiments, samples were randomly assigned to different treatments and all test groups were included in each experiment. 2.2. Growth and development assay of D. discoideum : WT, IPMK +, human IPMK +, PKBA − and PKBA − IPMK + In summary, D. discoideum cells were grown in axenic medium containing 100 μg/ml penicillin–streptomycin, at 22°C, in the presence of increasing concentrations of CBG dissolved in DMSO. All conditions contained 0.5% DMSO. Secondary plot analysis calculated the rate of exponential growth, from 96 to 144 h, at each concentration and normalised to the no compound vehicle control. For development assays, wild type D. discoideum cells were loaded onto nitrocellulose filters and placed on absorbent filter pads at the indicated concentration of compounds at 22°C for 24 h and then imaged to record developmental phenotypes. 2.3. D. discoideum REMI screen To identify D. discoideum mutants resistant to CBG, a restriction enzyme‐mediated insertional library containing 12,247 mutants was employed, grown with 10 μM CBG that inhibits growth by >90% in WT cells, for 10 days. Resulting CBG‐resistant cells were isolated and the location of the REMI insert determined using an inverse PCR technique to isolate the flanking DNA as previously described. 2.4. qPCR analysis of CBG‐resistant mutants RNA was extracted from WT and mutant cells, and cDNA was produced. cDNA was then analysed by qPCR using primers 100 bp apart from the gene of interest and a house‐keeping gene—positive control. The ∆∆‐Ct method was used to calculate fold change. 2.5. Creation of IPMK‐RFP and hIPMK‐RFP cell lines and imaging The D. discoideum IPMK gene was amplified by PCR of the ipmk gene cDNA and the human IPMK was synthesised with D. discoideum codon bias and both genes were cloned into the pDM324 plasmid containing a C‐terminal red fluorescent protein tag to create an overexpressor construct. The vector was electroporated into WT D. discoideum cells and selected by growth in the presence of geneticin at 10 μg/ml. Cells expressing the plasmids were imaged under 1% agar. 2.6. Protein–ligand docking analysis Tertiary structures of proteins were modelled using Phyre2 and docking assays were carried out with SwissDock. The most likely ligand binding site showing the lowest ΔG was displayed with UCSF Chimera. 2.7. Higher order inositol phosphate level analysis WT and IPMK + cells were treated with vehicle solvent only control or 0.25 μM CBG or CBD for 1 or 24 h and provided blinded for analysis. In brief, cell pellets were dissolved in 1 M perchloric acid containing 3 mM EDTA, incubated on ice for 10 min, centrifuged and the supernatant was neutralised with 1 M potassium carbonate. Samples were incubated on ice for 2 h, centrifuged at 20 000 g and the supernatants collected. Samples were mixed with OrangeG and run on a 35% polyacrylamide gel for 17 h at 4°C at 600 V and 6 mA. Gels were stained with toluidine blue and then scanned with a desktop computer for image analysis with ImageStudio. 2.8. Western blot analysis of mTOR activity in mouse embryonic fibroblast cells Briefly, WT and IPMK −/− mouse embryonic fibroblasts were treated with solvent control, CBG or CBD, or PI3K inhibitor for 24 h in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium containing 10% foetal bovine serum. Cells lysed using radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer containing 2% phosphatase inhibitor and 1% protease inhibitor. Cell lysates were separated by SDS‐PAGE gel electrophoresis, transferred to PVDF membrane and probed with antibodies. Signals were detected with chemifluorescent substrate and recorded on an Odyssey CLx. All immuno‐related procedures involved comply with the editorial on immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry. 2.9. Primary PBMC collection from human subjects Healthy individuals and pwMS attending clinics at Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, were recruited for this study. Written informed consent was obtained from each participant and the study received ethical approval from the Beaumont Hospital Ethics and the Faculty of Health Sciences Research Ethics Committee, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland. The recruitment of pwMS into the study was via a consultant neurologist and all pwMS had a relapsing–remitting form of MS as defined by the revised McDonald criteria including patient history, clinical signs and symptoms, physical examination and adjunctive diagnostic tools including MRI. Some pwMS were on immunomodulatory treatment including gilenya, dimethyl fumarate and plegridy. Healthy individuals with no history of autoimmune, cardiovascular, respiratory or degenerative disease were included and matched on the basis of age and gender. Details of participant demographics are presented in Table 1. PBMCs were prepared from venous whole blood samples by way of venipuncture from healthy control participants and pwMS. PBMCs were isolated by density separation over Lymphoprep™. PBMCs were maintained in culture for at least 2 h prior to treatment with rapamycin and plant‐derived, highly purified CBD or CBG or THC:CBD combinations for 24 h and provided blinded for analysis. TABLE 1 Demographic breakdown for peripheral blood mononuclear cell donation origin of healthy individuals and pwMS 2.10. Western blot analysis of mTOR activity in primary PBMCs PBMCs were lysed using RIPA buffer containing 2% phosphatase inhibitor and 1% protease inhibitor. Cell lysates were separated by SDS‐PAGE gel electrophoresis, transferred to a PVDF membrane and probed overnight with antibody for p4EBP1, total 4EBP1 and actin. Signals were detected with chemifluorescent substrate and recorded on an Odyssey CLx. 2.11. Data and statistical analysis To ensure unbiased analysis when comparing different treatments, all samples were randomly assigned to the treatments and measures of all test groups were balanced within each assay. Data and statistical analysis comply with the recommendations on experimental design and analysis in pharmacology. Time course and dose as a repeated measure was analysed by two‐way ANOVA in Figures 2a and ​ and3d. 3d. Normality tests for data were carried out using Shapiro–Wilk's test. If data were found to be normally distributed, then a one‐way ANOVA with a post‐test of either Dunnett's or Bonferroni's multiple comparisons tests was carried out, as specified. The post hoc tests were conducted only if F in ANOVA achieved P <.05 and there was no significant variance inhomogeneity. If data were found to not be normally distributed, then a Kruskal–Wallis test with a Dunn's multiple comparison post‐test or Mann–Whitney test was carried out to test for significance. Sample sizes subjected to statistical analysis consisted of at least 5 independent experiments per group. Significance was found if p ≤ 0.05. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. FIGURE 2 CBG inhibits growth of D. discoideum WT cells but not development, enabling a screen to identify CBG‐resistant mutants. WT cells were grown in the presence of increasing concentrations of CBG... FIGURE 3 Elevated expression of D. discoideum or human IPMK regulates the effect of CBG and CBD on growth and mTORC1 activity in D. discoideum. A D. discoideum insertional mutant showing resistance to CBG contained a mutagenic insert 885 bp downstream... 2.12. Materials CBD, CBG and THC were provided by GW Research Ltd. Details of other materials and suppliers are provided in specific sections. 2.13. Nomenclature of targets and ligands Key protein targets and ligands in this article are hyperlinked to corresponding entries in the IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY and are permanently archived in the Concise Guide to PHARMACOLOGY 2019/20. 3. RESULTS 3.1. CBD and CBG increase mTOR activity in WT D. discoideum cells We initially investigated the effect of CBD, CBG, CBDA and CBDV on mTORC1 signalling in D. discoideum. We employed a western blot approach, using an antibody against the phosphorylated form of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E‐binding protein 1 as a direct target of mTORC1 in D. discoideum, that is reduced in starvation and following treatment with two established mTOR inhibitors. Cells were treated for 1 h with each phytocannabinoid at 0.25 μM, a concentration similar to that reported in rodent brain tissue following oral dosing of CBD and in human plasma samples from clinical trials with Epidiolex®, and were analysed for phospho‐4EBP1 levels. CBD treatment significantly increased 4EBP1 phosphorylation by approximately 45% compared with vehicle control. CBG promoted a similar increase in mTORC1 activation, however the structurally similar CBDA and CBDV did not significantly alter mTORC1 activity. We then investigated the mechanisms behind this effect in D. discoideum, initially focusing on CBG as a potential new therapeutic compound. FIGURE 1 Assessing the effect of structurally distinct phytocannabinoids on mTORC1 activity in D. discoideum cells. Structures of abundant phytocannabinoids found in cannabis, including CBG, CBD, CBDA and CBDV. The mTOR complex 1 is composed of... 3.2. CBG inhibits D. discoideum growth but not development To investigate the mechanism of action of CBG on mTORC1 signalling, we first analysed the effect of CBG on both cellular growth and multicellular development in D. discoideum. CBG caused a concentration‐dependent reduction in growth, from a small reduction at 0.1 μM to total inhibition of growth at ≥2 μM. Because in this model, starvation induces a developmental cycle where cells employ a host of proteins and signalling pathways that are distinct to those necessary for growth, we also investigated the effects of CBG on this process. Under control conditions, starvation induced the development of mature fruiting bodies comprising a round spore head held above the substratum by an elongated stalk and a basal disc. CBG treatment had no effect on this developmental process, allowing phenotypically normal fruiting body formation. These results suggest that proteins and signalling pathways necessary for growth, but not development, may be targeted by CBG and that this effect is not through a generalised toxic mechanism leading to cell death, because cells survive and develop into mature fruiting bodies in the presence of high concentrations of CBG. 3.3. Inositol polyphosphate multikinase regulates the effect of CBG on D. discoideum cellular growth and mTOR activity Pharmacogenetics studies in D. discoideum often involve screening an insertional mutant library to isolate cells showing reduced sensitivity to compounds and identification of the gene affected in these cells provides valuable insight into the signalling mechanism affected by the compound. Thus, we performed a screen using a pool of 12,247 individual mutants, to isolate cells resistant to the effect of CBG on growth, enabling the identification of proteins controlling CBG sensitivity. Through the use of a CBG resistance screen, we identified one mutant, in three independent experiments containing the mutagenic DNA cassette inserted 885 bp downstream from the stop codon of the gene encoding IPMK. The encoded 284 aa protein contains conserved inositol phosphate‐binding and ATP‐binding domains, consistent with the orthologous human protein. Because this insertion site was not within the open reading frame of the gene and was thus unlikely to disrupt protein translation, we investigated changes in ipmk transcriptional levels in this mutant using real‐time PCR analysis. This analysis demonstrated a significant threefold increase in ipmk expression in the CBG‐resistant mutant compared with WT cells, suggesting that elevated IPMK expression provides resistance to the cellular effect of CBG on D. discoideum growth. We continued the analysis of a role for IPMK in regulating the cellular effects of CBG by overexpressing fluorescently tagged versions of the D. discoideum and Homo sapiens proteins. Both the D. discoideum IPMK and the human IPMK protein were expressed with a C‐terminal RFP tag. Fluorescent imaging of the resulting cells indicated that IPMK‐RFP was localised in the cytosol, whereas hIPMK‐RFP was localised in the cytoplasm and nucleus, consistent with the localisations defined in mammalian studies. CBG resistance during growth was then compared between WT, IPMK + and hIPMK + cell lines, visualised in a secondary plot showing the rate of exponential growth at different CBG concentrations for each cell line. These analyses indicated CBG IC 50 values for WT of 0.22 μM, whereas IPMK + cells showed a threefold increase to 0.64 μM and hIPMK + cells showed a fivefold increase to 1.03 μM. These data confirm that elevated D. discoideum IPMK levels increase resistance to the effect of CBG on growth over WT cells and this cellular role was conserved by the expression of the human IPMK protein. To investigate a potential direct mechanism for both phytocannabinoids against the D. discoideum and human IPMK proteins, in silico molecular docking analysis was employed. This analysis suggested a common binding site for both CBG and CBD on the D. discoideum IPMK, but this binding site was not consistent with that shown for the human protein. Thus, it remains unclear if this mechanism is through direct inhibition of both IPMK enzymes or through a secondary target. Because overexpression of IPMK increased resistance to the effect of CBG on cellular growth, we also examined changes in mTORC1 activity in these cells, using phosphorylation of 4EBP1 as a readout. Elevated expression of IPMK promoted a significant, 1.8‐fold increase in mTORC1 activity as compared with WT cells, consistent with a role for elevated levels of IPMK enhancing mTORC1 activity. However, in contrast to that observed in WT cells, CBG or CBD treatment of IPMK + cells caused a decrease in the activity of mTORC1, returning the elevated p4EBP1 levels to that comparable with WT vehicle‐treated cells. Furthermore, expression of the human IPMK protein caused a significant 2.2‐fold increase in mTORC1 activity as compared with WT cells, consistent with overexpression of the native IPMK protein. In addition, CBG or CBD treatment of hIPMK + cells promoted a decrease in the activity of mTORC1, returning the elevated p4EBP1 levels to that comparable with WT vehicle‐treated cells. However, this outcome suggests differential effects of CBG and CBD on mTORC1 activity, where in WT cells, these phytocannabinoids function to activate mTORC1 signalling, whereas they reduce mTORC1 signalling following IPMK overexpression, suggesting that these phytocannabinoids provide an IPMK‐dependent effect on this signalling pathway. 3.4. IPMK regulates the effect of CBG via a PI3K/PKB‐dependent mechanism in D. discoideum Because mTORC1 activity may be regulated by the gain of components shared with and thus sequestered by the mTORC2 complex, such as PKB, we investigated the effect of CBG in the absence of PKB. In these experiments, we initially focused on the PKBA − cell line, a mutant lacking the most characterised PKB isoform and examined these cells for growth sensitivity to CBG. Loss of this enzyme increased the IC 50 for CBG 10‐fold, from 0.22 μM in WT cells to 2.16 μM in the mutant, clearly supporting a role for PKBA in the CBG‐dependent interruption of cellular function during growth. This effect was not rescued by elevating expression of IPMK in these cells, where resulting cells displayed a ninefold increase in the IC 50 for CBG to 1.94 μM. The large decrease in CBG sensitivity following loss of PKBA is consistent with a cellular mechanism of the compound that is dependent upon PKBA activity but does not differentiate between effects of CBG through PI3K/PKBA signalling or through reducing mTORC2 formation or via an effect on IPMK to regulate mTORC1 signalling that is dependent upon upstream PI3K/PKBA signalling. FIGURE 4 Phytocannabinoid effects on cell growth and mTORC1 activation are dependent upon PKB and PI3K activity in D. discoideum. Regulation of mTORC1 activity occurs through a complex pathway, including PI3K and PKB, and... To investigate a role for PKB activity in CBG‐ and CBD‐dependent mTORC1 regulation, we analysed mTORC1 activity in PKBA − cells following treatment with CBG and CBD, assessing mTORC1 activity using the previous assay. In the absence of phytocannabinoid, loss of PKBA significantly increased mTORC1 activity by around twofold above WT levels, potentially due to a block in formation of mTORC2, thereby increasing mTORC1 formation and thus activity. In PKBA − cells, both CBG and CBD treatment still increased mTORC1 activity by 1.4‐ or 1.5‐fold, respectively. However, because D. discoideum contains two PKB proteins, we also analysed mTORC1 activity and response to CBG and CBD treatment in cells lacking both proteins. Here, we found that loss of both PKB proteins did not elevate mTORC1 activity above WT levels and that phytocannabinoid effects on mTORC1 activation were lost, suggesting that PKB signalling is necessary for cannabinoid‐dependent mTORC1 activation. To extend this result, we also employed a pharmacological approach to block PI3K activity, as the key activator of PKB function, where inhibition of PI3K also blocked the effect of CBG and CBD on 4EBP1 phosphorylation. Finally, we show that these effects are unlikely to occur via mTORC2, because phosphorylation of Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factor S, a D. discoideum guanine nucleotide exchange factor targeted by mTORC2, is not downregulated by either cannabinoid. These data suggest that PI3K/PKB signalling must be active for the CBG‐ and CBD‐dependent activation of mTORC1 signalling but do not differentiate between IPMK‐dependent and PI3K/PKB‐dependent mechanisms. 3.5. CBG and CBD elevate IPMK‐dependent inositol phosphate phosphorylation activity in D. discoideum To distinguish between a CBG‐ and CBD‐dependent effect on IPMK or PI3K/PKB signalling and because IPMK contributes to the synthesis of higher order inositol phosphates such as IP 4–6, we assessed the effects of CBG and CBD on enhancing production of higher order inositol phosphates. In these experiments, WT and IPMK + cells were treated with CBG or CBD, reflecting a rapid response and a long‐term response, respectively, inositol phosphates were extracted and separated using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and IP 6 levels were quantified. Here, CBD significantly increased IP 6 levels following acute exposure and both CBG and CBD significantly increased IP 6 levels following chronic exposure. This increase is likely to be highly relevant to cell function because a previously reported 18% increase in IP 6 levels modulates calcium influx over the plasma membrane to serve as a cell signal response. Repeating this analysis in cells overexpressing IPMK shows that these CBG‐ and CBD‐regulated effects are lost, consistent with that shown for mTORC1 activation. These data suggest a role for CBG and CBD in activating IPMK to elevate production of higher order inositol phosphates. FIGURE 5 Phytocannabinoids upregulate the inositol phosphate catalytic activity of IPMK in D. discoideum. IPMK has a catalytic role in the phosphorylation of higher order inositol phosphates, to produce IP 4 and IP 5 that are essential for the creation of IP... 3.6. IPMK regulates the effect of CBG and CBD on mTORC1 activation in MEF cells Because we have proposed a mechanism for CBG and CBD in the regulation of mTORC1 signalling dependent upon IPMK in D. discoideum, we aimed to translate this effect into mammalian cells. Here, we employed MEF cells, treated with CBG or CBD for 24 h, at 4 μM, a concentration used in a variety of in vitro experiments, but chosen to ensure strong pathway activation and analysed mTORC1 activity. In WT MEF cells, CBG and CBD treatment induced a significant increase in p4EBP1 following treatment with either phytocannabinoid, consistent with that shown in D. discoideum. To confirm that these effects were dependent upon IPMK activity, we repeated this analysis using an MEF cell line lacking the IPMK protein, which showed no change in p4EBP1 levels following treatment, confirming phytocannabinoid‐dependent effects on mTORC1 activation through IPMK. We also examined the PI3K dependency of this phytocannabinoid effect, by treating cells with CBG or CBD following pharmacological inhibition of PI3K activity, where no phytocannabinoid‐dependent increase in mTORC1 activation was observed. These results confirm and extend those found in D. discoideum, suggesting that both CBG and CBD act to increase mTORC1 activity through enhancing IPMK activity in MEF cells and are dependent on a functional PI3K signalling pathway. FIGURE 6 Phytocannabinoids upregulate mTORC1 activation in mouse embryonic fibroblasts through IPMK and PI3K‐dependent signalling. Analysing a role for CBG and CBD in mTORC1 signalling through IPMK and PI3K/PKB signalling in mouse embryonic fibroblasts... 3.7. CBG, CBD and a mixture of THC and CBD differentially regulate mTOR activation in primary PBMCs derived from pwMS We continued by investigating an effect of CBG and CBD in regulating mTOR activity in a clinical setting, using PBMCs from healthy individuals and pwMS. Cells were treated with rapamycin, CBG, CBD and the combination THC:CBD or solvent‐only control for 24 h and analysed for mTORC1 activity. In these experiments, separate blots were used for each antibody, to ensure no cross‐over between total and phoshpo‐4EPB1 readouts or loss of protein due to membrane stripping. Cells derived from pwMS were found to have an increased ratio of p4EBP1:4EBP1 compared with cells from matched healthy controls, consistent with upregulation of this pathway in the disease state. Treatment of cells with rapamycin reduced the proportion of p4EBP1:4EBP1 in both healthy matched controls and pwMS. Treatment of cells derived from healthy individuals with CBG, CBD or THC:CBD increased the p4EBP1:4EBP1 ratio by 1.3‐, 1.2‐ and 1.5‐fold, respectively. In contrast, treatment of cells derived from pwMS with CBG, CBD and THC:CBD caused a decrease in the p4EBP1:4EBP1 ratio of 1.4‐, 2.2‐ and 1.8‐fold, respectively. These results confirm a role for CBG, CBD and THC:CBD in mTORC1 regulation in human PBMCs dependent upon disease state. FIGURE 7 Phytocannabinoids differentially regulate mTORC1 activity in primary human peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy individuals and pwMS. To examine the therapeutic relevance of mTORC1 activity as a target for CBD and CBG, p4EBP1 levels... 4. DISCUSSION Phytocannabinoids have demonstrated efficacy in preclinical models of MS and in clinical studies relating to spasticity associated with MS. In addition, CBD has been shown to be effective in preclinical models of psychosis, breast cancer and tuberous sclerosis complex. One suggested mechanism for CBD treatment of epilepsy and cancer is through the downregulation of hyperactivated mTORC1 found in the disease state. In contrast, in the spinal cord neurons of a mouse model of MS, the mTORC1 pathway has been suggested to be downregulated after induction of the disease state, where CBD elevates mTORC1 signalling and this could improve the progression of the disease due to the arrest of myelin loss. A similar therapeutic mechanism of mTORC1 activation was also proposed for CBD in a mouse model of schizophrenia‐related psychosis and in the anticonvulsant effect of CBD in cocaine ‐induced seizures in a mouse model. These conflicting studies suggest that further analysis of the effects of cannabinoids on mTORC1 signalling is necessary to explain this variance. Our study identifies a role for CBD and CBG in regulating mTORC1 activity, where in WT D. discoideum cells, CBG and CBD activate mTORC1 signalling. Through an unbiased growth resistance screen, similar to that employed in an earlier report for CBD, we identify a role for IPMK in controlling phytocannabinoid sensitivity, where elevated expression of the D. discoideum protein or the orthologous human protein leads to a threefold to fivefold increase in IC 50 value for CBG. At high CBG concentration, cells remain sensitive to treatment, likely representing effects on a secondary target. Interestingly, treating cells showing elevated expression of either D. discoideum or H. sapiens IPMK using a single concentration of cannabinoid reported in rodent brain tissue following oral dosing of CBD and in human plasma samples from clinical trials with Epidiolex® inverses the effects of phytocannabinoids to cause a reduction in mTORC1 activity upon treatment, although a dose‐dependent analysis of this effect would provide further insight. We also confirm that the phytocannabinoid‐dependent regulation of mTORC1 activity is lost in mouse embryonic fibroblasts following ablation of IPMK, validating this mechanism in mammalian cells. We also demonstrate that treatment of PBMCs from healthy individuals with CBG, CBD or THC:CBD increases mTORC1 activity, whereas treatment of PBMCs from pwMS reduces mTORC1 activity, validating related effects in a preclinical setting. It is worth noting that, in this PBMC analysis, CBD may partly counteract CB 1 receptor activation and CB 1 receptors may regulate mTORC1 signalling in a complex context‐dependent manner, providing additional regulation of this important complex. In the present study, we have employed D. discoideum as a 3Rs model organism to investigate a mechanism underlying the CBG‐ and CBD‐dependent activation of mTORC1 signalling. In this model, we show that CBD acutely increases mTORC1 activity at concentrations used clinically and consistent with that shown in neurons in MS and psychosis studies. Interestingly, CBG also triggers this effect, whereas two closely related phytocannabinoids, CBDV and CBDA, do not activate this response, suggesting potential structural specificity for these phytocannabinoid in regulating mTORC1. We propose that the inverted response to these phytocannabinoids following elevated expression of IPMK may be due to the enzyme functioning as a rate limiting factor for mTORC1 activity and that these phytocannabinoids may trigger the IPMK preferential involvement in the mTORC1 complex, leading to enhanced mTORC1 activity. This model is supported by our data showing that elevated expression of IPMK in D. discoideum increases mTORC1 activity and loss of IPMK in MEF cells blocks phytocannabinoid‐dependent mTORC1 activation. In this model, with elevated expression of IPMK, mTORC1 activity is maintained through a reduced reliance on PI3K activity, because IPMK also shows PI3K activity. Phytocannabinoid treatment of these cells enhances the direct activity of IPMK, including function in the mTORC1 complex, thereby leaving cells with a reduced PI3K/PKB signalling pathway necessary for the activation of mTORC1, with an overall reduction in mTORC1 signalling. This model is further supported by phytocannabinoids increasing IP 6 production, which is independent of PI3K/PKB and mTORC1 activity. However, although our model suggests that phytocannabinoid activation of IPMK is PI3K/PKB independent, PI3K/PKB signalling remains necessary for the activation of mTORC1 that is consistent with earlier suggestions, because pharmacological inhibition of PI3K activity and ablation of PKB activity lead to a block of mTORC1 activation. This model provides novel mechanistic insight with both CBG and CBD regulating mTORC1 via enhancing IPMK activity in the presence of a functionally active PI3K/PKB signalling pathway. Understanding potential impacts of CBG in a clinical setting is unclear due to limited availability of information on CBG content in treatments. In clinical trials of phytocannabinoid‐based medicines containing THC and CBD, the levels of other cannabinoids such as CBG provided to patients remain unspecified. In contrast, a similar product used in a mouse model of Huntington's disease contained between 0.9% and 1.1% CBG. Crude phytocannabinoid extracts, also likely to contain CBG, show efficacy in MS treatment and a clinical trial of a whole plant cannabis‐based medicine containing THC and CBD demonstrated successful treatment of muscle spasticity in pwMS. It is also worth noting that different cannabis strains demonstrate varying levels of CBG. Thus, results presented here suggest that CBG should be further investigated for mTORC1 pathway regulation in this context. This study provides insight into the mechanisms of action of phytocannabinoids, potentially relevant in the treatment of MS and underlying signalling. Autoimmunity drives MS pathogenesis, promoting immune cell‐induced neuroinflammation, myelin degradation and reactive changes in glia and axonal destruction. In addition, much evidence indicates that the innate immune system has a defined role in the progression and/or aetiology of MS and that the PI3K/PKB/mTORC1 pathway provides a potentially relevant target pathway in MS. Assuming that employing separate blots for total and phosphor‐4EBP1 provides an accurate readout of mTORC1 activity, we find that specific phytocannabinoids reduce mTORC1 signalling in immune cells, which is elevated during the proinflammatory activation of these cells and therefore, our findings provide insight into a potential novel cellular target for phytocannabinoids in immune cells that may relate to MS treatment. In addition, we find that this effect is not seen in healthy individuals and is therefore evidence of a disease‐specific effect of immune cell activation. Despite a range of proposed mechanisms for the therapeutic effects of phytocannabinoids, this study supports a mechanism via mTORC1 function. However, adenosine plays a key role in regulating AMP‐activated protein kinase activity and thus mTORC1 regulation, and extracellular adenosine treatment of a human‐derived cancer cell line reduced mTORC1‐dependent p4EBP1 levels. Similarly, the CBD‐dependent reduction in glycine and the one‐carbon cycle function also impacts on adenosine levels and hence mTORC1 signalling. Finally, TRPV1 signalling has also been implicated in downstream regulation of mTORC1 activity. Thus, further research into these existing targets and mechanisms will be necessary to establish if they also provide an impact on mTORC1 regulation. This study proposes a mechanism of CBD and CBG through IPMK to regulate mTORC1 activity dependent upon activation state of the signalling pathway. Future studies may seek to validate this mechanism of both CBD and CBG in models of MS and psychosis and for the treatment of other mTOR‐dependent conditions. Our data also suggest that knowledge of CBG levels in cannabinoid extracts may be important to monitor various therapeutic roles. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION J.L.D.‐O., J.S., C.J.P. and E.C.W. carried out the Dictyostelium work. J.L.D.‐O. carried out the mouse embryonic fibroblast work. Y.D. and A.S. carried out the higher order phosphoinositide analysis. J.K.F., L.C. and E.D. carried out the PBMC work. R.S.B.W. conceived the project, supervised the work and, with J.L.D.‐O, wrote the paper. All authors contributed to and have approved the final manuscript. DECLARATION OF TRANSPARENCY AND SCIENTIFIC RIGOUR This declaration acknowledges that this paper adheres to the principles for transparent reporting and scientific rigour of preclinical research as stated in the BJP guidelines for Natural Products Research, Design and Analysis and Immunoblotting and Immunochemistry, and as recommended by funding agencies, publishers and other organisations engaged with supporting research. Supporting information Figure S1. Exemplar western blot analysis of D._discoideum and Human PBMC extracts showing p4EBP1 and total 4EBP1 antibody specificity. A. Full unedited gel relating to Figure 3E. Primary antibody against p4EBP1 rabbit, Cell SignallingTechnology, 9,459). Loading control streptavidin. B. and C. Full unedited gels relating to Figure 7. Primary antibody against p4EBP1 rabbit, cell signalling technology, 9,459). Primary antibody against total 4EBP1. Loading control actin. Figure S2. CBG does not affect development of wild type D. discoideum. Wild type D. discoideum cells, developed for 24 hours under starvation conditions form a field of mature fruiting bodies viewed from above, scale bar 1 mm for top view. In the presence of CBG, development of the fruiting was unaffected.. Figure S3. Homo sapiens and D.discoideum IPMK protein alignment. Proteins were aligned using Clustal W. Amino acid conservation is visualised using: ‘*’indicating a position with a conserved amino acid residue, ‘:’indicating a position with conservation between two amino acid with strongly similar properties,.’indicating a position with conservation between two amino acid with weakly similar properties. Figure S4. IPMK levels in the mutant and overexpression of IPMK. A: qPCR analysis of REMI mutant resistant to CBG to determine how ipmk mRNA levels differed in the mutant compared to wild type, n = 3. Data were not normally distributed, therefore a Mann Whitney test was carried out to test for significance, * ‐ p ≤ 0.05. B: D. discoideum and H. sapiens IPMK+ ‐RFP plasmids were created. This led to the increased expression of both proteins. Western blot analysis was used to determine that these proteins were overexpressed. Loading control protein is MCCC1. The housekeeping gene used was Ig7 and the method used to calculate fold‐change was ΔΔ‐Ct. Figure S5. Analysis of the effect of CBG on growth in the IPMK+ and hIPMK+ cell lines. D. discoideum mutant cell lines were grown in the presence of increasing concentrations of CBG in shaking culture for one week. Growth is calculated as a % of each cell line in solvent only conditions. A: IPMK+, used to calculate secondary plot in Figure 3. B: hIPMK+, used to calculate secondary plot in Figure 3. Figure S6. Docking analysis of D.discoideum and human IPMK with CBG and CBD. For molecular docking analyses predictions of tertiary protein structures were generated and Swiss Dock was used to detect potential binding sites of CBG and CBD. A. The most likely binding site showing the lowest ΔG. For the Dictyostelium IPMK, but not for the human IPMK, similar binding sites were predicted for CBG and CBD. B. The potential direct binding sites for both phytocannabinoids on both proteins. C. Alignment of potential binding sites on both protein. Figure S7. Analysis of the effect of CBG on growth in the PKBA‐ and PKBA‐IPMK+ cell lines. D. discoideum mutant cell lines were grown in the presence of increasing concentrations of CBG in shaking culture for one week. Growth shown as a % of each cell line in solvent only conditions. A: PKBA‐, used to calculate secondary plot in Figure 4. B: PKBA‐IPMK+, used to calculate secondary plot in Figure 4. Figure S8. Phospho‐GEFS western blot analysis suggests cannabinoids do not alter mTORC2 activity in D. discoideum. Wild type D. discoideum cells were treated with CBG or CBD or solvent only control prior to Western analysis. The PKBA ‐ PKGB ‐ mutant was used as a negative control and pGEFS levels were determined using an antibody against p‐PKB substrate with MCCC1 as a loading control. Data were not normally distributed as tested by Shapiro–Wilk's and significance was assessed by Kruskal‐Wallis test with a with Dunn's Multiple Comparison Post‐test, ** p < 0.01, n = 7. Graph shows mean ± SEM Figure S9. Phospho‐ and total‐4EBP1 western blot analysis showing cannabinoids upregulate mTORC1 activation in the presence of IPMK through PI3K‐dependent signalling in MEFs. These graphs relate to Figure 6. Mouse embryonic fibroblast cells were exposed to 4 μM CBG or CBD or vehicle control for 24 hours. Cells were then collected and analysed by western blot for total and phosphorylated 4EBP1 levels, with actin as the control protein. Data were normally distributed with Shapiro‐Wilks and significance was tested using a One ‐Way ANOVA with Dunnett's Multiple Comparison Test. A, C, E: Total 4EBP1 content of MEF cells treated with 4 μM CBG or CBD was measured using western blot analysis. B, D, F: Phosphorylation of 4EBP1 in MEF cells treated with 4 μM CBG or CBD was measured using western blot analysis. A: CBG or CBD of WT MEF cells had no effect on total 4EBP1 levels compared to vehicle only treatment, n = 9; DF:2,25, F = 7.0. B: CBG or CBD of WT MEF cells significantly increased phosphorylation of 4EBP1 compared to untreated, n = 9;DF:2,26, F = 5.7. C: CBG or CBD of MEF cells lacking IPMK had no effect on total 4EBP1 levels compared to vehicle only treatment, n = 9; DF:2,24, F = 0.7. D: CBG or CBD of MEF cells lacking IPMK had no effect on phosphorylation of 4EBP1 levels compared to vehicle only treatment, n = 9; DF:2,26, F = 0.1. E: CBG or CBD of MEF cells lacking PI3K activity had no effect on total 4EBP1 levels compared to vehicle only treatment, n = 9; DF:2,24, F = 3.2. F: CBG or CBD of MEF cells lacking PI3K activity had no effect on phosphorylation of 4EBP1 levels compared to vehicle only treatment, n = 9; DF:2,24, F = 0.7. Figure S10. Rapamycin treatment of peripheral blood mononuclear cells : A and B: To determine if mTORC1 activity in primary PBMCs could be examined, cells were treated with the mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin. In cells from both healthy individuals and individuals with multiple sclerosis rapamycin significantly decreased the proportion of phosphorylated 4EBP1 compared to total 4EBP1. C and D: To determine if mTORC1 activity in primary PBMCs could be examined, cells were treated with rapamycin. In cells from both healthy individuals and individuals with multiple sclerosis, rapamycin did not significant alter p4EBP1 levels. D and E: Rapamycin treatment of cells from both healthy individuals and individuals with multiple sclerosis rapamycin significantly increased total 4EBP1. Click here for additional data file. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This study is supported by Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council and Irish Research Council for Science, Engineering and Technology. Notes Damstra‐Oddy JL, Warren EC, Perry CJ, et al. Phytocannabinoid‐dependent mTORC1 regulation is dependent upon inositol polyphosphate multikinase activity. Br J Pharmacol. 2021; 178 :1149–1163. 10.1111/bph.15351 Funding information Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, Grant/Award Number: DTP studentship; Irish Research Council for Science, Engineering and Technology, Grant/Award Number: EPSPG/2015/131 DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Some data may not be made available because of privacy or ethical restrictions. Article information Br J Pharmacol. 2021 Mar; 178: 1149–1163. Published online 2021 Jan 18. doi: 10.1111/bph.15351 PMCID: PMC9328663 PMID: 33347604 Joseph L. Damstra‐Oddy, 1 Eleanor C. Warren, 1 Christopher J. Perry, 1 Yann Desfougères, 2 John‐Mark K. Fitzpatrick, 3 Judith Schaf, 1 Lisa Costelloe, 4 William Hind, 5 Eric J. Downer, 3 Adolfo Saiardi, 2 and Robin S.B. Williams 1 Joseph L. Damstra‐Oddy 1 Centre for Biomedical Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham UK Find articles by Joseph L. Damstra‐Oddy Eleanor C. Warren 1 Centre for Biomedical Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham UK Find articles by Eleanor C. Warren Christopher J. Perry 1 Centre for Biomedical Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham UK Find articles by Christopher J. Perry Yann Desfougères 2 Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London UK Find articles by Yann Desfougères John‐Mark K. Fitzpatrick 3 Discipline of Physiology, School of Medicine, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, University of Dublin, Dublin Ireland Find articles by John‐Mark K. Fitzpatrick Judith Schaf 1 Centre for Biomedical Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham UK Find articles by Judith Schaf Lisa Costelloe 4 Department of Neurology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin Ireland Find articles by Lisa Costelloe William Hind 5 GW Research Ltd, Histon UK Find articles by William Hind Eric J. Downer 3 Discipline of Physiology, School of Medicine, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, University of Dublin, Dublin Ireland Find articles by Eric J. Downer Adolfo Saiardi 2 Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London UK Find articles by Adolfo Saiardi Robin S.B. Williams 1 Centre for Biomedical Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham UK Find articles by Robin S.B. Williams 1 Centre for Biomedical Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham UK 2 Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London UK 3 Discipline of Physiology, School of Medicine, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, University of Dublin, Dublin Ireland 4 Department of Neurology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin Ireland 5 GW Research Ltd, Histon UK Robin S.B. Williams, Email: ku.ca.luhr@smailliw.nibor. Corresponding author. * Correspondence Robin S. B. Williams, Centre for Biomedical Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham TW20 0EX, UK. Email: ku.ca.luhr@smailliw.nibor Received 2020 Jul 29; Revised 2020 Dec 7; Accepted 2020 Dec 8. Copyright © 2020 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Pharmacological Society. This is an open access article under the terms of the License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Articles from British Journal of Pharmacology are provided here courtesy of Wiley-Blackwell, John Wiley & Sons 