 Navigation of dendritic cells from the site of infection to lymphoid organs is guided by concentration gradients of CCR7 ligands. How cells interpret chemokine gradients and how they couple directional sensing to polarization and persistent chemotaxis has remained largely elusive. Previous experimental systems were limited in the ability to control fast de novo formation of the final gradient slope, long-lasting stability of the gradient and to expose cells to dynamic stimulation. Here, we used a combination of microfluidics and quantitative in vitro live cell imaging to elucidate the chemotactic sensing strategy of DCs. The microfluidic approach allows us to generate soluble gradients with high spatio-temporal precision and to analyze actin dynamics, cell polarization, and persistent directional migration in both static and dynamic environments. We demonstrate that directional persistence of DC migration requires steady-state characteristics of the soluble gradient instead of temporally rising CCL19 concentration, implying that spatial sensing mechanisms control chemotaxis of DCs. Kymograph analysis of actin dynamics revealed that the presence of the CCL19 gradient is essential to stabilize leading edge protrusions in DCs and to determine directionality, since both cytoskeletal polarization and persistent chemotaxis are abrogated in the range of seconds when steady-state gradients are perturbed. In contrast to Dictyostelium amoeba, DCs are unable to decode oscillatory stimulation of soluble chemokine traveling waves into a directional response toward the wave source. These findings are consistent with the notion that DCs do not employ adaptive temporal sensing strategies that discriminate temporally increasing and decreasing chemoattractant concentrations in our setting. Taken together, in our experimental system DCs do not depend on increasing absolute chemokine concentration over time to induce persistent migration and do not integrate oscillatory stimulation. The observed capability of DCs to migrate with high directional persistence in stable gradients but not when subjected to periodic temporal cues, identifies spatial sensing as a key requirement for persistent chemotaxis of DCs. Keywords: leukocytes, dendritic cells, chemotaxis, gradient, directional sensing Introduction Directed cell migration along chemokine gradients is considered essential for embryogenesis, wound healing, cancer metastasis, and immune surveillance. DCs are potent antigen-presenting cells and their capacity to induce adaptive immune response requires their navigation from the site of infection to secondary lymphoid tissues, where they prime naïve T lymphocytes. In addition to interstitial migration this route includes DC navigation through confined areas, such as the entry into initial afferent lymphatics and the traverse of subcapsular and cortical sinuses to enter the paracortical cords. Gradient-guided chemotaxis of DCs therefore allows navigation through complex environments and engagement of rare cell populations, which would otherwise not meet by chance, e.g., DC-T cell interactions. Efficient guidance of motile DCs mainly depends on signaling of the G protein-coupled receptor CCR7, which is upregulated on DCs following pathogen encounter and recognizes the two ligands CCL19 and CCL21. In a physiological milieu, gradients are presumably not stable over long distances for long periods of time as a result of rapid decay of concentration as a function of distance from the secreting source, hindered chemokine diffusion, chemokine immobilization, or dynamic chemokine release. Navigation in such complex and dynamic environments is poorly understood. However, it is indisputed that it requires an integration of spatial and temporal cues which allows cells to maintain their direction when the guidance cue fluctuates. Two distinct strategies are proposed for cellular gradient sensing. Those cells employing spatial sensing strategies simultaneously compare the chemoattractant receptor occupancy at different positions in the cell, which allows the cell to orient itself towards the gradient direction. Those cells employing temporal, or sequential, sensing strategies compare receptor occupancy at successive time points, between which the cell moves from one location to another, and accordingly adjust the bias of direction during locomotion. Motile cells that move at large speed compared to their body size employ temporal sensing strategies. In contrast, chemotaxis of large, much slower, amoeboid cells is typically considered to rely on spatial sensing. However, recent studies with Dictyostelium amoeba suggest that these cells employ both sensing modalities and that an interplay between cellular memory and adaptive temporal sensing allows cells to maintain their direction when the guidance cue fluctuates. Furthermore, it was recently proposed for myeloid cells that rising chemokine concentrations are required to promote long-range directional migration, implying that temporal sensing controls prolonged responses to chemotactic cues. Therefore, the existing literature is inconsistent about how chemotactic cues regulate directional locomotion of leukocytes and we still lack a quantitative understanding of how cells interpret both stable and dynamic guidance cues in complex environments. Previous assays such as point release of chemokines from micropipettes, under agarose assays, Dunn chemotaxis chambers, and diffusion-based microfluidic approaches in 3D matrices were limited in the ability to control the shape of the gradient with high spatio-temporal precision and to expose cells to controlled dynamic stimulation. Here, we utilize a combination of a flow-based microfluidic approach and quantitative confocal live cell imaging which allows to directly visualize and track cells during migration and to analyze their response in complex, precisely controlled chemokine fields. In this study we employ chemotaxis of dendritic cells to explore quantitative aspects of directional gradient sensing in a prototypical example of fast migrating leukocytes, which share many characteristics of so-called amoeboid crawling movement described for Dictyostelium discoideum. We provide evidence that guidance control of DCs strongly depends on the integration of spatial information, since cells depolarize and stop in the range of seconds following complete CCL19-gradient abrogation, respectively. The observed capability of DCs to migrate with high directional persistence in static gradients but not in temporally dynamic environments strongly argues for a spatial navigation strategy. Materials and Methods Mice All mice used in this study were bred on a C57BL/6J background, maintained at the institutional animal facility, and sacrificed at 7–10 weeks of age for isolation of organ according to the German law of animal experimentation. Lifeact-EGFP mice were a gift from Frank Bradke. Generation, Cell Culture and Maturation of Bone Marrow Derived Dendritic Cells Dendritic cells were generated from the bone marrow extracted from femur and tibia of 7–10-week-old mice as described previously. We employed DCs from Lifeact-EGFP mice, which allow visualization of F-actin without interfering with polymerization dynamics. In brief, bone marrow cells were collected by flushing the bones with PBS. Subsequently, 5 × 10 6 bone marrow cells were cultured in 10 cm petri dishes in 10 ml complete cell culture medium containing 10 ng/ml recombinant Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony Stimulating Factor. On day 3, cells were fed by addition of 5 ml complete cell culture medium supplemented with 10 ng/ml GM-CSF. On day 6, half of the cell culture medium in stock was replaced by fresh complete cell culture medium supplemented with 10 ng/ml GM-CSF. To induce maturation, BM-DCs were stimulated overnight with 200 ng/ml Lipopolysaccharide from E. coli O127:B8 and used for experiments on day 7–9. Purification of Splenic Dendritic Cells Dendritic cells were purified from spleens of 7–10-week-old Lifeact-EGFP mice. Collagenase solution, consisting of 0.2 mg/ml collagenase IV, 10% FCS, 100 µ/ml DNAse I in HBSS, was added to the spleens after they were minced into small pieces and incubated at 37°C for 45–60 min. The dissociated tissue was homogenized using syringe and 19G cannula and subsequently sieved through cell strainer. The cell suspension was washed once with PBS containing 5% FCS and incubated with a so-called ACK lysis buffer at room temperature for 5 min. The ACK lysis buffer is used for the lysis of red blood cells and consists of 155 mM NH 4 Cl, 10 mM KHCO 3, 0.1 mM EDTA in ddH 2 O. Lysis was stopped with excess of PBS followed by washing twice with PBS. DCs were purified from cell suspension using CD11c Microbeads Ultrapure and the autoMACS Pro Separator. CD11c+ DC were subsequently cultured in six well plates overnight in 5 ml complete cell culture medium containing 10 ng/ml recombinant Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony Stimulating Factor. To induce maturation, BM-DCs were stimulated for 6 h with 200 ng/ml Lipopolysaccharide from E. coli O127:B8 and subsequently used for experiments. Cell Culture of Dictyostelium Amoeba and Preparation Cells of D. discoideum strain AX2, expressing LimEdeltacc-GFP as an actin probe, were a gift from Günther Gerisch. The cells were cultivated at 22°C in 10 cm cell culture dishes with nutrient medium containing 10 μg/ml of G418. Nutrient medium consists of 7.15 g Bacto™ Yeast Extract, 14.3 g Bacto™ Peptone, 18.0 g D--maltose monohydrate, 0.0486 g KH 2 PO 4, 0.616 g Na 2 HPO 4 * 2H 2 O in 1 L cell culture water, was adjusted to pH 6.7, and subsequently filtered by the use of a 0.45 µm porous membrane. The cells were split every 2–3 days in a ratio of 1:5–1:10, before the cell monolayers became confluent. For starvation, 5 * 10 6 cells were shaken overnight at 22°C in an Erlenmeyer flask with 3 ml phosphate buffer placed on a shaker with orbital motion and subsequently used for microfluidic experiments. Chemoattractants and Gradient Visualization Recombinant murine chemokines were reconstituted to a concentration of 100 μg/ml in cell culture water and stored at −20°C. Prior to use, the chemokine was diluted to a working concentration of 50 nM in so-called Microfluidic buffer, i.e., Hank’s balanced salt solution, supplemented with 0.5% FCS and 25 mM HEPES buffering agent. Alexa Fluor™ 647 dextran, 10,000 MW was prepared following manufacturer’s protocol and reconstituted to a concentration of 1 mM in PBS and stored at −20°C. Prior to use, Alexa Fluor™ 647 dextran was diluted to a working concentration of 300 nM in Microfluidic buffer. The fluorescently labeled dextran is characterized by a similar molecular weight as compared to the recombinant CCL19 and served as a surrogate molecule to monitor the chemokine gradient within the microfluidic chamber. The synthetic peptide WKYMVM is a selective agonist for the formyl peptide receptors FPR2 and FPR3. WKYMVM was reconstituted to a concentration of 100 µM in cell culture water and stored at −20°C. Prior to use, WKYMVM was diluted to a working concentration 50 nM in Microfluidic buffer. LTB4 was reconstituted to a concentration of 100 µM in cell culture water and stored at −20°C. Prior to use, LTB4 was diluted to a working concentration 25 nM in Microfluidic buffer. cAMP was reconstituted to a concentration of 1 mM in cell culture water and stored at −20°C. Prior to use, cAMP was diluted to a working concentration of 1 µM in cell culture water. Alexa Fluor™ 633, was prepared following manufacturer’s protocol and reconstituted to a concentration of 1 mM in PBS and stored at −20°C. Prior to use, Alexa Fluor™ 633 was diluted to a working concentration of 300 nM in PBS and served as a surrogate molecule to monitor gradients of cAMP, LTB4, or WKYMVM, respectively. Coating of Microfluidic Chamber-Slides Chamber-slides were coated with fibronectin to allow integrin-mediated adherence and migration of BM-DCs and CD11c+ DCs. Fibronectin from human plasma was reconstituted to a concentration of 200 μg/ml in cell culture water and stored at −20°C. Prior to use, fibronectin was diluted to a working concentration of 50 μg/ml in PBS and manually filled into the chamber-slide through the outlet adapter. The chamber-slide was incubated with fibronectin for 1 h at room temperature and subsequently washed with PBS. Then the coated chamber-slide was blocked with Casein to completely inhibit unwanted immobilization of soluble chemokines. Casein was reconstituted to a working concentration of 2.5 vol.-% in PBS and stored at −80°C; incubation was performed for 1 h at room temperature followed by washing with Microfluidic buffer, supplemented with 0.5% FCS and 25 mM HEPES buffering agent. Seeding of Bone Marrow-Dendritic Cells in Microfluidic Chamber-Slides For chemotaxis experiments non-adherent LPS-stimulated mature BM-DCs were collected from the cell culture medium supernatant. Then the cells were resuspended in Microfluidic buffer and subsequently placed in a microfluidic chamber-slide in 100 μl at a cell density of 1.5 * 10 6 cells/ml. Cells were settled for adherence for 60 min at 37°C/5%CO 2 /humidity. Before live cell imaging the channel was washed once with Microfluidic buffer to remove non-adherent cells. Seeding of Splenic CD11c+ Dendritic Cells in Microfluidic Chamber-Slides For chemotaxis experiments CD11c+ DCs were resuspended in Microfluidic buffer and subsequently placed in a microfluidic chamber-slide in 100 μl at a cell density of 1.5 * 10 6 cells/ml. To improve cell adhesion of CD11c+ DCs, cells were incubated with MgCl 2 to increase activation of integrins. To this end CD11c+ DCs were resuspended in a modified Microfluidic buffer, consisting of Hank’s balanced salt solution, supplemented with 0.5% FCS, and 25 mM HEPES buffering agent, and 10 mM MgCl 2. Cells were settled for adherence for 60 min at 37°C/5%CO 2 /humidity. Before live cell imaging the channel was washed once with Microfluidic buffer to remove non-adherent cells. Seeding of Dictyostelium Amoeba in Microfluidic Chamber Slides Following starvation 0.5 * 10 6 AX2 cells/ml in 17 mM phosphate buffer were placed into uncoated chamber-slides and incubated for 20 min at 22°C before chemotaxis experiments were performed with adherent cells. Generation of Precise Concentration Gradients Using the Microfluidic Device To generate spatially and temporally precisely controlled soluble concentration gradients of chemoattractant by laminar flow, we employed a source-sink-based microfluidic approach. The core piece of this approach consists of a chamber-slide that merges three separated liquids into one channel. The three inlet channels were connected to 50 ml centrifuge tubes, which were used as a reservoir of the flow buffer source. Flexible tubes from the buffer source without chemoattractant were connected to both outer inlets of the chamber-slide, whereas a flexible tube from the buffer source with chemoattractant was connected to the central inlet as depicted in the graphical representation. One more flexible tube was connected via Luer connector to the outlet and ends in a waste vessel. Air-tight connectors allowed pressurization of Falcon tubes for microfluidic applications. Before capping and connecting the Falcon tubes with the buffer source the solution was purged with gaseous nitrogen for 5 min followed by removal of emergent air bubbles with a cell culture pump. This prevents unwanted gas bubbles, which hinder the formation and maintenance of stable gradients in the chamber. Pressure is precisely controlled via a pneumatic pressure regulator. High precision bidirectional flow sensors interfaced with Maesflow software allows for direct feedback control and monitoring of individual flow rates. Pressure control was automated by the Maesflow software using custom-made scripts that set the flow rates from the individual inlet dynamically over time. For the generation of dynamic traveling waves we modified executable MFCS shell scripts named “travelingwave.sh.” from Nakajima and Sawai. Supplementary Table S1 summarizes flow rates as well as the spatio-temporal condition of the gradient which were used in respective experiments. FIGURE 1 Microfluidic approach to generate sigmoidal shaped concentration gradients with high spatio-temporal precision. Graphical representation of the “source-sink”-based microfluidic setting. The core piece of this approach consists of a... Confocal Live Cell Imaging Image series data of motile DCs were obtained using an inverted confocal ultra-fast laser scanning microscope equipped with a motorized microscope stage and a controllable heating incubation insert. Alternative use of a complex incubation box was proved as unsuitable for this microfluidic setup, because the intake airflow caused unwanted air bubbles in the chamber slide and the flexible tubes and subsequently abrogated the stability of the gradient. Image data of motile Dictyostelium Amoeba were obtained at 22°C. For visualization 488 and 633 nm laser lines and a photomultiplier tube was used. Objective lens used were ×10 for visualization and quantification of chemotaxis and ×63 for visualization of cell polarization and actin dynamics on a single-cell level. Fluorescence images were acquired at one frame per 2–10-s. FIGURE 2 Spatial sensing and chemotactic response of bone marrow-derived dendritic cells in stable soluble CCL19 gradients. Sigmoidal shaped concentration profile of a stable soluble gradient analyzed with a surrogate molecule, 10 kDa Dextran... FIGURE 4 Directional persistent migration of BM-DCs is abrogated in the range of seconds when stable CCL19 gradients are perturbed. Concentration profiles of soluble 10 kDa Dextran Alexa Fluor 647, which is used as a surrogate molecule to mirror... FIGURE 5 Steady-state chemokine-gradients are essential to stabilize leading edge protrusions in BM-DCs. Time-lapse confocal imaging sequence of actin dynamics and leading-edge polarization of a single cell in a stable soluble CCL19 gradient... FIGURE 6 BM-DCs are not able to decode oscillatory stimulation of soluble CCL19 traveling waves into a directional chemotactic response. Proposed model of spatial and temporal sensing behavior in traveling waves of chemoattractant, modified after. Using green fluorescence of EGFP as a source channel of motile cells we tracked spots over time. The so-called quality filter was set to a level above 5 after spot detection. The Autoregressive Motion Algorithm was used for tracking analysis. A value of 20 µm was set as a maximal distance of individual spots from frame to frame. Image series with annotated pseudo-colored cell tracks were stored as videos. Cell migration parameters, i.e., accumulated distance, x-displacement, and cell directionality were exported from Imaris software and further analyzed with GraphPad Prism 9.3.1. The x-Forward Migration Index is similar to a so-called Chemotactic Index. X-FMI was used in this study to calculate directional persistence, i.e., the ratio of the cell’s most direct path to the chemokine gradient source to its accumulated distance. The x-FMI was calculated with a custom-made script using R-software on the basis of “Position”- and “Track displacement length”- data obtained from Imaris. Stopping time of chemotaxing cells was quantified by analyzing the stagnation of x-displacement in response to gradient removal. Manual tracking was performed using the Manual Tracking and Chemotaxis Plugin of Fiji Software in Figure 4 and Supplementary Videos S3, S4, S6. Kymograph Analysis of Actin Dynamics and Membrane Protrusion Formation Actin dynamics and membrane protrusion formation were analyzed by line-scan and kymograph analysis, using Fiji Software. Image series of the EGFP-channel were processed using the Walking Average plugin to increase signal-to-noise ratio and to flatten the background. Then a segmented line which includes the entire leading-edge activity of the cell during the image series was placed from the cell’s center into peripheral cell regions which are exposed to the source direction of the chemoattractant. Subsequently, a kymograph within the range of the segmented line was plotted using the Multiple Kymograph plugin. The resulting kymograph represents the gray value changes, i.e., actin dynamics, over time. Superimposition of EGFP- and Alexa Fluor 647 channels allows correlating the actin-driven protrusion formation. Quantification and Statistical Analysis Reproducibility of the experimental findings was verified using biological replicates, which were performed as independent experiments and designated in the figure legends. Individual experiments were validated separately. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism Software 9.3.1 using the appropriate tests according to normal or non-normal data distribution. Kruskal-Wallis tests were applied in Figures 2C–E, 6B,C and Supplementary Figures S2I–L. For pair-wise comparisons we performed Dunn’s multiple comparison post-hoc Kruskal-Wallis test. Mann-Whitney U tests were applied in Supplementary Figures S1G,H, S2A,B. Data were shown as mean ± SD or SEM as depicted in the figure legends. Statistical significance was considered for * p ≤ 0.1, ** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.001. Results A Microfluidic Set-Up to Elucidate the Chemokine Gradient Sensing Mechanisms of Dendritic Cells To elucidate the chemokine gradient sensing strategy of DCs, we employed a combination of microfluidics and quantitative confocal live cell imaging, which allows to analyze the response of motile cells towards controlled chemokine gradients with high spatio-temporal resolution. In our “source-sink”-based microfluidic approach, laminar flows from three independent source channels were merged and hydro-dynamically focused to generate soluble concentration gradients of chemokines with a sigmoidal-shaped concentration profile. This profile includes sections that are approximately exponential, linear, and asymptotic. 2A ). Utilizing automatic pneumatic feedback regulation and executable shell script files enabled specific adjustment of flow rates of the three source channels and subsequent precise spatio-temporal control of the gradient’s steepness and position. This set-up allows therefore to expose cells to either soluble stable gradients or to dynamic chemokine environments, i.e., abrogation of the gradient, and dynamic oscillatory stimulation. 10 kDa Alexa Fluor 647-dextran, which diffuses similarly to Alexa Fluor 647-CCL19, was utilized to characterize the gradient. In initial chemotaxis studies we used labeled Alexa Fluor 647 CCL19 to exclude chemotactic effects caused by dextran. We employed microfluidics on a 2D surface, since gradients in under agarose assays and in 3D collagen scaffolds rely on diffusion at large scales, and thus require at least 30 min for gradient stabilization. These systems are, consequently, not suitable to generate fast dynamic temporal patterns of stimulation, e.g., gradient removal or traveling waves. In contrast to under agarose and 3D collagen assays, in our 2D model the cells were not confined which excludes stimulation of cell motility by geometrical constrains. Our flow-based 2D microfluidic assay is characterized by fast gradient stabilization, i.e., both the final gradient slope and the absolute concentration of CCL19 become stable within ∼3 min. The cells were placed into the microfluidic chamber-slide before they are exposed to the gradient. Fast de novo formation and stabilization of the gradient implicates that DCs sense the steady-state gradient for the first time in approximately 3 min. Due to precise feedback-control and pulseless flow, our pneumatic device generates stable gradients over a period of at least 60 min without oscillating noise, which is detrimental when syringe pump based microfluidic approaches were used instead of pneumatic devices. The microfluidic setup combined with fast confocal live cell imaging of LPS-activated motile bone marrow-derived DCs and CD11c+ splenic DCs, which both were isolated from Lifeact-EGFP mice, allowed us to analyze trajectories of motile cells, velocity, displacement, directionality, actin dynamics, and cytoskeletal polarization. Dendritic Cells Migrate With High Directional Persistence in Stable Soluble CCL19 Gradients To elucidate how BM-DCs sense and integrate the information of chemotactic cues into a directional movement, we acquired trajectories of BM-DCs migrating along stable soluble CCL19 gradients over a period of 60 min and subsequently determined accumulated distance and directionality by measuring cell displacements for time intervals of 2–20 s. The directionality parameter is a measure of straightness of motile cells without consideration of a gradient source direction. This parameter is the linear distance between start- and endpoint of the migration tracks, divided by the accumulated distance of the tracks. The Forward Migration Index is analogous to a chemotactic index and used to compare a cell’s most direct path to the chemokine gradient source to its total accumulated distance. Since cells were exposed to CCL19 gradients which were aligned horizontally in the field of view, we used the prefix “x”. An index equal to one, x-FMI = 1, represents perfect migration along the direction of the gradient, and x-FMI = −1 migration against the gradient direction. We observed that BM-DCs migrate with high directional persistence in a steep “CCL19 gradient” region of ∼150 µm width, which resembles gradients of CCR7 ligands with steep decay detected in perilymphatic regions. In this “steep” CCL19 gradient region, BM-DCs reached a mean accumulated distance of 93.9 µm over a time period of 60 min. In contrast, cells migrating in areas characterized by a shallow exponential decay of the gradient or in approximately uniform concentration of 50 nM CCL19, exhibited a significantly reduced directional persistence with a mean accumulated distance below 30 µm and a mean x-FMI below 0.06. We observed that in both latter regions accumulated distance and x-FMI of motile BM-DCs were similar to those cells which were tracked without CCL19- or with uniform CCL19-stimulation, respectively. We then analyzed directional migration of BM-DCs towards single standing CCL19-waves which represent a different type of stable chemokine gradient environment. Standing waves are characterized by symmetric bell-shaped architecture, in which the concentration profiles in front and back halves of the wave are equal in strength, but opposite in direction. We observed that a stable standing CCL19-wave initiates directional migration of BM-DCs from opposite direction, because the cells are attracted from both halves of the wave. The trajectories clearly show that motile BM-DCs accumulate in the peak region of the standing wave, where the absolute CCL19 concentration is highest and reaches asymptotic characteristics. This chemotactic behaviour is in concordance with spatial sensing, in which cells very precisely follow the increasing concentration of two opposing gradients which are mapped out in this highly defined spatial situation. Our results clearly revealed that steady-state CCL19 gradient information is sufficient to promote directional persistent migration of DCs. We did not observe the requirement of rising absolute CCL19 concentration over time for long-range BM-DC migration towards chemokine attractants as proposed by, implying that spatial sensing mechanisms control chemotaxis of BM-DCs. FIGURE 3 Directional migration of BM-DCs towards single standing CCL19 waves. Analysis of BM-DCs migration towards both halves of a symmetric bell-shaped standing CCL19 wave. Tracks of individual motile Lifeact-EGFP expressing BM-DCs are pseudo-colored. Putative fluctuations of spatial gradient information raise important questions about navigation strategies of motile cells. Do chemotaxing cells abruptly stop when they are faced with an abrupt collapse of spatial gradient information, or will they instead maintain persistent motion? Although several studies investigated general chemotaxis of leukocytes, directed cell behavior and stopping time of motile BM-DCs following removal of spatial cues has not been quantitatively addressed yet. To analyze how BM-DCs sense and respond to gradient perturbation in vitro requires high spatio-temporal control of soluble chemokines. We therefore used CCL19, which in contrast to the related chemokine CCL21, lacks the highly charged C-terminal extension that binds glycosaminoglycan which is utilized to immobilize CCL21 to matrix proteins. Immobilized CCL21 therefore directs cellular haptotaxis which we avoided here, because immobilized chemokine gradients would be static and could not be manipulated in the ultra-fast and highly resolved spatio-temporal fashion which is a key innovative feature of our study. On the other hand, we provide evidence here that the efficiency of directed BM-DC migration is not significantly different, when fully soluble, stable gradients of either CCL19 or CCL21 are employed, respectively. Therefore, the functions of CCL19 and CC21 in the settings of “pure” chemotaxis investigated here are highly similar. First of all, we recorded trajectories of motile BM-DCs over a period of 60 min, and subsequently determined x-displacement of cells towards the CCL19-source before and following gradient perturbation, i.e., removal of the soluble gradient or switch to a uniform CCL19 stimulation, respectively. In contrast to the accumulated distance, which reflects the summation of an entire path that a given cell has migrated, the x-displacement is here used to map the increment of cell track length over time. Note that our flow-based microfluidic approach allows for completion of chemokine gradient removal within 14 s. We observed that BM-DCs were not able to maintain directional migration when CCL19 gradients were removed or shifted to a uniform stimulation with a final concentration of 50 nM CCL19. Quantification of x-displacement revealed that BM-DCs lost their directional track within ∼50 s following CCL19 gradient removal and within ∼20 s after switching from a CCL19 gradient to a uniform CCL19 stimulation, respectively. Previously, it was shown that in fast-migrating amoeboid like cells, such as in leukocytes, actin-driven protrusions in the form of lamellipodia and filopodia facilitate directional decisions and invasion of complex matrices, while actual translocation is driven by the cell body. We therefore investigated whether spatial information of stable CCL19 gradients is required to maintain cytoskeletal polarization in BM-DCs. To this end, actin-driven leading-edge protrusions in Lifeact-EGFP BMDCs were visualized upon CCL19-gradient removal or re-establishment, respectively. Precise spatio-temporal positioning of soluble gradients, combined with fast high-resolution image acquisition, allowed us to resolve the cytoskeletal organization of chemotactic signal interpretation in response to dynamic CCL19 stimulation at the submillimeter scale. Kymograph analysis of actin-dynamics of the cell’s front revealed that the maintenance of leading-edge protrusions strongly depend on the presence of stable chemokine gradients, as polarized lamellipodia retracted in the range of seconds when the CCL19 gradient was removed. This process is reversible, since BM-DCs immediately started to re-polarize when stable CCL19 gradients were re-applied. Taken together, our findings revealed a requirement of stable chemokine gradient information to determine and to maintain directional persistent migration of BM-DCs by stabilizing actin-driven leading-edge protrusions. These findings strongly corroborate the concept of spatial sensing as a key navigation strategy of DCs. Dendritic Cells Require Spatial Gradient Information for Navigation in Dynamic CCL19 Environments Recently, it was shown that DCs trigger local chemokine secretion from lymphatic endothelial cells, and that dynamic rather than pre-patterned immobilized chemical cues promote DC entry into initial afferent lymphatic vessels, which transport tissue fluids and leukocytes into the subcapsular sinus of draining lymph nodes. Navigation of cells in such complex and dynamic environments requires integration of spatial and temporal cues which are poorly understood. To gain insight into the functional coupling of directional sensing and decision-making, we analyzed the migratory behaviour of BM-DCs in response to fast 180-degree direction switching of soluble CCL19 gradients. We observed that BM-DCs instantaneously sense the altered chemokine stimulus and rectify their migration path toward the newly established CCL19 gradient. We conclude from these findings that BM-DCs employ a spatial directional sensing strategy to sense dynamics and changes of gradient direction to facilitate decision-making in directional navigation. The observed capability of DCs to sense and respond to changes in spatial gradient direction raised the question of whether BM-DCs are also able to decipher dynamic oscillatory CCL19 environments. To this end, we exposed BM-DCs to traveling CCL19 waves, which represent an established type of dynamic spatio-temporal stimulation. Recent studies have shown that Dictyostelium amoeba have the capability to decipher dynamic spatio-temporal stimulation, in which they “ignore” the decreasing gradient in the back half of dynamic traveling waves, and continue to migrate with high directional persistence towards the source of cAMP. We observed that, in contrast to Dictyostelium, BM-DCs do not employ adaptive temporal sensing strategies that discriminate increasing and decreasing concentrations of chemoattractant. In contrast to stable gradients, traveling CCL19 waves over a wide range of period length did not induce persistent directional migration of DCs, since mean accumulated distances of BM-DCs are below 30 µm in 60 min and mean x-FMI are below 0.1. We then analyzed the x-displacement of DCs, which is here used to map the track length of cells towards the source of individual CCL19 wave pulses. Interestingly, analysis of x-displacement in single traveling waves revealed that DCs transiently respond to the front half of the wave when wave propagation was very slow. However, these measures of length are below those of BM-DC’s cell size and therefore might not indicate real net translocation of the cell body. To gain insight into the actual locomotion process, we therefore developed a specific high-resolution kymograph approach, which allows the precise analysis of actin dynamics in response to periodic CCL19 wave stimulation. We observed that, in contrast to stable gradients, traveling CCL19 waves only induced the generation of short-term actin-driven membrane protrusions in the front half of the waves, but immediately retract in the back of the waves. High-resolution confocal live cell imaging revealed, that BM-DCs responded to the oscillating stimulus with rotating actin dynamics around the entire cell periphery instead of a cytoskeletal polarization towards the CCL19 wave source. We hypothesize from these results, that BM-DCs in fact sensed the CCL19 signal when they were exposed to slow waves, but that the cells do not induce directional migration when the CCL19 gradient fluctuates. Obviously, the recurrent decreasing concentration gradients in the back halves of the waves prevent the formation of stable leading edge lamellipodia and subsequent directional decision-making of BM-DCs, when exposed to oscillating CCL19 stimulation. These results strongly corroborate our concept 3 ) that DCs recognize a differential in chemokine concentration across their cell diameter via a mechanism referred to as “ spatial recognition ”, since directionality is immediately abrogated when cells experience gradient stagnation or removal. To exclude that the observed spatial sensing behavior of BM-DCs toward CCL19 gradients is merely based on specific CCR7 receptor signaling, we performed additional experiments with other chemotactic stimuli, which are known to play significant roles in DC trafficking. Our results provide evidence that the spatial sensing strategy of BM-DCs is based on cell intrinsic regulation and not on specific CCR7 receptor signaling, since BM-DCs show similar spatial sensing behavior when exposed to ligands of other G protein-coupled receptors, like CXCR4, BLT1/2 or FPR2/3, respectively. In essence, the observed capability of BM-DCs to migrate with high directional persistence in steady-state gradients but not in traveling CCL19 waves is compatible with a gradient sensing strategy in which BM-DCs require spatial gradient information for efficient chemotaxis. In contrast to Dictyostelium, BM-DCs do not employ adaptive temporal sensing to decipher periodic-temporal stimulation. These results were strongly confirmed by results obtained with primary CD11c+ splenic DCs displaying a migratory behaviour which is in concordance with a spatial navigation strategy which we observed in BM-DCs. Taken together our analysis revealed that persistent chemotaxis of DCs depends on continuously present spatially organized cues which they sense on the sub-millimeter scale, and we furthermore showed that these cells do not require temporally increasing stimulation by chemoattractants for directed motion. The observed capability of DCs to migrate with high directional persistence in stable gradients but not in periodic temporal cues identifies spatial sensing as a key requirement for persistent chemotaxis of DCs. Discussion In the present study, we employ chemokine-gradient-guided migration to elucidate the sensing mechanism of motile DCs. To this end, we set up a high-resolution microfluidic device to expose DCs to precisely controlled, temporally and spatially varying soluble CCL19 gradients, while simultaneously tracking actin dynamics, cell polarization, and chemotaxis. Our data demonstrate that efficient guidance of DCs depends on the translation of chemokine-encoded spatial information of the gradient into directionally persistent migration. We observed that steady-state CCL19 gradients are sufficient for chemotactic sensing of DCs, without the requirement of integrating a temporal evolution of increasing concentration signals. Our experiments furthermore show that DCs do not employ adaptive temporal sensing strategies in our setting, since cells are not able to maintain cell polarity and directional persistence when they are exposed to oscillating chemotactic cues. Our observations support a concept of spatial sensing in which DCs interpret the concentration difference of chemokines integrated by the difference of receptor occupancy at different positions in the cell, a theory made in many models of signal recognition in spatial sensing and directional migration. Our data clearly show, that DCs have the capability to integrate spatial chemokine information and to migrate with high directional persistence toward steady-state soluble CCL19 gradients on 2D fibronectin. 5 ). This is in line with previous studies demonstrating similar persistent migratory responses of motile DCs toward stable chemokine gradients in a 3D environment. We do not observe a requirement for increasing absolute stimulus levels over time, in contrast to a recent study which proposed that temporal sensing mechanisms control prolonged chemotaxis of myeloid cells, but we of course concede that we did not precisely replicate the experimental conditions of that particular study. For example, as opposed to, we did not employ a 3D-system which would prohibit ultra-fast manipulation of the gradients. It is indisputable that 3D cellular in vitro environments are in comparison to 2D cell culture settings more akin to the natural environment of DCs found in tissues. Furthermore, it is established that some aspects of cell migration differ on 2D substrates as compared to migration in 3D environments, e.g., leukocytes are able to migrate in the absence of adhesion receptors within 3D interstitial space. However, in various diffusion-based microfluidic devices which have been developed to investigate the migration behavior of DCs in 3D collagen environments, both slow de novo development of the gradient as well as slow response time for dynamic modulation of the gradient are detrimental when it is aimed to analyze sensing strategies of DCs with high spatio-temporal resolution. For this reason we performed precise chemotaxis assays in flow-based source-sink microfluidics on 2D substrates analogous to the approach recently described for motility assays with Dictyostelium amoeba. Our flow-based microfluidic approach is characterized by fast stabilization of the final gradient slope as well as the possibility to apply fast modeling of dynamic stimulatory conditions with high spatio-temporal precision. Although we clearly observed that DCs are able to respond to spatial chemokine gradient information with persistent directional migration in vitro, it is inconceivable that steady-state spatial gradients are stable over long distances for long periods of time in vivo. Physiological chemokine gradients are presumably instable as a result of hindered chemokine diffusion, chemokine immobilization, or dynamic chemokine release. Recently, it has been shown that DCs do not encounter pre-immobilized CCR7-ligands but trigger local CCL21 release from LECs and that dynamic rather than pre-patterned immobilized chemical cues promote DC entry into afferent lymphatics. The presence of dynamic chemical gradients would require an integration of spatial and temporal information which is poorly understood. Migration principles established for rapid amoeboid crawling leukocytes share many characteristics with those described for the social amoeba Dictyostelium. It is generally accepted that both cell types employ spatial sensing in static chemokine gradients to induce actin-driven cell polarity and directional migration, but if these cell types are able to maintain directional migration when the guidance cue is oscillating remained elusive. Recent studies have shown that cellular memory and adaptive temporal sensing, which combines the integration of spatial and temporal information, enables Dictyostelium to migrate toward traveling waves of cAMP. Since leukocytes share many characteristics of so-called amoeboid crawling movement described for Dictyostelium we utilized the setup of oscillating traveling waves, which represents an established surrogate model of dynamic spatio-temporal stimulation. Measurements of cell displacement towards the wave source revealed substantial differences in chemotactic sensing between Dictyostelium and DCs. We observed that DCs were not ignoring decreasing chemoattractant concentration in the back halves of CCL19 traveling waves. Therefore, and in contrast to amoeba, DCs apparently do not employ adaptive temporal sensing strategies that discriminate temporally increasing and decreasing chemoattractant concentrations in our setting. Previous studies which have shown that DCs interpret haptotactic immobilized chemokine gradients strongly support the hypothesis that DCs employ spatial sensing. However, that integration of soluble chemokine gradient information is solely based on spatial sensing strategies of DCs is, to our knowledge, first evidenced by the present study. Our observation that cells depolarize and stop migrating instantaneously following CCL19 gradient abrogation strongly corroborates the notion that spatial gradient information is essential to maintain directional DC migration. However, DCs have the ability to instantly sense the reversed direction of a stable gradient, since we observed that these cells rectify their direction within seconds following CCL19 gradient switch. 