 The Dictyostelium atypical mitogen-activated protein kinase Erk2 is required for chemotactic responses to cAMP as amoeba undergo multicellular development. In this study, Erk2 was found to be essential for the cAMP-stimulated translocation of the GATA transcription factor GtaC as indicated by the distribution of a GFP–GtaC reporter. Erk2 was also found to be essential for the translocation of GtaC in response to external folate, a foraging signal that directs the chemotaxis of amoeba to bacteria. Erk1, the only other Dictyostelium MAPK, was not required for the GtaC translocation to either chemoattractant, indicating that GFP–GtaC is a kinase translocation reporter specific for atypical MAPKs. The translocation of GFP–GtaC in response to folate was absent in mutants lacking the folate receptor Far1 or the coupled G-protein subunit Gα4. Loss of GtaC function resulted in enhanced chemotactic movement to folate, suggesting that GtaC suppresses responses to folate. The alteration of four Erk2-preferred phosphorylation sites in GtaC impacted the translocation of GFP–GtaC in response to folate and the GFP–GtaC-mediated rescue of aggregation and development of gtaC − cells. The ability of different chemoattractants to stimulate Erk2-regulated GtaC translocation suggests that atypical MAPK-mediated regulation of transcription factors can contribute to different cell fates. KEY WORDS: MAPK, Transcription factor, Chemotaxis, Dictyostelium, GATA transcription factor, Folate, Kinase translocation reporter, Nuclear-to-cytoplasmic translocation Summary: Chemotactic signals that direct Dictyostelium movement for foraging and multicellular development act through an atypical MAPK to regulate the cellular distribution of a key developmental GATA transcription factor. INTRODUCTION Environmental signals can regulate eukaryotic cell function and fate through signaling pathways that control cellular processes, such as gene expression and cell movement. These signaling pathways typically involve cell surface receptors coupled to G proteins and a variety of protein kinases that serve as molecular switches for a wide range of cellular responses. Mitogen-activated protein kinases play important roles in many different signaling pathways in most eukaryotes, including animals, plants, fungi and protists. These protein kinases typically function downstream of other protein kinases in G-protein-coupled receptor and tyrosine kinase receptor signaling pathways, and they facilitate the regulation of many types of signaling proteins including other protein kinases, phosphodiesterases and transcription factors that modulate cellular activities, such as second messenger signaling, metabolism, chemotaxis and gene expression. Canonical MAPK regulation involves kinase cascades that include MAPK kinases, MAPKK kinases and scaffold proteins. However, one subgroup of MAPKs, referred to as atypical MAPKs, do not appear to be regulated through conventional MAP2Ks but instead have another regulatory mechanism that remains to be fully understood. Compared to other MAPKs, relatively little is known about the function of atypical MAPKs in animals, but several reports have indirectly associated atypical MAPKs with stress responses. Major challenges to understanding the roles of atypical MAPKs have been identifying specific signals that directly stimulate atypical MAPK activation and characterizing the phenotypes that result from losses of atypical MAPK function, but the analysis of atypical MAPKs in genetically amenable organisms has begun to provide insight into both function and regulation of atypical MAPKs. Atypical MAPKs have been found in animals and protists, such as amoebae, and they share some structural similarities that make them distinct from other MAPKs. The absence of atypical MAPKs in fungi has excluded their analysis in yeast, which have been important for understanding the function and regulation of other types of MAPKs. However, the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum encodes an atypical MAPK and genetic analyses have provided many clues to atypical MAPK function and regulation. The Dictyostelium atypical MAPK, Erk2, is rapidly activated in response to chemoattractants and mediates chemotactic cell movement, consistent with the presence of atypical MAPKs in organisms with cell motility. Dictyostelium encodes only one other MAPK, Erk1, and this protein is related to other more typical MAPKs found in most eukaryotes. Both Erk2 and Erk1 become activated through the phosphorylation of a conserved activation motif in response to chemotactic stimulation, but the regulation and roles of these MAPKs are quite different. Erk2 activation occurs initially and then a burst of Erk1 activation follows as a secondary response that is dependent on Erk2 function. Only Erk2 is essential for chemotaxis and only Erk1 is activated by the single conventional MAP2K in Dictyostelium. Dictyostelium have a chemotaxis response to at least two chemoattractants, cAMP and folate. Chemotaxis to folate is a mechanism by which Dictyostelium can forage for bacterial food sources in the environment and resume vegetative growth as solitary cells. In contrast, chemotaxis to cAMP mediates the aggregation phase of the multicellular developmental life cycle by allowing cells to move toward each other as they relay cAMP signaling in a pulsatile manner. Responses to cAMP not only include chemotactic movement, but the regulation of many developmental genes, including developmental cell type-specific genes. One of the key regulators of developmental genes is the GATA transcription factor GtaC. Loss of GtaC impairs aggregation, and GtaC has been shown to bind many locations in the genome. Expression of GFP-tagged GtaC rescues the development of gtaC − strains and serves as a reporter for the translocation of this transcription factor from the nucleus to the cytoplasm when cells are stimulated with cAMP. The shuttling of this transcription factor between the nucleus and cytoplasm during the repeated cyclic pattern of cAMP stimulation has been suggested to function as a developmental timer in the assessment of cycle number and duration. In this report, we assessed the roles of both typical and atypical MAPKs in the translocation of this GATA transcription factor in response to multiple chemoattractant signals and also tested the specificity of chemoattractant receptors and associated G proteins in this process. The GFP–GtaC reporter was used to examine the roles of specific phosphorylation sites on GtaC translocation and the regulation of developmental processes. Our study suggests that multiple external signals can use atypical MAPK signaling to regulate the GtaC transcription factor and different cell fates. RESULTS The atypical MAPK Erk2 is required for GtaC translocation The translocation of a GFP–GtaC reporter from the nucleus to the cytoplasm was previously observed in a strain containing a hypomorphic erk2 − allele, but we re-examined the possible translocation of the reporter in an erk2 -null strain. Transformants containing the GFP–GtaC reporter were only obtained with a low concentration drug selection and none of the transformants displayed sufficient GFP fluorescence for analysis, suggesting that the reporter might be toxic to cells lacking Erk2. To reduce possible toxicity, a mutant version of the reporter, GFP–GtaC c-s, was used in which two of the required cysteine residues of the GtaC zinc finger domain were converted into serine residues. Many viable transformants were obtained using this reporter vector and GFP fluorescence was readily detectable at high drug selection concentrations suggesting that the alteration of the zinc finger reduces toxicity of GFP–GtaC overexpression in erk2 -null cells. The reporter was concentrated in the nucleus of the erk2 -null cells during both growth and starvation, and the stimulation of cells with cAMP did not result in the translocation of the reporter to the cytoplasm. Complementation of the erk2 -null mutant with a wild-type erk2 allele rescued the ability of cAMP stimulation to translocate the reporter to the cytoplasm confirming that Erk2 is essential for this process. The translocation of the reporter was also re-examined in an erk1 -null strain and the reporter was found to translocate in the same manner as observed in wild-type cells, confirming that Erk1 function is not required for this process. Fig. 1. Requirement of Erk2 function for the translocation of GtaC in response to cAMP stimulation. Wild-type, erk2 −, erk2 − complemented with Erk2 expression vector and erk1 − strains expressing the GFP–GtaC... Erk2 is required for phosphorylation of GtaC The stimulation of wild-type cells with cAMP results in the rapid appearance of phosphorylated forms of the GFP–GtaC reporter, which migrate slower in electrophoretic gels, and an analysis of the GtaC sequence previously revealed many potential phosphorylation sites of several types of protein kinases. The slower migrating forms of GFP–GtaC were absent in erk2 − cells stimulated with cAMP, suggesting that Erk2 is required for the phosphorylation of the reporter. The slower migrating forms of the reporter were observed in erk2 − cells complemented with the wild-type erk2 gene and also in erk1 − cells, suggesting a specific dependence on Erk2 function. The requirement of Erk2 function for GtaC phosphorylation does not exclude the possibility that other protein kinases, such as glycogen synthase protein kinase, might phosphorylate GtaC but only the loss of Erk2 prevents the mobility shift of the GFP–GtaC reporter. In an in vitro phosphorylation assay immunoprecipitated Erk2, but not Erk1, was capable of phosphorylating GFP–GtaC, resulting in a mobility shift in electrophoretic gels. In total, these data suggest that GtaC is specifically phosphorylated by Erk2, a mechanism consistent with the dependence of GtaC translocation on Erk2 function. Fig. 2. Requirement of Erk2 function for GFP–GtaC mobility shifts. Immunoblot of GFP–GtaC c-s from wild-type, erk1 −, erk2 −, and erk2 − complemented with Erk2 expression vector strains stimulated... Erk2 regulates GtaC translocation in response to folate Since Erk2 is also activated in response to folate, we postulated that folate stimulation could also result in GtaC translocation. Folate stimulation of wild-type cells resulted in the translocation of the GFP–GtaC c-s reporter from the nucleus to the cytoplasm with kinetics comparable to that occurring after cAMP stimulation. This translocation was absent in erk2 − cells, as observed for cAMP-stimulated erk2 − cells. The translocation of the reporter was rescued by the expression of wild-type Erk2 indicating that Erk2 can regulate GtaC translocation in response to multiple chemotactic signals. As with cAMP responses, Erk1 was not required for the translocation of the reporter in response to folate, implying that only the atypical MAPK function regulates this process. Fig. 3. Erk2 dependency of the GtaC translocation in response to folate. Wild-type, erk2 −, erk2 − complemented with Erk2 expression vector, and erk1 − strains expressing the GFP–GtaC c-s reporter were... Folate signaling and GtaC function Chemotaxis and other responses to folate require the folate receptor Far1 and the coupled G-protein subunit Gα4, and so the requirements of these signaling components were analyzed by assaying GFP–GtaC c-s reporter translocation in cells lacking either the receptor or the G protein. As expected, folate stimulation of the reporter translocation was absent in cells lacking either the folate receptor Far1 or the Gα4 subunit. The noticeable dip in the nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio of reporter in gα4 − cells stimulated with folate was observed in multiple assays and appeared to result from a transient change in the shape of some cells that temporarily moved the nucleus out of the focal plane. The loss of either Far1 or Gα4 did not prevent translocation of the reporter when cells were stimulated with cAMP, confirming that these signaling proteins mediate responses to folate and not to cAMP. The closest Gα4 subunit paralog in Dictyostelium is the Gα5 subunit and loss of the Gα5 subunit did not impede translocation of the reporter in response to either folate or cAMP. Previous studies have shown the Gα5 subunit is not required for chemotactic movement to folate but possibly acts in opposition to the Gα4 subunit in chemotactic movement and in regulation of developmental morphology. Other studies have indicated the requirement of the cAMP receptors Car1 and Car3, and the G protein subunit Gα2 for efficient translocation of the reporter in response to cAMP. To evaluate GtaC function in folate chemotaxis, a gtaC − strain was created through gene disruption and analyzed for chemotaxis to folate in the above agar assays. Cells lacking GtaC migrated further toward folate than the wild-type parental cells, consistent with a role for GtaC in the suppression of folate chemotaxis. This result suggests that folate chemotaxis might be enhanced by Erk2-mediated translocation of GtaC, possibly through the loss of GtaC repression of the folate receptor gene. Fig. 4. Receptor and G protein requirements for GtaC translocation in response to folate. far1 −, gα4 − and gα5 − strains expressing the GFP–GtaC c-s reporter were stimulated with 1 µM folate or... Erk2-dependent translocation of GtaC can be mediated through multiple phosphorylation sites The dependence of GtaC phosphorylation and translocation on Erk2 function suggests that Erk2 phosphorylates GtaC before it can be translocated to the cytoplasm. An earlier analysis of Erk2 phosphorylation sites in vivo and in vitro has indicated that preferred Erk2 phosphorylation sites include serine/threonine residues followed by a proline and a positively charged residue. The primary sequence of GtaC contains four of these sites and none of these sites exist in the GFP tag. Of these four sites, only the T492 residue is located within a region highly conserved among other Dictyostelid GtaC homologs, and the other sites are found just upstream of this conserved region. Other GtaC orthologs also have putative Erk2 phosphorylation sites just upstream of the conserved region but the positions of these sites do not always align precisely with those in the Dictyostelium discoideum GtaC protein. An increase in the phosphorylation of the T492 site has been detected in a mass spectrometry analysis of phosphoproteins after folate stimulation. In addition, GtaC contains 12 other sites that are regarded potential targets for MAPKs or cyclin-dependent protein kinases. We examined the importance of the four putative Erk2-preferred phosphorylation sites that could mediate translocation of the GFP–GtaC c-s reporter in response to folate stimulation by converting one or more of the target residues into alanine. Individual residue changes did not prevent the translocation of the reporter in wild-type cells but in some cases the extent of translocation was reduced. These observations indicate that no single site is essential and that redundancy might exist in the ability of these sites to allow translocation of the reporter. Converting all of the sites or all but the S357 site significantly interfered with the reporter translocation, and in general the reporter translocation decreased as more sites were altered. Conversion of S380 and/or S386 appeared to have more impact on reducing reporter translocation than other single or double conversions suggesting these residues might be primary targets of Erk2 phosphorylation. However, the relationship of specific conversions with the impact on reporter translocation appears to be complex, and we cannot rule out the possibility that a conversion of one site might indirectly impact the importance of other sites. Fig. 5. Erk2 phosphorylation requirements for GtaC translocation in response to folate. Map of GFP–GtaC reporter construct with locations of Erk2-preferred phosphorylation motifs. Location of nuclear localization signal and zinc finger... Erk2 phosphorylation sites are necessary for GtaC function in early development The GFP–GtaC c-s reporter offers a real-time analysis of Erk2-mediated GtaC translocation, but the translocation analysis might not accurately reflect the importance of Erk2 phosphorylation sites on GtaC function, particularly since this reporter lacks a functional zinc finger domain. To examine the impact of the Erk2 phosphorylation site alterations on GtaC function, the zinc finger domain in these mutant alleles was restored by converting the zinc finger domain sequence back to the wild-type sequence. When introduced into a gtaC − strain all of the single phosphorylation site mutants and one of the double site mutants were capable of rescuing the aggregation phase of development when cells were grown on bacterial lawns. Interestingly, the S380A allele rescued aggregation to form tight mounds, but most mounds did not undergo further developmental morphogenesis. None of the mutants possessing alterations at both S380 and S386 were capable of restoring sufficient aggregation to form tight mounds of cells. These results indicate that Erk2 phosphorylation sites on GtaC are not just important for translocation but that the sites play a regulatory role in GtaC function, consistent with a previous study demonstrating a correlation between translocation and developmental gene expression. Fig. 6. Erk2 phosphorylation site-mediated regulation of GtaC function in early development. GFP–GtaC constructs with altered Erk2 phosphorylation sites were expressed in gtaC − cells. Strains expressing each construct were plated on to bacterial... DISCUSSION The dependence of GtaC translocation on the presence of the atypical MAPK Erk2 and on the Erk2-preferred phosphorylation sites within this transcription factor provide strong support that Erk2 directly regulates the GtaC function in response to chemoattractants. The interaction between Erk2 and GtaC is further supported by the phosphorylation of GtaC in combined immunoprecipitates of GtaC and Erk2, as indicated by mobility shifts of GFP–GtaC in electrophoretic gels. These results reveal a previously unrealized role for atypical MAPKs in the regulation of transcription factor translocation, suggesting that this class of MAPKs can directly modify key regulators of gene expression. This study demonstrates that Erk2 can phosphorylate and regulate the translocation of the GtaC transcription factor in response to multiple chemoattractants, suggesting that the regulation of GtaC might have roles in foraging responses in addition to its role in multicellular development. The regulation of transcription factors in response to external signals has been observed for other classes of MAPKs. Mammalian ERK1 and ERK2 regulates the activation and nuclear accumulation of the transcription factor Elk-1 in response to growth factors and p38 MAPKs regulates the translocation of TEAD transcription factors from the nucleus to the cytoplasm in response to stress. Heterologous overexpression of the atypical MAPK, MAPK15, in mammalian cells has been reported to regulate CRM1-dependent ERRα localization to the cytoplasm through protein–protein interactions but the phosphorylation state of ERRα was not investigated. Our analysis showing Erk2-mediated regulation of GtaC in Dictyostelium is the first report of transcription factor phosphorylation and translocation by an atypical MAPK. Translocation of GtaC is rapid and reversible, and correlates with the activation of Erk2 in response to chemoattractants. If other atypical MAPKs operate in a manner similar to Erk2, then atypical MAPK signaling pathways in other organisms might be expected to regulate transcription factors and possibly other MAPKs in response to chemoattractants or environmental stresses. Fig. 7. Model of Erk2 regulation of GtaC translocation. Activation of cAMP or folate G protein-coupled receptors leads to the activation of the atypical MAPK Erk2 and the phosphorylation of the GtaC transcription factor. Translocation of GtaC from... Erk2 function is essential for folate chemotaxis, but the loss of GtaC increases the movement of cells to folate, suggesting that GtaC has a negative impact on this response. An earlier analysis of GtaC function on gene regulation has indicated that the loss of GtaC function increases the expression of the gene encoding the folate receptor Far1, consistent with increased chemotactic movement of gtaC − cells to folate. GtaC might possibly repress far1 expression and then release this repression when translocated to the cytoplasm. However, the presence of GtaC positively impacts the expression of cAMP receptor genes suggesting that a different Erk2-regulated GtaC mechanism might exist for these genes. Erk2 is likely to have other cellular targets that might regulate chemotactic movement through mechanisms other than gene regulation. The Erk2-mediated regulation of GtaC translocation in response to multiple chemoattractants that promote different cell fates suggests that GtaC-mediated regulation of gene expression might be different in each response or that other signaling mechanisms might contribute to cell fate. External cAMP regulation of GtaC translocation has been previously described as a developmental timer mechanism to coordinate changes in gene expression with the repeated cycles of cAMP stimulation that occur during aggregation, but how GtaC might regulate gene regulation in response to folate remains to be assessed. Differential regulation of GtaC binding to DNA or other transcription factors could possibly result in the regulation of different target genes in response to folate compared to cAMP, similar to the different Erk2 phosphorylation targets associated with each chemotactic response. The analysis of the Erk2-preferred phosphorylation sites on GtaC revealed that almost any combination of these sites would allow translocation of the transcription factor to the cytoplasm suggesting that the translocation process might be mediated by general changes in GtaC conformation. The precise mechanism of nuclear export is not known, but sequences near the nuclear localization signal have been reported to resemble features of nuclear export signals in other systems. It is possible that exposure of a nuclear export signal or the masking of the nuclear localization signal might allow for translocation but associations with other proteins might also contribute to cytoplasmic localization. As previously reported, GtaC has sites that might be phosphorylated by other classes of protein kinases, such as glycogen synthase kinase or cAMP-dependent protein kinase, but thus far only alterations in the Erk2-preferred phosphorylation sites have been shown to severely impact the translocation process. Gsk3 function in Dictyostelium has been previously shown to affect the efficiency of GFP–GtaC translocation in response to cAMP, and GSKs typically recognize substrates already phosphorylated by other protein kinases, suggesting that phosphorylation of GtaC by Gsk3 might be a secondary modification. The ability of Erk2-phosphorylated GtaC to serve as a substrate for other protein kinases remains to be determined, but the multiple shifts in electrophoretic gel migration suggest GFP–GtaC undergoes multiple phosphorylations or other modifications after chemoattractant stimulation. The distribution of the phosphorylation sites preferred by Erk2 or other protein kinases in the C-terminal half of GtaC does not account for the requirement of an N-terminal region for cytoplasmic translocation. Perhaps this region contains binding sites necessary for protein kinase interactions or this region interacts with the C-terminus to regulate the exposure of translocation signals. In mammalian cells, MAPK15 has been shown to be associated with general cellular stress responses through protein-binding analysis, heterologous expression or RNA silencing experiments, but thus far no specific signals or signaling pathways have been identified that cause rapid activation of the MAPK like that observed for chemoattractant activation of Erk2 in Dictyostelium. If MAPK15 has roles in cell movement and development similar to that of Erk2 in Dictyostelium, then disrupting the MAPK15 gene could potentially impact early embryonic development making the genetic analysis of MAPK15 in mammals challenging. Many important phenotypes associated with the loss of Erk2 in Dictyostelium, including defects in chemotaxis and transcription factor translocation, were not revealed with hypomorphic erk2 − alleles, suggesting that reduced levels of atypical MAPK expression might not be sufficient to uncover all MAPK-associated phenotypes. However, developing a kinase translocation reporter for atypical MAPKs in mammals could provide a powerful tool for investigating the signals that activate MAPK15. In Dictyostelium the GFP-tagged GtaC protein serves as the first known kinase translocation reporter specific for an atypical MAPK. This reporter will likely benefit future studies in the identification of other signals, perhaps other chemoattractants or morphogens that activate atypical MAPK function. MATERIALS AND METHODS Strains and culturing The erk2 −, erk1 −, erk1 − erk2 −, gα4 − and gα5 − and strains were created from the parental axenic strain KAx3 and a thymidine auxotrophic derivative JH10 as previously described. The far1 − strain was created from KAx3 cells as previously described. The gtaC − strain was created from JH10 cells through a disruption of the gtaC locus with an insertion of the thyA gene resulting in developmental phenotypes as previously described for gtaC − cells. Expression of wild-type gene expression vectors, pFar1-Y and pHC326 were capable of rescuing chemotaxis and developmental phenotypes associated with the gene disruptions. Dictyostelium strains were grown in axenic HL-5 medium or on lawns of Klebsiella aerogenes as previously described. Vectors were transformed into Dictyostelium strains using electroporation parameters as previously described. Multiple clones from all transformations were assessed for developmental morphogenesis or GFP–GtaC reporter translocation. GFP–GtaC translocation assay Strains expressing the GFP–GtaC c-s or derivatives were grown in fresh axenic medium for several hours prior to harvesting and plating on coverslips attached to the bottom side of 10 mm holes drilled into the 60 mm diameter Petri dishes. After cells were allowed to attach to the coverslip for 10 min, unattached cells were removed by two or three washes with developmental buffer composed of phosphate buffer with the addition of 1 mM MgCl 2 and 0.5 mM CaCl 2. A final solution of 100 µl solution of DB was placed over the attached cells. Within 6 min of the final DB wash, the coverslip Petri dishes were mounted on 60× oil-immersion objective of an Olympus XI89 spinning disc confocal microscope. The software Cellsens was used to program time lapse exposures at 30 s intervals for a duration of 4–8 min. Chemoattractant solutions were added to the cells during the second time-lapse interval to a final concentration of 10 nM cAMP or 1 µM folate, unless otherwise noted. ImageJ software was used to create videos of the time lapse and to quantify the translocation of the reporter from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. The mean pixel intensity of the nucleus was divided by the mean pixel intensity of the cytoplasm. Measurements of the nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio in the stimulated cells were compared to an average of the ratios obtained from the first two time-lapse images representing unstimulated cells. The middle 50% values were used to generate the plotted data due to transient variability of values in some cells undergoing movement and/or shape changes that temporarily cause the nucleus to leave the focal plane. GFP–GtaC c-s mobility shift assay Wild-type, erk1 −, erk2 − and erk2 − cells expressing GFP–GtaC c-s were starved in DB for 1 h. Cells were then washed with cold DB, resuspended in DB to a density of 2×10 7 cells/ml, and kept on ice before assay. Cells were stimulated with 1 µM of cAMP at room temperature, lysed in SDS sample buffer at various time points before or after stimulation, and boiled for 5 min. Immunoblotting was performed as described before using an anti-GFP antibody or an anti-Flag antibody. In vitro phosphorylation assay To purify GtaC as the substrate, GFP–GtaC/ gtaC − cells were washed with cold DB, and lysed at a density of 10 7 cells/ml by adding equal volume of 2× lysis buffer, and incubated on ice for 5 min. Cleared lysate was incubated with GFP-Trap beads at 4°C for 1.5 h. Beads were washed with lysis buffer and elution buffer and kept on ice before the assay. To purify Erk1 and Erk2, Flag–Erk1/ erk1 − and Flag–Erk2/ erk2 − cells were collected before and after cAMP stimulation, washed with DB, and lysed at a density of 2×10 7 cells/ml by adding equal volume of 2× lysis buffer. Cleared lysate was incubated with anti-Flag M2 affinity resin at 4°C for 2 h. Beads were washed with lysis buffer and elution buffer. Proteins were eluted by the addition of elution buffer containing 3× Flag peptide at 4°C for 30 min. For the kinase reaction, 10 µl of GFP–GtaC-containing beads were mixed with 25 µl of Flag–Erk1 or Flag–Erk2-containing eluate. The reaction was initiated by the addition of ATP mix to a final concentration of 10 mM MgCl 2, 5 mM DTT and 0.3 mM ATP. Reaction was allowed to proceed for 15 min at room temperature and stopped by the addition of protein sample buffer. Vector construction Expression vectors GFP–GtaC and GFP–GtaC c-s have been previously described. Erk2 phosphorylation site alterations at residues S357, S380, S386 and T492 were created through PCR mutagenesis of an intron-less version of pHC329 using the oligonucleotides and HiFi assembly. All of the phosphorylation site mutant vectors were further modified to restore the wild-type sequence in the zinc finger domain using oligonucleotides. All modified vectors were sequenced to verify changes in the sequence. The gtaC::thyA gene disruption was created through the insertion of a thyA gene fragment, amplified with oligonucleotides, and cloned into a unique Eco RI site in the gtaC open reading frame and a Bgl II fragment containing the disruption site and flanking sequences was excised from a vector and electroporated into JH10 cells. Chemotaxis and developmental assays The ‘above agar’ chemotaxis assays to folate were conducted as previously described by placing droplets of cell suspensions on non-nutrient agar plates followed by the placement of droplets of 100 µM folate. Images of cells acquired after plating and 3 h later were compared to measure the maximum distance traveled by the leading edge of cells. The developmental morphogenesis of gtaC − cells, with or without GFP–GtaC vectors, was analyzed by transferring cells from clonal colonies in axenic culture onto a bacterial lawn. Images of Dictyostelium plaques on the lawn were acquired 2–3 days after the inoculation. Multiple transformants were analyzed for each strain. Supplementary Material Supplementary information: Click here to view. Reviewer comments: Click here to view. Acknowledgements The authors thank Alex Mason, Elise Ballinger and Stormie Dreadfulwater for technical assistance. Footnotes Competing interests The authors declare no competing or financial interests. Author contributions Conceptualization: J.A.H., H.C.; Methodology: J.A.H., H.C.; Validation: J.A.H., H.C.; Formal analysis: J.A.H., H.C., R.G.A., S.F.; Investigation: J.A.H., H.C.; Data curation: J.A.H., H.C., R.G.A., S.F.; Writing - original draft: J.A.H., H.C.; Writing - review & editing: J.A.H., H.C., R.G.A., S.F.; Supervision: J.A.H.; Project administration: J.A.H., H.C.; Funding acquisition: J.A.H., H.C. Funding This work was supported by the grants from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences R15 GM131269-01 and OCAST HR13-36 to J.A.H. and National Science Foundation of China 32170701 to H.C. Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months. Peer review history The peer review history is available online at. Article information J Cell Sci. 2022 Aug 15; 135: jcs260148. Published online 2022 Aug 19. doi: 10.1242/jcs.260148 PMCID: PMC9481928 PMID: 35916164 Jeffrey A. Hadwiger, 1, * ‡ Huaqing Cai, 2, * ‡ Ramee G. Aranda, 1 and Saher Fatima 1 Jeffrey A. Hadwiger 1 Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078-3020, USA Find articles by Jeffrey A. Hadwiger Huaqing Cai 2 National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, China Find articles by Huaqing Cai Ramee G. Aranda 1 Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078-3020, USA Find articles by Ramee G. Aranda Saher Fatima 1 Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078-3020, USA Find articles by Saher Fatima 1 Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078-3020, USA 2 National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, China * These authors contributed equally to this work ‡ Authors for correspondence Handling Editor: John Heath Received 2022 Apr 20; Accepted 2022 Jul 25. Copyright © 2022. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd Articles from Journal of Cell Science are provided here courtesy of Company of Biologists 