 Cell migration on an adhesive substrate surface comprises actin-based protrusion at the front and retraction of the tail in combination with coordinated adhesion to, and detachment from, the substrate. To study the effect of cell-to-substrate adhesion on the chemotactic response of Dictyostelium discoideum cells, we exposed the cells to patterned substrate surfaces consisting of adhesive and inert areas, and forced them by a gradient of chemoattractant to enter the border between the two areas. Wild-type as well as myosin II-deficient cells stop at the border of an adhesive area. They do not detach with their rear part, while on the nonadhesive area they protrude pseudopods at their front toward the source of chemoattractant. Avoidance of the nonadhesive area may cause a cell to move in tangential direction relative to the attractant gradient, keeping its tail at the border of the adhesive surface. Significance Dictyostelium cells integrate inputs from chemoattractant gradients and substrate adhesiveness into a mixed response of swimming and gliding. At the borderline of an adhesive area, the cells move with the front on the nonadhesive area pointing toward the source of attractant and the tail gliding along the adhesive area. These responses do not require myosin II-dependent contractile activity. Introduction Ameboid cells migrate on a substrate surface by coordinated attachment and detachment. In a gradient of chemoattractant, this movement is biased by the position of pseudopods, the majority of which points toward the source of attractant. Dictyostelium cells can move on an adhesive substrate and can also “swim” in a non-attached mode, and under both conditions they can orientate in response to a gradient of chemoattractant. While moving on a substrate, the front can bend toward a source of attractant without having contact to the substrate. Similarly, mutant cells lacking talin A that are strongly impaired in cell-to-substrate adhesion move with undiminished velocity and are capable of orientating by chemotaxis ; and cells weakly adhesive that lack Rap1 are capable of gliding on a smooth substratum with high speed, but they are impaired in applying force against obstacles. On the other hand, when exposed to a pattern of adhesive and inert substrate surfaces, Dictyostelium cells remain confined to the adhesive areas, whereas the response to the interphase between a smooth and an etched surface is variable. Here, we ask how a chemotaxing cell responds to changes in substrate adhesiveness. Cells exposed to a surface pattern of adhesive and nonadhesive areas were stimulated by a gradient of attractant diffusing in the solvent on top of the surface. The question is whether chemotaxis dominates the response when a cell is attracted to the border from the adhesive to the nonadhesive area. In this case the cell would cross the border and continue to move by swimming, a behavior found in T lymphocytes. In another scenario, the cell would stop detachment at the rear when the front is no longer supported by an adhesive substrate, such that floating is prevented. We report on evidence for the latter mechanism in Dictyostelium cells and show how these cells integrate the information from attractant gradients and substrate patterns into directional motility. Materials and methods Micropatterning of ibidi μ-Dish surfaces The method used here is a version of the plasma-based technique described by Segerer et al.. For passivation of the hydrophobic surface of an ibidi μ-Dish 4% Pluronic F-127 was used. The silicon masters for the stamps were fabricated using a 3-inch Silicon wafer. The wafer was dipped in 1% hydrofluoric acid for 2 min, to remove the native oxide and hence to improve the adhesion of the photoresist used to coat the wafer in a subsequent step. We diluted positive tone photoresist AZ 40XT with 10% of its solvent PGMEA to lower the viscosity and to achieve a final thickness of 10 μ m at a spin speed of 2500 rpm. To evaporate the solvent, the wafer was baked in three steps at 85, 110, and 126°C for 1 min each. The exposure with the lithography system was carried out at a dose of 550 mJ/cm 2 with a laser diode at 375 nm. Since AZ 40XT is a chemically amplified photoresist, before development a post-exposure bake at 110°C for 2 min was required to complete the photoresist reaction. Then the wafer was developed in TMAH-based developer AZ 726 MIF for 2 min at room temperature to dissolve the exposed parts of the photoresist, leaving the microstructures. To stop the development, it was rinsed in de-ionized water and blown dry with compressed air. Finally, the master was coated with trichloro--silane in the gas phase to facilitate removal of the PDMS mold during sample preparation. To prepare the mold, polydimethylsiloxane was mixed in a 10:1 ratio with the curing agent and poured over the silicone master. Any air pockets were removed by desiccation for 10 min, and the mold was cured in a convection oven at 50°C overnight. Subsequently, the PDMS mold was carefully peeled from the master and cut with a scalpel into smaller pieces, which were used as stamps. A stamp was placed with its structured face on the hydrophobic surface of an ibidi μ-Dish to protect the desired areas in the following plasma activation process. This process was carried out in a pure oxygen plasma with a plasma cleaner for 3 min at 50 W, 0.4 mbar. After careful removal of the stamp, the sample was immersed in a solution of 4% Pluronic-F127 for 3 h. Only the hydrophobic, non-plasma-treated surfaces served as binding sites for the Pluronic-F127, which leaves a Pluronic pattern on the substrate. At last, the dishes were washed three times with Milli-Q water followed by 70% ethanol. Cell strains Green fluorescent protein and red fluorescent protein were expressed in the AX2-214 strain of Dictyostelium discoideum and in the myosin II-null mutant HS2205 derived from this strain. Table 1 Strains Culture conditions and sample preparation for confocal microscopy Cells were cultivated in plastic Petri dishes at 21 ± 2°C with nutrient medium, as described by Malchow et al., supplemented with 10 μ g/mL of Blasticidin S and/or 10 μ g/mL of Geneticin to provide selective pressure for fluorescent proteins. Fused cells were produced by electric pulses as described by Gerhardt et al. after a starvation period of at least 4 h. For confocal imaging, AX2 wild-type cells were rinsed off several almost confluent plates with 17 mM Na/K-phosphate buffer and centrifuged at 4°C for 5 min at 200 × g. After washing twice with cold PB by centrifugation, the cells were adjusted to a final concentration of 1 × 10 7 cells/mL, transferred to an Erlenmeyer flask, and starved for at least 4 h in PB at 21°C on a shaker at 160 rpm. After starvation, 25 μ L of the cell suspension was transferred into a structured dish that had been preloaded with 2 mL PB. For imaging the myosin II-null cells, the medium from one non-confluent plate was removed and the plate was gently rinsed three times with 10 mL cold PB, avoiding detachment of the cells. With 10 mL of cold PB the cells were then taken off the plate and 5 mL was dispensed into a new plate together with 5 mL PB. After a starvation period of about 14 h at 21°C, the cells were rinsed off the plate with 10 mL PB, and 200 μ L of the suspension was transferred into a structured dish, which had been preloaded with 2 mL PB. Chemotaxis experiments using a micropipet For chemotactic stimulation of the cells on the structured dishes, a Femtotip microcapillary was filled with 10 −4 M cyclic AMP solution. Using a micromanipulator, the pipet tip was lowered, brought into the field of view, and moved to different positions slightly above the substrate surface. Confocal image acquisition and data processing Confocal images of the cells were acquired as time series on a Zeiss LSM 780 microscope equipped with a Plan-Apochromat 63×/NA 1.46 oil immersion or a Plan-Apochromat 40×/NA 1.4 oil immersion objective. We show the fluorescent proteins in time series of either single planes or average projections of z -stacks of confocal planes together with phase-contrast images of the cells. The fluorescence and bright-field images were processed using the image-processing package Fiji developed by Schindelin et al. on the basis of ImageJ. For the tracking of cells, images were recorded at 1-s intervals. Every 20th image of the two fluorescence channels was merged, converted to 8-bit, and processed using the plugin TrackMate of Fiji with an Roi diameter of 10 μ m. The tracking is shown in Videos S3 and S4. Results Surface patterning into adhesive and nonadhesive areas Dictyostelium cells adhere to hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces with no requirement for a specific extracellular matrix. To render a surface nonadhesive, it may be coated with polyethylene glycol or Pluronic-F127. Here, patterns of adhesive and nonadhesive areas were generated on cyclic olefin copolymer surfaces based on the photolithographic procedure described by Segerer et al.. Dictyostelium cells adhered to a blank, plasma-cleaned COC surface, but they did not adhere to areas coated with Pluronic-F127. Pluronic does bind to the hydrophobic COC surface of uncoated ibidi μ-Dishes and can be prevented from binding by prior plasma-cleaning of COC areas. Patterns were generated by protection of surface areas with PDMS stamps of various shapes during the plasma cleaning, followed by incubation of the entire surface with Pluronic-F127. Arrest of chemotactic movement at the border of an adhesive area The overview of Fig. 1 and Video S1 shows the principle of the experimental design. Cells adhering to the substrate surface were separated by a nonadhesive surface from a micropipet releasing the chemoattractant cyclic AMP. The cells responded in the diffusion gradient of the attractant by directed motion until their front crossed the border of the adhesive area where, with a few exceptions, they were arrested. Figure 1 Overview on the responses of cells to a gradient of chemoattractant at the borderline between adhesive and nonadhesive substrate surfaces. On the adhesive area, cells of Dictyostelium discoideum migrate toward the source of attractant, a micropipet filled... Video S1. Overview of cells of Dictyostelium discoideum moving toward the border of an adhesive area: The cells, on the adhesive area at the left, responded to a micropipet filled with cyclic AMP and accumulated at the borderline between adhesive and nonadhesive substrate surfaces crossing their path. This video, showing phase-contrast images, is related to Figure 1. Click here to view. The arrest of cells was compatible with their response to the attractant. With the front on the nonadhesive portion of the substrate surface, cells protruded actin-rich pseudopods, primarily filopods, toward the source of the gradient. Figure 2 Accumulation of wild-type cells enlarged by cell fusion. As fluorescent label, the cells expressed PHcrac-GFP for PIP3 and mRFP-LimEΔ for filamentous actin. The micropipet filled with cyclic AMP was moved from the... Video S2. Accumulation of cells enlarged by electric-pulse-induced fusion: The cells expressed PHcrac-GFP as a label for PIP3 and mRFP-LimEΔ for filamentous actin. The borderline is marked with cyan arrows and the pipet tip position in the fluorescence images with white solid circles. This video is related to Figure 2. Click here to view. Quantifying the efficiency of arrest Videos S3 and S4 show the tracking of the chemotactically responding cells shown in Fig. 1 and Video S1 and reveal the paths on the adhesive area of 40 cells, of which none entered the nonadhesive area where the micropipet releasing cyclic AMP was located. In most experiments, counting the cells was hampered by their aggregation that prevented distinction of arrested cells, while single detaching cells that passed the border to float on the nonadhesive area could be easily identified. Taken together, in the experiments represented in Figs. 2 and ​ and5, 5, 14 cells detached at the border compared with more than 136 cells that became arrested there. Figure 5 Tangential movement of cells relative to the attractant gradient along the border of an adhesive area. The cells, enlarged by fusion, expressed PHcrac-GFP for PIP3 and mRFP-LimEΔ for filamentous actin. One cell at the bottom of the... Video S3. Tracking of the chemotactically responding cells shown in Video 1: Panels from the left to right: fluorescence images of cells, with regions of interest detected by the tracking program and tracked paths in red; Rois and tracked paths only; fluorescence images only; bright-field images. Borders of the adhesive area are outlined with a cyan line, and pipet position is marked with cyan dots. These videos are related to Figure 1. Click here to view. Video S4. Continued tracking of the chemotactically responding cells shown in Video 1: This video is the continuation of Video S3 after the pipet was moved to the bottom. Panels from the left to right: fluorescence images of cells, with regions of interest detected by the tracking program and tracked paths in red; Rois and tracked paths only; fluorescence images only, bright-field images. Borders of the adhesive area are outlined with a cyan line, and pipet position is marked with cyan dots. These videos are related to Figure 1. Click here to view. Monitoring cells that escaped onto the nonadhesive area revealed that detachment at the border does not exclude that the cell recognized the border of the adhesive area. In Video S5 we show, in successive image series, three detaching cells that moved along the border or came to a halt, remaining attached with a small area of their surface, before they escaped with swimming activities at their front. The first cell detached after short arrest at the border. The second cell was finally caught by adhesion to a group of cells arresting at the border. The third cell responded on the nonadhesive area by chemotaxis to changes in the position of the pipet. Video S5. Three examples of cells that escaped onto the nonadhesive area: In the first and second example the cells expressed PHcrac-GFP for PIP3 and mRFP-LimEΔ for filamentous actin, in the third example they expressed GFP-α-tubulin and mRFP-LimEΔ. The borderline is marked with cyan arrows and the pipet tip position in the fluorescence images with white solid circles. Click here to view. Response of myosin II-null cells Contraction of the tail of the cells is enforced by the filamentous myosin II. To explore the role of myosin II in the response of the cells to the border between the adhesive and nonadhesive areas, we compared the behavior of mutant cells devoid of myosin II heavy chains with that of the parent cells. As exemplified by the cell shown in Fig. 3 and Video S6, the mutant cells became restrained to the border of the adhesive substrate surface without losing motility. Myosin II-null cells are even more efficiently prevented from passing the border than cells of the wild-type, of which a few cells can escape onto the nonadhesive area. This result indicates that avoidance of the inert surface is a response that is independent of myosin II and that myosin II-mediated contractility may even support detachment. Figure 3 A myosin II-null cell at the border of an adhesive area responding to a gradient of chemoattractant. The cell responded during a recording period of more than 10 min by protruding lamellipods and filopods, and by changing polarity. The cell was... Video S6. A myosin II-null cell at the border of an adhesive area: The cell expressed LimEΔ-GFP as a label for filamentous actin. The borderline is marked with cyan arrows and the pipet tip position in the fluorescence images with white solid circles. This video is related to Figure 3. The 449-s frame in the video corresponds to the 0-s frame in Figure 3. Click here to view. The arrest of the cells at the border of an adhesive area can result in multilayered accumulation of cells as shown in Fig. 4 and Video S7 for myosin II-null cells. By chemotactic migration on the adhesive area the cells eventually accumulated in a wall several cell layers high, with the foremost cells arrested at the border of the adhesive area. Figure 4 Massive accumulation of chemotaxing myosin II-null cells at the border of an adhesive area. The cells expressed LimEΔ-GFP as a label for filamentous actin. The borderline between adhesive and nonadhesive areas is indicated by a dotted... Video S7. Chemotaxing myosin II-null cells accumulating at the border of an adhesive area: At the end of the video a massive accumulation of cells at the border of the adhesive area is seen. The cells expressed LimEΔ-GFP as a label for filamentous actin. The borderline is marked with cyan arrows and the pipet tip position in the fluorescence images with white solid circles. This video is related to Figure 4. The 100-s frame in the video corresponds to the 0-s frame in Figure 4. Click here to view. “Tangential” movement at the border of an adhesive area The sequence of Fig. 5 and Video S8 shows cells that expressed mRFP-LimEΔ as a label for filamentous actin, and GFP-PHcrac for PIP3. When the cells were stimulated by cyclic AMP through a micropipet located within a nonadhesive area, they moved first in the attractant gradient on the adhesive area toward its border, which they crossed only with their front. Subsequently, the cells moved along the border in the direction of higher cyclic AMP concentrations, with their front protruding toward the micropipet and their tail remaining on the adhesive area. Thus, front direction determined by attractant differs from tail direction that depends on substrate adhesion. The result is movement along the borderline of the adhesive area, in tangential direction relative to the concentration profile of the gradient, until the cells reach the zone of highest attractant concentration. Pointing of the front to the source of attractant on top of the nonadhesive area indicates that the movement of these cells does not require contact of their front with the adhesive area. Video S8. Tangential movement of cells along the border of an adhesive area: The cells were enlarged by electric-pulse-induced fusion and expressed PHcrac-GFP for PIP3 and mRFP-LimEΔ for filamentous actin. Cells that entered the frame from bottom or top moved in tangential direction relative to the attractant gradient of cyclic AMP in the micropipet. The borderline is marked with cyan arrows and the pipet tip position in the fluorescence images with white solid circles. This video is related to Figure 5. Click here to view. The cells shown in Fig. 5 and Video S8 have been subjected to electric-pulse-induced fusion. These cells are larger than normal and their macropinocytotic activity is enhanced. As a token, the PIP3 label visualizes macropinosomes, confirming previous results that chemotaxis is compatible with membrane internalization at the cell front. Circumventing and bridging gaps The circumvention of the nonadhesive area is illustrated in Fig. 6 and Video S9, where cells were confronted with a square of inert surface between their position and the source of attractant. The cells were in a fully aggregation-competent stage in which they extensively elongated and strongly cohered at their ends. Cells searched for an adhesive ground by extending into the nonadhesive area and sweeping around, remaining connected at their base with the adhesive area or with other cells. Eventually, small aggregates reached the micropipet using the borderline of the adhesive area for passage. Figure 6 Circumventing a gap. In this case, the nonadhesive area has the shape of a square connected to a wedge. This series shows phase-contrast images of... Video S9. Cells circumventing the nonadhesive square portion on the left and bridging gaps of the wedge portion on the right: The nonadhesive area has the shape of a square connected to a wedge. This video of phase-contrast images is related to Figures 6 and 7. The 48-s frame in the video corresponds to the 0-s frame in Figure 7. Click here to view. If the nonadhesive gap is only 20 μ m broad or smaller, a cell scoring the area with its non-adhering front has a chance to reach the border of the facing adhesive zone. It will then detach from the substratum at its rear but will retain contacts with other cells and move forward toward the micropipet. Cohesive cells can also bridge nonadhesive areas collectively, even if the gaps are larger than the body length of a single cell. In summary, the cells combine a mechanism that protects them from losing contact to a substratum with a chemotactic response to orientate in a structured environment. Figure 7 Bridging a gap. This figure presents phase-contrast images of the wedge portion of the pattern shown in the 0-s frame of Fig. 6. Single or cohering cells passing the gap by tip attachment to the opposite adhesive area are indicated by open or... Video S10. Two examples of joined bridging of a nonadhesive gap by cohering cells: As in Video 9, cells were stimulated by a gradient of chemoattractant to move to the top of the images and had to pass the nonadhesive wedge. Owing to their elongation and end-to-end cohesion, these cells acted together to bridge the gap. Click here to view. Discussion Here, we exploit surface patterns of adhesive and inert areas, in combination with chemotactic stimulation, to study the behavior of Dictyostelium cells responding to a gradient of chemoattractant at a crossing border of the adhesive area on which they move. If a cell would not respond to the change in adhesiveness, it would detach and float. In fact, only a minority of wild-type cells happens to float; the majority of cells stops detachment before the tail leaves the adhesive area, while on the nonadhesive surface the cells extend protrusions toward the source of attractant. The cells can bridge gaps that are smaller than their length. Alternatively, a cell may approach the source of attractant by circumventing a nonadhesive area. The results indicating that lacking substrate adhesion at the front prevents detachment at the tail point to an antifloating mechanism for cells crawling on the surface of irregular substrates as the soil particles in the natural habitat of Dictyostelium cells. The finding that protrusion of the front toward the attractant does not require adhesion to a substrate is consistent with a previous report on weakly adhesive talin A-null cells, and is also in accord with swimming T lymphocytes on a nonadhesive surface. Chemotactic motility of ameboid cells is primarily based on actin-dependent protrusion at the front. The forces generated in the actin cortex of the cell are transmitted into translocation of the cell by coordinated interaction with an adhesive substrate surface: gain of adhesion areas at the front region is followed by loss at the tail portion of the cell. Cell movement is accompanied by a cycle of shape changes of the cell, in particular in the z -direction. However, as shown in cells exposed to high Ca 2+ concentrations, a myosin II-dependent mechanism enables the cells to glide on the substrate solely with their tail. Dictyostelium cells can even chemotax without any adhesion to a substrate. For this swimming motion, two mechanisms have been proposed that may act together: paddling with protrusions that move from the front to the back of the cell and rearward membrane flow in low-viscous medium. Contraction and detachment of the tail are supported by filamentous myosin II. Elimination of myosin II does not change adhesiveness of a cell but reduces the force that effects contraction of the tail and detachment of the cell. Myosin II-mediated contraction of the tail supports the movement is, however, not essential. Myosin II-null cells responded even more efficiently than wild-type cells by arresting on the border of an adhesive area. These data indicate that, both in wild-type and myosin II-null cells, detachment of the tail is inhibited when the front region lacks contact to an adhesive substrate. The interrelationship of chemotactic orientation and cell-to-substrate adhesion is most evident when a cell arrives at a site where the borderline of the adhesive area does not stand perpendicular to the direction of the attractant gradient. In this case the cell is forced to move along the borderline tangentially to the direction of the attractant gradient, with its tail remaining restrained to the adhesive substrate and its front protruding pseudopods into the nonadhesive area toward the source of attractant. It is remarkable that cells can directionally move under these conditions, even in the absence of myosin II, with no possibility for the pseudopods that point toward the source of attractant gradient of transmitting force onto the surface of the adhesive substrate. It appears that, under these conditions, the cells perform a hybrid movement of swimming with the front region while gliding on the substrate with their tail along the border of the adhesive area. Conclusion Cells of Dictyostelium moving on an adhesive substrate toward the source of chemoattractant exert a mechanism to stop at the border of this area and to prevent floating. Detachment of their tail is inhibited when the front recognizes lack of substrate adhesiveness. The inhibition of crossing the border to the nonadhesive area is also effective in myosin II-null cells. Cells migrating tangentially toward increasing attractant concentrations along the border of an adhesive area show a hybrid type of movement with the front on top of the nonadhesive substrate pointing toward the source of attractant and the tail gliding in contact with the adhesive area. Author contributions L.R. and M.E. conducted the experiments and analyzed the data. C.L. produced the patterned surfaces. G.G. and J.O.R. wrote the paper. 