Generation of a mitochondrial protein compendium in Dictyostelium discoideum You possibly have javascript turned off. The functionality is limited to basic scrolling. You may switch to Article in classic view. Alt PDF Generation of a mitochondrial protein compendium in Dictyostelium discoideum iScience. 2022 May 20; 25: 104332. Prev Page 0 of 0 Next Prev Next Done Links PMC Home Journal List iScience v.25; 2022 May 20 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Feedback Done Alternative formats Article in classic view PDF Cite Done Article navigation Done Settings & Help A- A+ AUTO Help with PubReader Switch to classic view About PubReader ✘ Previous Page Next Page ✘ ◀ no matches yet ▶ Making articles easier to read in PMC We are experimenting with display styles that make it easier to read articles in PMC. The ePub format uses eBook readers, which have several "ease of reading" features already built in. The ePub format is best viewed in the iBooks reader. You may notice problems with the display of certain parts of an article in other eReaders. Generating an ePub file may take a long time, please be patient. Cancel Download article t Welcome to PubReader! Click on above to: Get help with PubReader, or Switch to the classic article view. Okay iScience Elsevier Generation of a mitochondrial protein compendium in Dictyostelium discoideum Anna V. Freitas, Jake T. Herb,, and Hong Xu Additional article information Associated Data Supplementary Materials Table S1. D. discoideum homologs of human mitochondrial proteins, related to Figure 1 Homology was assessed by BLAST+ using the Human MitoCarta 3.0 as the query and the D. discoideum proteome as the subject. Presented alongside are N-terminal sequence predictions retrieved from TargetP-2.0. mmc1.xlsx GUID: 0D270A95-3215-41B3-A7A2-A837F38478AE Table S2. Proteomic discovery relative enrichments and relative enrichment ratios, related to Figure 1 Relative enrichment ratios and their respective p-values for samples quantified in the proteomic discovery experiment. Relative enrichments from lysate, crude mitochondria, and purified mitochondria samples. All sample enrichments are calculated from three biological replicates. mmc2.xlsx GUID: 8EDC7A78-F666-41C3-9CAD-B241D201FBEE Table S3. Proteomic discovery core mitochondrial proteins, related to Figure 2 D. discoideum mitochondrial ETC, OXPHOS, and TCA cycle proteins used for enrichment normalization. Information retrieved from uniprot.org. mmc3.xlsx GUID: 45130E0C-5676-4434-874D-F395527051F1 Table S4. Predicted probabilities of mitochondrial localization based on GMM, related to Figure 2 The probability of a protein belonging to cluster 1 or cluster 2 according to the RER-based mixture modeling. Note that the RER cutoff for the proteomic analysis is when a protein has a probability of 1.000 of belonging to the mitochondrial cluster. mmc4.xlsx GUID: F79021C7-6C50-4767-B502-87AE9518F6D3 Table S5. Proteomic discovery mitochondrial targeting sequence prediction, related to Figure 2 N-terminal sequence predictions retrieved from TargetP-2.0 for all samples quantified in the proteomic discovery experiment, all proteins with an RER ≥ 0.392, and all proteins with an 0.392 > RER ≥ 0.326. mTP: mitochondrial targeting peptide; SP: signal peptide; OTHER: neither mTP nor SP. mmc5.xlsx GUID: FE372294-928E-4A96-9899-6C5D42FF2000 Table S6. Microscopy validation of relative enrichment ratio cutoff, related to Figure 3 Localization patterns of proteins that were used to verify the RER cutoff. A red highlight indicates proteins that were removed from the final mitochondrial compendium while a green highlight indicates proteins that were added to the final mitochondrial compendium based on the protein’s localization. Proteins that were unable to be synthesized or transfected and proteins that have homology to a protein within the Human MitoCarta 3.0 are indicated in red and blue text, respectively. mmc6.xlsx GUID: B531FE2F-5318-4EC0-9C01-38B7C318EEE7 Table S7. Classifications of the mitochondrial protein compendium, related to Tables 1 and 2 Biological process classifications were determined by PANTHER biological process or PANTHER family of the D. discoideum protein, or of the H. sapiens protein. Homologs of the D. discoideum proteins were established by HMMER alone or by HMMER and BlastP. mmc7.xlsx GUID: 9AEC6ED7-5F05-4EE6-8A9A-F777AA52AD6A Table S8. All ribosomal proteins in the mitochondrial protein compendium, related to Table 2 List of all mitochondrial proteins with ribosomal protein classifications according to their annotation and/or PANTHER family classification. Taxonomic groups were determined by the protein’s PANTHER family classification. Highlighted cells indicate that the protein shares no significant homology to any H. sapiens, S. cerevisiae, or R. prowazekii proteins. mmc8.xlsx GUID: B39562B4-2A20-429F-BD25-4198A9DFC490 Table S9. Expression profiles for genes encoding mitochondrial proteins, related to Figure 4 Normalized values scaled to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. Groups: biological process categories; t0-24: timepoints in hours within the 24-hour starvation-induced development cycle. Log2 fold-change is calculated from raw values. Upregulated genes at specific time points are indicated in red. Data retrieved from dictyExpress. mmc9.xlsx GUID: 77D58EF3-C30A-4234-8C33-9E28348EB153 Table S10. List of oligos used for cloning, related to Figure 3 Homology to pDM323 used for ligation is underlined. Reverse primers contain an additional base to retain the reading frame. mmc10.xlsx GUID: 11B217F2-48EC-46AA-ABEA-13422F02189D Data Availability Statement • Proteomics data have been deposited at ProteomeXchange. Original microscopy images and supplementary tables have been deposited at Mendeley. All data is publicly available as of the date of publication. • All code and data used in the analysis are available on GitHub. • This paper also analyzes existing, publicly available RNA sequencing data retrieved from DictyExpress. Summary The social ameba Dictyostelium discoideum has emerged as a powerful model to study mitochondrial genetics and bioenergetics. However, a comprehensive inventory of mitochondrial proteins that is critical to understanding mitochondrial processes has yet to be curated. Here, we utilized high-throughput multiplexed protein quantitation and homology analyses to generate a high-confidence mitochondrial protein compendium consisting of 936 proteins. Our proteomic approach, which utilizes mass spectrometry in combination with mathematical modeling, was validated through mitochondrial targeting sequence prediction and live-cell imaging. Our final compendium consists of 936 proteins. Nearly, a third of D. discoideum mitochondrial proteins do not have homologs in humans, budding yeasts, or an ancestral alphaproteobacteria. Additionally, we leverage our compendium to highlight the complexity of metabolic reprogramming during starvation-induced development. Our compendium lays a foundation to investigate mitochondrial processes that are unique in ameba and to understand the functions of conserved mitochondrial proteins in D. discoideum. Subject areas: Microbiology, Microorganism, Omics, Proteomics Graphical abstract Open in a separate window Highlights • Identification of 936 high-confidence mitochondrial proteins in D. discoideum • Half of mitochondrial proteins are conserved between Dictyostelium discoideum and human • Many unique mitochondrial proteins are involved in mtDNA gene expression • Mitochondrial proteins are dynamically expressed during development Microbiology; Microorganism; Omics; Proteomics Introduction Dictyostelium discoideum, a social ameba, is a well-established model organism to study eukaryotic cellular processes such as cell motility, chemotaxis, and differentiation. Under normal nutrient conditions, D. discoideum grows axenically through binary fission. However, upon starvation, amebae secrete cAMP, which attracts neighboring cells to aggregate together and form a multicellular mound. Cells in a mound move collectively as a slug toward light, heat, or humidity to find a suitable environment. The slug eventually matures into a fruiting body consisting of two major types of differentiated cells, spore cells that will start a new life cycle and stalk cells that form a stalk to hold the spore aloft. As many of the aforementioned biological processes are intertwined with cellular energetics, investigation of mitochondrial biogenesis and functions is an emerging area in D. discoideum research. The D. discoideum mitochondrial genome is ∼56 kb, circular, double-stranded DNA that encodes two ribosomal RNAs, 18 transfer RNAs, five open reading frames without annotated function, and 38 proteins including 18 subunits of the electron transport chain complexes and 15 ribosomal proteins. Phylogenetic studies reveal that Amoebozoa diverged before Opisthokonta, but after Plantae, and are more closely related to animals than plants. Notably, the Dictyostelium mitochondrial genetic system possesses a few differences from metazoans. D. discoideum mtDNA has four introns in the cox1/2 genes and utilizes universal codons, a common feature of most plants’ mitochondria. The universal genetic code and the lack of a full set of tRNA genes on the Dictyostelium mitochondrial genome indicate that some nuclear-encoded tRNAs are likely imported into mitochondria to support the organellar translation. Additionally, the electron transport chain in Dictyostelium contains an additional component compared to its mammalian counterparts: an alternative oxidase, which is found across eukaryotic clades except vertebrates. AOX is highly expressed during vegetative growth, but its expression level is markedly reduced upon starvation, suggesting that metabolic reprogramming potentially occurs during starvation-induced development. Interestingly, either reduction of mtDNA content or disruption of the rps4 locus on mtDNA impairs aggregation and slug phototaxis but has no impact on vegetative growth, suggesting that mtDNA, and most likely an intact oxidative phosphorylation system, is essential to initiate the development program. On the other hand, pharmacological inhibitions of either Complex I or Complex V can induce aggregation, even though mitochondrial respiration appears to increase at the beginning of starvation. Therefore, the interplay between mitochondrial function and Dictyostelium development remains to be explored. Despite the growing interest in using D. discoideum as a model organism to study many conserved mitochondrial processes and some unique biology, a comprehensive list of the mitochondrial proteins has yet to be established. A recent proteomic study detected 294 proteins in D. discoideum mitochondria, which we believe is far from complete. Nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins, which constitute over 90% of the total mitochondrial proteome, are synthesized in the cytoplasm and then imported to mitochondria. It is estimated that the import of ∼60% of these proteins relies on a positively charged, N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence. Computational approaches that integrate machine learning and known biological data are frequently used to predict mitochondrial targeting based on the presence of an MTS. However, this method is insufficient to capture all mitochondrial proteins, as most proteins on the outer membrane and in the inner membrane space, and some inner membrane proteins rely on alternate translocation mechanisms. An alternative computational approach leverages sequence homology to known mitochondrial protein compendiums that were generated using mass spectrometry -based proteomic discovery. However, to compensate for the rapid evolution of the mitochondrial genome, nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins evolve faster than other nuclear-encoded proteins. Thus, some Dictyostelium mitochondrial proteins may escape the homology search, and Amoebozoa-specific mitochondrial proteins will certainly be missed. In this study, we combined quantitative proteomics and mathematical modeling to identify over 850 high-confidence mitochondrial proteins, which were validated through both in silico and fluorescent microscopy analyses. We further complemented the proteomics-based mitochondrial protein discovery with bioinformatic approaches to create a compendium of 936 D. discoideum mitochondrial proteins. We also discuss conserved D. discoideum mitochondrial proteins that may be used as the basis for validating mitochondrial proteins in other organisms, as well as unique features of the mitochondrial proteome in D. discoideum. Results and discussion Mitochondrial protein discovery using quantitative proteomics To identify putative D. discoideum mitochondrial proteins, we searched for Dictyostelium homologs of 1,136 human mitochondrial proteins listed in the Human MitoCarta 3.0, and retrieved 616 proteins. This number is much less than known mitochondrial proteins in humans and baker’s yeast. We posited that the mitochondrial proteomes might be highly divergent between D. discoideum and humans, and many Dictyostelium mitochondrial proteins might be missed from this bioinformatic curation. We, therefore, took a proteomic approach to directly identify mitochondrial proteins in D. discoideum. From AX2 axenic cultures, we prepared mitochondria isolates—both crude and highly purified—through Percoll gradient ultracentrifugation. We performed tandem mass tag liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry on both mitochondria isolates and included AX2 whole-cell lysate as the control. A total of 6,892 proteins were captured in all samples. Figure 1 Curation of a comprehensive mitochondrial proteome in Dictyostelium discoideum A limitation of identifying organellar proteins from their subcellular fractions alone is that high-abundance contaminants are often co-purified and result in false-positive hits. To address this issue, we assessed the probability of a protein localizing to mitochondria by comparing its relative enrichment in mitochondrial preparations to a list of 47 authentic mitochondrial proteins that include components of electron transport chain complexes and enzymes in the citric acid cycle. We first calculated the ratio of a protein’s abundance in the mitochondria isolates, both crude and highly purified, versus its abundance in the whole-cell lysate. The resulting value, indicating its enrichment in mitochondrial preparations, was further normalized to the average enrichment ratio of the 47 reference mitochondrial proteins to compute the relative enrichment ratio. Overall, a protein’s RER in crude mitochondria isolate is in accordance with that in purified mitochondria. However, the distribution of RERs appears continuous in crude mitochondria, but clusters into two distinct populations, reflecting their different enrichments in purified mitochondria, which allowed us to determine a proper RER threshold for mitochondrial proteins using mathematical modeling. Thus, we proceeded to only analyze the purified mitochondria RER. Figure 2 Prediction of mitochondrial localization based on relative enrichment analysis In principle, a true mitochondrial protein would be co-purified with the reference mitochondrial proteins in pure mitochondrial isolates, and its RER should be 1.0. However, the RER distribution of these 47 reference proteins appears as a normal curve centered around 1.0, suggesting that many mitochondrial proteins may have an RER below 1.0. Among all proteins profiled using TMT-based LC-MS, only 259 have an RER higher than 1.0 in purified mitochondria. We posit that mitochondrial proteins might be degraded to different extents, based on their intrinsic stability, during the procedure of mitochondrial purification, which involves overnight ultracentrifugation. Therefore, it is necessary to determine a proper RER value to differentiate mitochondrial proteins from non-mitochondrial proteins. We applied a Gaussian mixture model to bin all proteins into two clusters: non-mitochondrial and mitochondrial proteins based on their RER values. We chose an RER cutoff of 0.392, such that all proteins with an RER greater than or equal to this value had a 100% probability of belonging to the mitochondrial cluster. Based on this analysis, a total of 861 proteins were assigned as putative mitochondrial proteins. Validation of mitochondrial protein discovery based on quantitative proteomics To validate the accuracy of RER-based mitochondrial protein discovery, we first assessed the recovery rate of putative mitochondrial proteins in silico. Many mitochondrial proteins possess an N-terminus mitochondrial targeting sequence that directs the import of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins into the mitochondrial matrix. Overall, 3.4% of all proteins recovered in the proteomics experiment contain an MTS. Importantly, we recovered 94% of these MTS-bearing proteins using the RER cutoff of 0.392. As a negative control, 2.2% of proteins that were destined to other organelles such as the ER, Golgi, lysosomes, vacuoles, or secretory pathway had an RER greater than or equal to 0.392. Furthermore, all remaining proteins with no sequence prediction also fit into these clusters. These analyses demonstrate that an RER cutoff value of 0.392 effectively separates mitochondrial proteins from non-mitochondrial proteins. We also surveyed the localization of 81 proteins recovered in LC-MS, using fluorescent microscopy. These proteins were selected on the basis that their subcellular localization has not been annotated previously as mitochondrial, and their RERs are randomly distributed from 0.1 to 1.5. Each protein was tagged with GFP at its C-terminus and co-expressed with an MTS-mCherry fusion protein, which marks mitochondria in D. discoideum AX2 cells. Among the 81 proteins, 91% of proteins with an RER higher than 0.392 showed complete or partial mitochondrial localization, demonstrating a strong positive correlation between RER value and probability of mitochondrial localization. Moreover, logistic regression analysis on the localization pattern of these 81 proteins predicts that an individual protein has more than a 79% probability of localizing to the mitochondria if its RER is higher than 0.392. Although the microscopy analysis demonstrated that few non-mitochondrial proteins were recovered in our compendium, 12% of proteins with an RER less than 0.392 showed mitochondrial localization. Figure 3 Validation of proteomic discovery and enrichment analyses A comprehensive mitochondrial protein compendium in D. discoideum To further improve the coverage and accuracy of our mitochondrial protein discovery, we first revised the proteomics list based on the in vivo microscopy validation. We removed three non-mitochondrial localizing proteins and added five mitochondrial localizing proteins. We also examined the proteins with a 95% or greater predicted probability of localizing to the mitochondria based on the GMM. For these 66 proteins, we retrieved five that had a predicted MTS and/or were homologs of human mitochondrial proteins. Additionally, there were 41 D. discoideum homologs of human mitochondrial proteins that were not captured in LC-MS. For these 46 proteins, we removed any that demonstrated more sequence homology to a non-mitochondrial human protein than a protein in the Human MitoCarta3.0. We posit that these D. discoideum proteins may share a conserved domain, and therefore emerged in the homology analyses, but do not share the same function. We also removed any proteins that were non-mitochondrial based on previous evidence. We added the remaining 21 proteins to the list, as well as 52 proteins with mitochondrial gene ontologies that had not emerged during the proteomic or homology analysis. The final compendium consists of 936 high-confidence mitochondrial proteins in D. discoideum. Characterization of the D. discoideum mitochondrial proteome Out of the 936 D. discoideum mitochondrial proteins, 504 and 404 proteins have homologs in the mitochondrial proteome of humans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, respectively. Only 286 D. discoideum mitochondrial proteins have homologs in Rickettsia prowazekii, an α-proteobacterium that is closely related to the mitochondrial ancestor. Overall, a total of 300 proteins, representing 32.1% of the D. discoideum mitochondrial proteome, have no homologs in the whole proteome of humans, S. cerevisiae, or R. prowazekii, indicating that a large fraction of D. discoideum mitochondrial proteins were evolved de novo after the divergence of Amoebozoa. Moreover, 74 D. discoideum mitochondrial proteins have no homologs in Dictyostelium purpureum, a closely related species of social ameba, further substantiating the fast-evolving nature of the ameba mitochondrial proteome. Table 1 Comparison of mitochondrial proteome in D. discoideum to other organisms There are also 77 D. discoideum mitochondrial proteins with human homologs that had not been annotated as mitochondrial proteins. Among these 77 proteins, 62 were also not annotated as mitochondrial proteins in budding yeast, including 27 that had homologs in S. cerevisiae. Given the estimated false-discovery rate of our compendium, the localization of these proteins needs to be experimentally assessed. Nonetheless, there are a few examples, such as the RNB domain-containing protein and tRNA-binding domain-containing protein, both of which have a predicted MTS and are likely targeted to the mitochondrial matrix. The human homologs of DDB_G0288469, DIS3-like exonuclease 2, and DDB_G0349377, rhomboid-related protein 4, were not included in the human compendium, despite evidence that the yeast homolog of DIS3-like exonuclease two localizes to the mitochondria, and that rhomboid-related protein 4 has been partially shown to localize to the mitochondria. The mitochondrial localization of their D. discoideum homologs substantiates these two proteins might indeed localize to the mitochondria and indicates that our compendium can complement previous studies toward a more comprehensive discovery of mitochondrial proteins in other organisms. Table 2 The functional categorization of all D. discoideum mitochondrial proteins Additionally, we categorized the D. discoideum mitochondrial proteome using PANTHER biological function or protein family classifications. Proteins involved in mitochondrial gene expression and metabolism comprise the largest fractions of all mitochondrial proteins, over 22% for each category. Other proteins are involved in mitochondrial protein homeostasis, the electron transport chain, redox signaling and metabolism, and regulation of mitochondrial morphology and dynamics. A large fraction of D. discoideum mitochondrial proteins, approximately 16%, have no classified functions based on PANTHER analyses. D. discoideum -specific mitochondrial proteins Different from human mtDNA, D. discoideum mitochondrial genome contains several introns and has numerous overlapping genes, which require complex post-transcriptional processing. Consistent with this notion, proteins involved in gene expression consisted of a large fraction of D. discoideum -specific mitochondrial proteome. On the contrary, few metabolism proteins emerged in the list, suggesting that metabolic processes are highly conserved between D. discoideum and metazoans. Here, we expand upon a few of the unique features of the D. discoideum mitochondrial protein compendium. Mosaic nature of mitochondrial ribosomes Mitochondrial ribosomes, ribosomal assembly factors, and other proteins involved in translation represented 9.7% and 9.6% of the overall and unique mitochondrial protein compendium, respectively. While mitoribosomes are thought to be evolved from bacterial ribosomes, these two differ greatly regarding their structure, function, as well as their composition of proteins and RNAs. We identified 50 proteins that are predicted to be mitoribosomal proteins, including 13 proteins that did not share significant homology with any H. sapiens, S. cerevisiae, or R. prowazekii proteins. Interestingly, D. discoideum mitoribosomal proteins belong to families across several taxonomic groups: 35 proteins belong to mammalian mitoribosomal protein families, one belongs to eukaryotic cytosolic ribosomal protein families, nine belong to yeast mitoribosomal protein families, two belong to chloroplast or bacterial ribosomal protein families, one is from archaea, and two are universally conserved among prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In D. discoideum, it has previously been shown that cytosolic ribosomes tether to the mitochondrial outer membrane for cotranslational import. Hence, the recovery of the 60S ribosomal protein L6 could be the result of the association of cytoplasmic ribosome with the mitochondrial outer membrane rather than its localization in the matrix. Nonetheless, the presence of proteins representing multiple mitoribosome lineages suggests that there may be D. discoideum - or Amoebozoa-specific mechanisms to process mitochondrial transcripts and regulate mitochondrial translation. Further validation of these findings is necessary as the composition and structure of the D. discoideum mitoribosome have yet to be resolved. Mitochondrial DNA and RNA processing factors Among the list of unique proteins are 49 candidate mtDNA and mtRNA processing factors including six endonucleases and a pentatricopeptide repeat -containing protein A. Bioinformatic analysis suggests that PtcA belongs to the mitochondrial group I intron splicing family. PPR proteins, defined by tandem PPR domains, are implicated in several different mitochondrial gene expression processes including translation initiation, and ribosomal stabilization. The number of PPR proteins that are encoded in an organism varies greatly: terrestrial plants, such as Arabidopsis thaliana, have upwards of 450 PPR proteins, while humans have 7. D. discoideum has 12 PPR domain-containing peptides, including PtcA, reflecting a greater complexity of D. discoideum’s mitochondrial genome compared to that of metazoans. Divergent evolution path of lipid biosynthesis The mevalonate pathway, which produces five-carbon blocks for the synthesis of diverse biomolecules such as cholesterol and coenzyme Q10, is an essential and highly conserved process in eukaryotes, archaea, and some bacteria. In animals and fungi, the mevalonate pathway takes place in ER, and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl -coenzyme A reductase, a key enzyme in this pathway that converts HMG-CoA to mevalonate, localizes in the ER and peroxisomes. HMGR2, one of two HMG reductases in D. discoideum, is recovered in our compendium and contains a predicted MTS, suggesting that it likely localizes to the mitochondrial matrix. Likewise, HGSA, one of the two HMG-CoA synthases, also emerged as a mitochondrial protein. Additionally, the isozymes of HMGR2 and HGSA—HMGR1 and HGSB, respectively—were not recovered in our compendium and have predicted signal peptide sequences. Taken together, this suggests that mevalonate metabolism may redundantly take place in the mitochondria in addition to in the ER in D. discoideum, highlighting the evolutionary divergence of some metabolic pathways that originated from the common mitochondrial ancestor. Implication of mitochondrial function in multicellular development D. discoideum with reduced mtDNA or a disruption of the gene encoding mt-ribosomal protein S4 displays no defect in vegetative growth but has impaired starvation-induced development, suggesting that mitochondrial respiration is necessary for multicellularity. However, contrasting evidence has demonstrated a significant decrease in mitochondrial respiration after starvation, and accordingly, a decreasing expression of many respiration complexes. To understand potential regulations of mitochondrial function in multicellular development, we retrieved RNA sequencing data using the Dictyostelium gene expression database, dictyExpress. Overall, there was a decrease in the expression of mitochondrial genes within our compendium over the 24-h developmental time course. A similar pattern is observed in proteins that are involved in mitochondrial DNA maintenance and gene expression including many ribosomal proteins. Interestingly, despite the decrease in gene expression machinery, 80% of the mitochondria-encoded genes in the dataset were upregulated in the first 4 h after starvation induction. Furthermore, in examining all respiratory chain complexes, seven nuclear-encoded ETC subunits had a higher expression level at or after 8 h of starvation, besides the 11 nuclear-encoded subunits that show a burst of expression in the first 4 h after the starvation. The complex pattern of mitochondrial gene expression, particularly the upregulation of electron transport chain complex subunits during the development suggests potential roles of mitochondrial respiration in Dictyostelium development, and that both nuclear and mitochondrial-encoded proteins are likely implicated in these processes. Future characterization of the mitochondrial proteome at different developmental stages would be valuable to complement these findings, as changes in a gene’s expression do not always correspond with its protein level or activity. Figure 4 Expression profile of mitochondrial genes during D. discoideum development In conclusion, we generated the most comprehensive list of mitochondrial proteins in D. discoideum to date. Our compendium lays the foundation for future studies to understand the functions of conserved mitochondrial proteins in health and diseases using D. discoideum as the model. It also provides an entry to study many fascinating mitochondrial processes that are unique in ameba. Additionally, through comparative genomics, our compendium will complement mitochondrial protein discovery in other organisms and may shed light on the evolution of the mitochondrial proteome and processes. Limitations of the study To reduce the false discovery of non-mitochondrial proteins, we set a stringent RER cutoff at 0.392 based on the mathematical modeling. Our microscopy-based validation demonstrates that several proteins with RERs less than 0.392 actually localize to mitochondria, while a few others with RER above this threshold do not. Although the in silico dataset correction improved the coverage of our compendium, some bona fide mitochondrial proteins without homologs in the Human MitoCarta 3.0 that have RER values below the cutoff would be missed in the compendium. In addition, our proteomic discovery method does not effectively discern mitochondria-associated proteins from bona fide mitochondrial proteins that localize to the matrix, intermembrane space, or are inserted in the inner or outer membrane. Future updates to our compendium should examine the submitochondrial localization of the inventoried proteins. Lastly, our mitochondria protein discovery is limited to the vegetative stage of D. discoideum. Future characterization of the mitochondrial proteome in other developmental stages would lead to an improved understanding of mitochondrial regulation of D. discoideum development and differentiation. STAR★Methods Key resources table Resource availability Lead contact Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Hong Xu. Material availability All plasmids generated in this study are available upon request. Experimental model and subject details D. discoideum AX2 cells were obtained from the Jin lab and originally derived from the Carole Parent lab, National Cancer Institute, NIH. Cultures were maintained in HL5 medium at 22°C. Method details D. discoideum transformation Transformants were generated via electroporation as previously described, with modifications. After electroporation, cells were incubated on ice for 10 min. Subsequently, cells were transferred from the cuvette with 2 mL of HL5 and plated onto 12-well tissue culture plates. After 24 h, transformants were selected with Genectin and/or Blasticidin S in HL5. Protein mass spectrometry Mitochondrial isolation Cells were harvested at a concentration of 1-3 x 10 6 cells/mL and resuspended at 2 × 10 7 cells/mL in 800 μL of Reagent A from the Mitochondrial Isolation Kit for Cultured Cells on ice. Cell lysis and crude mitochondrial preparation were performed as previously described with modifications. Cells were lysed with 35 strokes of a Dounce homogenizer followed by the addition of an equal volume of Reagent C. Whole-cell lysate samples were stored at -80°C or were centrifuged three times to purify the mitochondria. For each centrifugation step, the supernatant was transferred to a fresh 1.5 mL tube. The crude mitochondrial lysate was used immediately for purification or was stored at -80°C. To generate purified mitochondrial isolates, Percoll gradient centrifugation was performed as follows. Lysis suspension was added to the top of a Percoll and Development Buffer solution in a 10 mL ultracentrifuge tube. Ultracentrifugation yielded three distinct layers. The top layer, containing contaminants, was discarded. The middle layer, containing mitochondria, was transferred into a fresh 2 mL tube. Aliquots of the mitochondrial suspension were topped off with 500 μL of DB, then centrifuged. Following centrifugation, the supernatant was aspirated, and the mitochondria-containing pellet was maintained on ice. To lyse the mitochondria, the pellet was washed with 2 mL of DB, centrifuged, and resuspended in 2 mL of DB with urea. Protein yield was quantified via Bradford Assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Relative protein quantification Resuspended cell pellets were lysed via pulsed sonication, then sequentially reduced, alkylated, and digested overnight with trypsin. The protein digests were labeled with 10-plex Tandem Mass Tag reagents, then were pooled and desalted. To separate the peptide mixtures into 24 fractions, high pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed. Each fraction was analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos nanoLCMS system. Peptide and proteins were identified as described in He et al.. In brief, the resulting LCMS raw data were searched against a database downloaded from dictybase.org using the Sequest HT algorithm on the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 platform. Three groups of samples were normalized to 47 reference mitochondrial proteins. Relative enrichment was defined as the ratio of a protein’s enrichment from a crude or purified mitochondria sample over its enrichment from a whole-cell lysate sample. To calculate the relative enrichment ratio, REs were normalized such that the average RER of 47 known mitochondrial proteins is 1. The RER presented is a median value of three biological replicates. Mathematical modeling To classify proteins as mitochondrial or non-mitochondrial based on their RER, the RER distribution of isolated proteins was fit to a two-component Gaussian mixture model in R. All proteins with an RER greater or equal to the cutoff value have a 100% posterior probability of belonging to the mitochondrial cluster. Bioinformatic analyses Homology analyses Protein sequence homology was established by BLAST+ expect <0.001 and bit-score > 40, or by HMMER sequence e-value < 0.01. Subcellular localization was predicted using TargetP-2.0. Biological functions for all proteins in the D. discoideum and human mitochondrial proteome were manually categorized from biological function or protein family classifications provided by PANTHER. In silico dataset correction Two strategies were implemented to supplement the mitochondrial protein discovery. The top D. discoideum homolog of human mitochondrial proteins were curated. Proteins within this list were integrated into the final mitochondrial compendium if they also had a 95% or greater predicted probability of localizing to the mitochondria based on the mixture modeling, unless one of the following criteria were met. First, the protein had a human homolog that was non-mitochondrial with a higher degree of sequence identity, indicating that the D. discoideum protein likely had a similar domain as the human MitoCarta protein but had a different function. Second, the literature indicated that the protein was nonmitochondrial or the homology evidence was a poor indicator of a similar function. Additionally, D. discoideum proteins annotated with the gene ontology term “mitochond∗” on AmiGO or dictyBase were selected. RNA sequencing data normalization and visualization Normalized RNA-seq data from Parikh et al. was retrieved using dictyExpress. For the 936 proteins in the mitochondrial compendium, only 932 corresponding genes were present in the dataset. To compare the gene profiles, data were normalized to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 using the scale function in R. For the overall mitochondrial expression profile, genes and timepoints were ordered using hierarchical clustering. For the profiles of individual biological processes, scaled data were imported into the matrix visualization software Morpheus and ordered via hierarchical clustering with one minus Pearson’s correlation as the distance metric and average as the linkage method. Gene upregulation was determined by a log2 fold-change ≥ 1 of non-normalized values. Library generation for imaging verification To evaluate the efficacy of our mitochondrial protein identification, 98 proteins were selected to be GFP tagged so that their localization could be assessed via fluorescence microscopy. None of the proteins selected had a gene ontology annotation that indicated mitochondrial localization. Four proteins selected for verification had homologs listed in the human mitochondrial proteome. All genes were synthesized by Gene Universal. Of the 98 genes submitted for synthesis, 85 were generated as inserts in pDM323: a D. discoideum extrachromosomal expression vector with G418 resistance and a C-terminal GFP tag ; 6 genes were generated as inserts in the shuttle vector puC57 and were cloned into pDM323 between BglII and SpeI sites using the In-Fusion HD Cloning Kit and confirmed by sequencing. Fragment or plasmid purification was performed using the Zymoclean Gel DNA Recovery Kit or High Efficiency 5α Competent E. coli in combination with the QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kit. The other 7 genes were unable to be synthesized, such that only 92 proteins were screened. Of these 92 genes, only 81 were successfully expressed in D. discoideum. The RER of the proteins that were verified were as follows: 14 proteins with a RER >.75, 11 proteins with a RER = 0.75-0.5, 24 proteins with a RER =.5-0.25, and 32 proteins with RER < 0.25. To observe mitochondrial localization, the mitochondrial targeting sequence of respiratory cytochrome oxidase c subunit IV fused with mCherry was cloned into pDM326, a D. discoideum extrachromosomal expression vector with Blasticidin S resistance. All primers for cloning are listed in Table S10. Live-cell imaging To image cells in the axenic phase, cells were transferred to 8-well glass chambers 7 to 10 days post-transformation. Cells were allowed to adhere to the bottom of the chamber for 30 min before the media was aspirated. The media was replaced with 1x PBS after three washes. Confocal images were collected on a PerkinElmer Ultraview system. Images were analyzed with ImageJ and formatted in Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Illustrator. Quantification and statistical analysis All data were presented as the mean ± SD unless otherwise indicated. p values were calculated in R using a one-way analysis of variance followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test to test for the effect of RER on mitochondrial localization. Statistical significance of difference was considered when p < 0.05. To predict the probability of localization based on RER, outliers were identified and removed from the microscopy validation dataset based on the interquartile method. Data were analyzed using a binomial logistic regression with excluded from the mitochondria as the reference level, and partial mitochondrial localization, mitochondrial localization, or combined as the outcome levels. The fit of each binomial logistic regression was compared via McFadden’s pseudo-R 2 to determine which predicted probability to report. Predicted probabilities and 95% confidence intervals were calculated to compare outcomes and were reported in the text for the model with the highest pseudo-R 2. 