 Dictyostelium discoideum is a soil-dwelling unicellular eukaryote that accumulates extracellular polyphosphate. At high cell densities, when the cells are about to overgrow their food supply and starve, the corresponding high extracellular concentrations of polyP allow the cells to preemptively anticipate starvation, inhibit proliferation, and prime themselves to begin development. In this report, we show that starved D. discoideum cells accumulate cell surface and extracellular polyP. Starvation reduces macropinocytosis, exocytosis, and phagocytosis, and we find that these effects require the G protein-coupled polyP receptor and two enzymes, Polyphosphate kinase 1, which is required for synthesizing intracellular polyP, cell surface polyP, and some of the extracellular polyP, and Inositol hexakisphosphate kinase, which is required for cell surface polyP and polyP binding to cells, and some of the extracellular polyP. PolyP reduces membrane fluidity, and we find that starvation reduces membrane fluidity, and this effect requires GrlD and Ppk1 but not I6kA. Together, these data suggest that in starved cells, extracellular polyP decreases membrane fluidity, possibly as a protective measure. In the starved cells, sensing polyP appears to decrease energy expenditure from ingestion, and decrease exocytosis, to both decrease energy expenditures and retain nutrients. Full Text Availability The license terms selected by the author for this preprint version do not permit archiving in PMC. The full text is available from the preprint server. Article information Version 1. bioRxiv. Preprint. 2023 Feb 16. doi: 10.1101/2023.02.16.528874 PMCID: PMC9949037 PMID: 36824815 This is a preprint. It has not yet been peer reviewed by a journal. The National Library of Medicine is running a pilot to include preprints that result from research funded by NIH in PMC and PubMed. Ramesh Rijal, Issam Ismail, Shiyu Jing, and Richard H. Gomer PMC Copyright notice Updated version available: A peer-reviewed version of this article, " Starvation Induces Extracellular Accumulation of Polyphosphate in Dictyostelium discoideum to Inhibit Macropinocytosis, Phagocytosis, and Exocytosis ", has been published in Int J Mol Sci. The complete version history of this preprint is available at bioRxiv. Articles from bioRxiv are provided here courtesy of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Preprints