 Self-organization of cells is central to a variety of biological systems and physical concepts of condensed matter have proven instrumental in deciphering some of their properties. Here we show that microphase separation, long studied in polymeric materials and other inert systems, has a natural counterpart in living cells. When placed below a millimetric film of liquid nutritive medium, a quasi two-dimensional, high-density population of Dictyostelium discoideum cells spontaneously assembles into compact domains. Their typical size of 100 μm is governed by a balance between competing interactions: an adhesion acting as a short-range attraction and promoting aggregation, and an effective long-range repulsion stemming from aerotaxis in near anoxic condition. Experimental data, a simple model and cell-based simulations all support this scenario. Our findings establish a generic mechanism for self-organization of living cells and highlight oxygen regulation as an emergent organizing principle for biological matter. Subject terms: Biological physics, Cellular motility In this work the authors report a quasi two-dimensional population of living cells that can spontaneously self-assemble into finite-sized domains, an analogue of the microphase separation known in inert matter. Introduction It is not uncommon for physical concepts to migrate to the biological realm 1, 2. Even though cells are governed by specific genetic programming, their collective behavior shares some common generic features with non-living systems. States of matter, such as solid, liquid, gas phases originally defined for molecular components, are now employed to characterize assemblies of cells 3. Extended analogies with liquids have illuminated the properties of tissues, whose surface tension induces cell sorting, shapes of minimal area, spreading and dewetting 1, 4, 5. A variety of out-of-equilibrium processes have also proven useful: examples range from the glass and jamming transitions for epithelia 6 – 8 to the directional solidification model for the growing yeast dynamics 9 or the diffusion-limited aggregation for fractal-like bacterial colonies 10. Over the years, soft condensed matter ideas have found fruitful applications in cell assemblies. One soft matter phenomenon that has attracted considerable attention for half a century is micro-phase separation, a process leading to spontaneous formation of equilibrium domains with finite length scale. In the most prominent instance of diblock copolymers, separation is driven by the repulsion between two chemically different blocks but is counteracted by chain connectivity and entropy 11. The balance between those competing trends results in ordered morphologies with a thermodynamically preferred domain size 12, 13. The microphase separation of polymers is in fact representative of a generic scenario for pattern formation: modulated phases induced by competing interactions, usually a short-range attraction opposed by a long-range repulsion 14. This mechanism was recognized in several physical systems, including Langmuir monolayers 15, magnetic films 16, superconductors 17, liquid crystals 18 and clusters of proteins or colloids 19, 20 A related class of phenomena recently uncovered is the formation of biomolecular condensates, whether micron-scale compartments in eukaryotic cells 21 or euchromatin domains in the nucleus 22. All instances of microphase separation identified so far involve subcellular processes or inert matter. To our knowledge, it has never been observed in populations of cells. We report here how living cells can self-organize in reversible finite-size domains, a bona fide analog of the microphase separation in inert matter. Cell-cell adhesion acts as a short-range attraction promoting aggregation but is counteracted by oxygen depletion and aerotaxis, whose combination induces an effective long-range repulsion. As a consequence, the domain size is set by a delicate balance between cell density and oxygen availability. An analytical model and microscopic cell simulations both corroborate this simple picture. Our findings add to the mounting evidence that oxygen regulation may govern spatial patterning in various contexts, from morphogenesis of eukaryotes to tumor escape and growth 23 – 25. Results Experiments Cells of Dictyostelium discoideum were seeded on a substrate submerged with a film of nutrient culture medium and imaged by transmission microscopy for several days. As their number increases through division, their spatial distribution becomes heterogeneous: cells gather in aggregates—locally denser regions—which grow by addition from the surroundings or merging with neighboring aggregates. The steady state eventually reached is the focus of this work. Fig. 1 Microphase separation in a population of Dictyostelium discoideum cells. The striking observation is the self-organization of cells in compact, roughly circular domains with a finite length scale. Dark regions, indicative of packed, multi-layered cell assemblies, exhibit both a typical size a and a typical center-to-center distance d. In Fig. 1 f, g, one finds a = 100 ± 15 μm and d = 300 ± 80 μm and an aggregate thickness that usually remains below 40 μm. The aggregates stand out on a light gray background of lower density with nearly confluent cells and they are cohesive as they cannot be simply dissociated by gentle pipetting. If the calcium-dependent cell–cell adhesion system is disabled, the domains dissociate, proving that aggregates involve adhesion between cells. Remarkably, the self-organized state is not frozen : aggregates remain mobile over days and though their random motion may bring them in close vicinity, they do not necessarily merge but may avoid each other, suggesting that further growth is not limited by cell dynamics but prevented by an intrinsic repulsion. The size of self-organized domains ranges from a few dozens to hundreds of micrometers and strongly depends on the liquid height above cells. A first hint is given by cell assembly below a meniscus. In the dish center, where the film is thinnest, an almost continuous domain is seen. However, as the liquid height increases upon approaching the wall, the giant domain is replaced by finite aggregates whose size decreases until complete disappearance. In subsequent experiments, cells were placed in distinct wells with different liquid heights. Here again, the thicker the liquid film, the smaller the aggregates. Fig. 2 The size of aggregates is controlled by oxygen availability. Because the substrate is impermeable and the liquid is at rest, the amount of oxygen available for cell consumption is governed by the film height h. Assuming a purely diffusive transport, the maximum flux of oxygen is j m = D c s / h, with D the diffusion coefficient and c s the concentration at saturation which applies at the air-water interface. Using an atmosphere with controlled oxygen level, we changed c s to a value c s ′ and observed that cell patterns were quite similar when the maximal flux j m or the equivalent height h eq ≡ h c s / c s ′ was the same, which suggests that the domain size depends primarily on the available flux of oxygen. To ascertain this point, aggregates having reached a steady state were submitted to a step change of atmosphere, a process equivalent to changing h but without inducing any disturbance on the cells or liquid above. The effect on aggregates is immediate: domains expand in enriched atmosphere and shrink in deprived atmosphere but recover their initial size upon going back to normal atmosphere. Taken together, those observations demonstrate that oxygen availability, as quantified by h eq, is the key factor controlling the aggregate size. To characterize our system, we obtain from direct measurements the medium saturation concentration c s = 250 ± 20 μM and the cell consumption rate q = 4.2 ± 0.8 10 −17 mol s −1. The average cell density ρ ¯ was found to depend on h eq : the thicker the film, the lower the number of cells. It is known that cell division is strongly suppressed in anoxic condition 26, 27. Assuming that it stops entirely below a threshold c div, the density under a film of thickness h is ρ ¯ exp = ξ div D c s q h, ξ div ≡ 1 − c div c s, 1 where the literature and our own measurements suggests ξ div to be a few percent below unity. Taking ξ div = 0.95 and using D = 2 10 −5 cm 2 s −1 28, Eq. yields ρ ¯ = 1.13 / h, with ρ ¯ in 10 6 cm −2 and h in mm, which is compatible with experimental data. The main observable characterizing the microphase separation is the typical aggregate size a, which depends on the equivalent height. For h eq below 0.5 mm, the covering is continuous, corresponding to a formally infinite size. When h eq ≃ 1 mm, the largest aggregates that can be defined unambiguously are 150 μm in radius. For thicker films with h eq = 2–3 mm, the aggregates are smaller, with radius around 50 μm. We now turn to the understanding of these experimental facts. A minimalistic model We present a parsimonious approach which captures the main trends of experiments by focusing exclusively on the oxygen distribution. The model considers a fixed number of cells—there is no cell division—and involves only two basic assumptions: cells spontaneously gather into aggregates with cell density ρ a, aggregates grow in size until the minimal oxygen concentration above them reaches a critical value c ^. The former assumption is justified by cell–cell adhesion, a short-range attraction that promotes aggregation, whereas the latter acts a long-range repulsion, because oxygen depletion is stronger in larger aggregates. From this competition, a preferred domain size results. The microscopic mechanisms underlying such behavior need not be specified at this point. Our model defines a pure diffusion problem, which in a simplified geometry of disk-like aggregates, can be solved analytically. The predicted aggregate radius a is such that the minimal concentration, attained at the aggregate center, reaches the critical value c ^. Given an average cell density ρ ¯, an aggregate surface fraction ϕ and a height h, this condition yields a h ψ ϕ, h a ϕ = ξ j m / q − ρ ¯ ρ a − ρ ¯, ξ ≡ 1 − c ^ c s, 2 with ψ a known function. As visible in Fig. 3 d, the existence of aggregates is limited to a range of film thickness with h min = ξ D c s q ρ a, h max = ξ D c s q ρ ¯. 3 At both ends of this interval, the system is homogeneous. For h = h min, the film is so thin that even with an infinite aggregate, the concentration c ^ is nowhere attained. For h = h max, even an aggregate of vanishing size makes the minimum concentration drop below c ^. Near h max where the aggregate size a is small, the solution of Eq. can be expanded as a = α, with − α the slope and α − 1 ≡ ψ ρ a / ρ ¯ − 1. Such a linear approximation is actually excellent in a wide range of height and the intersection with the lower boundary h = h min defines a characteristic aggregate size a ≃ h min / ψ, where ψ remains of order unity. Fig. 3 A simple model captures the domain size. For a given mean cell density, the predicted aggregate size is strongly dependent on the film height, especially for the densest systems. As detailed in the Section E of Supplementary Information, we fix ρ a = 2 10 6 cm −2 and c ^ / c s = 0.01. The only free parameter is the aggregate surface fraction ϕ. We consider both its maximum ϕ max = ρ ¯ / ρ a, reached when the background is empty of cells, and a much lower value 0.16 ϕ max. In spite of this sixfold variation, the choice of ϕ has only a weak influence on the results. Given this parameter set, the characteristic size a ≃ h min is at least half a millimeter, several times above the experimental sizes which remain below 200 μm. The reason is that ρ ¯ and h were so far treated as independent, whereas they are not in experiments. We therefore account for the dependence of mean cell density with film height. Combining Eq. for ρ ¯ exp and Eq. gives a ψ ϕ, h a ϕ = Δ ξ ξ h min − 1 h − 1, 4 where Δ ξ = ξ − ξ div. A numerical solution is shown in Fig. 3 e with black lines. In particular, Eq. indicates that for large h / h min, the size is a ≃ h min Δ ξ / ξ. The thickness dependence of cell density has thus two important implications. First, the typical aggregate size is not any more h min, which was millimetric, but a much lower value since Δ ξ = 0.04. For instance, when h = 1 mm, a size in the range 60–100 μm is predicted, which now overlaps with the experimental observations. Second, the aggregates can exist at water heights of several millimeters. Both consequences originate from the same fact: the mean density spontaneously reached by the system corresponds to a liquid height slightly below the value h max where aggregates would disappear. Let us briefly consider the model predictions for a step change in atmosphere when the cell density remains constant, since cells have no time to divide. When suddenly submitted to an oxygen-deprived atmosphere, aggregates should disappear. A clear reduction is observed, though not a complete disappearance that we suspect is prevented by an increasingly slow dynamics. When submitted to an enriched atmosphere, aggregates are predicted to become larger, a trend that is unmistakably observed even if the final sizes are again difficult to ascertain. Thus, in spite of drastic approximations, our elementary model recapitulates the main features of aggregate behavior and supports the notion that oxygen regulation governs domain formation. Cell-based simulations We now propose a microscopic description of the domain formation and illustrate how the picture of the analytic model can originate in the individual behavior of the cells. In our two-dimensional lattice model, a site can accommodate several cells, each of which obey three rules. First, cell-cell adhesion favors contact with their neighbors. Second, cells consume oxygen. Third, they exhibit aerotaxis toward oxygen-rich regions, but only in near anoxic condition when c / c s < c aer = 0.1, as demonstrated recently 29. The number of cells is constant because division is not considered. In our simulations, the oxygen concentration field, assumed steady, is evaluated with a Green function and the cells move according to a Monte Carlo algorithm with local moves only. A realization typically involves 10 4 cells and 10 6 –10 7 MC steps. The model definition, numerical method and parameters are detailed in “Methods”. Fig. 4 Cell-based simulations provide a microscopic view of microphase separation. The competition between adhesion and aerotaxis is sufficient to drive the formation of finite-size aggregates. In the absence of aerotaxis, cells form aggregates, which further grow by fusion events. Such a coarsening process would lead, albeit slowly, to a divergence of domain size. In the presence of aerotaxis, the aggregate size converges to a finite value, indicating a stationary state. The microscopic mechanism can be inferred from Fig. 4 b. Cell consumption induces oxygen depletion near aggregates, generating gradients that below c aer trigger aerotactic escape and limit further domain growth. Consistent with this picture, the domain size is controlled by film thickness h and mean cell density ρ ¯, as visible in Fig. 4 d. A comparison with Fig. 3 d reveals that qualitatively the trends in the model and simulations are identical. Aggregates appear only below a height h max and upon decreasing h from this point, their size increases linearly, with a slope controlled by the density ρ ¯. The simulations thus provide a microscopic basis for the behavior postulated in the minimalistic model. For a quantitative comparison between simulations and experiments, we fix the cell size to 10 μm and take all other parameters from their known value, except the cell consumption q, which is reduced by a factor 1.2. Accounting for the height dependence of mean cell density, the aggregate size found in simulations is shown in Fig. 4 d with the black curve. As the film height varies from 1 to 2.5 mm, the aggregate radius decreases from 120 to 70 μm, a trend that is also seen in experimental data. Besides, as in experiments, the simulated aggregates never reach a static configuration but continually deform, move and rearrange. Such a feature is typically absent from inert systems and might be specific to microphase separation of living cells. All together, our cell-based simulations can capture the key features of aggregate behavior and confirm that oxygen-controlled domain formation can result solely from the interplay between adhesion, consumption and aerotaxis. Discussion Quasi two-dimensional assemblies of Dd cells under liquid films can self-organize into domains of finite size because the combined effect of oxygen depletion and aerotaxis leads to an effective long-range repulsion that counteracts spontaneous aggregation. The mechanism is similar to the microphase separation of inert systems. There is, however, an interesting difference. Unlike purely two-dimensional systems 19, 30, 31, the repulsion is mediated by the liquid film, whose equivalent thickness h eq determines the range of effective interaction. Because h eq is easily varied experimentally, it offers some control on the domain size, which can be changed dynamically. This is in stark contrast with block copolymers where the long-range repulsion is primarily governed by chain properties and is thus fixed once and for all 13. Since domain formation in living cells has been observed in the past, it is worth pointing out how the involved phenomena, though superficially resembling, are actually different from the microphase separation reported here. The bacterial chemotactic patterns of ref. 32 exhibit finite-size spots but in contrast with our aggregates, they are irreversibly “frozen in” and made of immobile bacteria. In the microcolonies of Neisseria gonorrhoeae 33, 34, where coarsening would eventually lead to a giant monodomain, the finite size is a consequence of kinetic slowdown and not the result of competing interactions. The stripe patterns of bacteria with density-dependent motility 35 involves a continuously expanding population, not a fixed number of cells. Finally, the classical aggregation of Dd, formalized in the chemotactic collapse of the Keller-Segel model 36, results in a single millimetric immobile mound 37, clearly distinct from our smaller and dynamic aggregates. On the theoretical side, we note that Turing patterns 38, 39 often imply the constant creation and destruction of species. In contrast, microphase separation involves only the rearrangement of cells whose number is locally conserved. The microphase separation of living cells opens questions and perspectives. First, we have focused on the domain size in steady state but many aspects call for in-depth exploration: the kinetics of domain formation and the interplay with cell division, the tridimensional structure of aggregates and their random motion, mode of migration and chemotactic ability 40, 41. Second, an understanding of the biological mechanism underlying cell behaviors is needed. Third, we anticipate that the microphase separation demonstrated with Dd cells has a wider relevance because adhesion and aerotaxis are both widespread throughout the living world, from bacteria to higher eukaryotic cells 42, 43. We conclude on the broader significance of our findings in the context of biological patterning and morphogenesis. Embryonic development was long attributed to an inductive process governed by exogenous signals such as maternal chemical gradients or morphogens 44. In contrast, a recent line of work with embryoid models emphasizes the evidence for endogenous self-organization 45. The two mechanisms may actually act concurrently, a combination termed guided self-organization. The oxygen-controlled microphase separation found here offers a striking instance of such a hybrid process. No pattern is imposed from outside but the availability of oxygen, that may be controlled externally, dictates whether cells aggregate or not and which domain size is ultimately selected. Interestingly, a related approach of “directed assembly” has been exploited for block copolymers 46. Guided self-organization is a thus generic mechanism relevant both in technological applications and in the natural realm. Finally, multicellular aerobic life is inevitably constrained by the fact that diffusion is slow over large distances 47, 48. While the genesis of multicellularity remains debated 49, one may wonder whether microphase separation is involved and possibly reassess the role of oxygen in pattern formation and life evolution. We expect physical concepts to be instrumental in this endeavor. Methods Experiments Cell preparation and live cell imaging AX2 axenic cells of Dictyostelium discoideum were grown in HL5 medium with glucose at 22 °C in tubes with shaking conditions. Exponentially growing cells were harvested, counted and deposited in 6-well plates, with a initial surface cell density ρ 0 between 5 × 10 3 and 2 × 10 5 cells/cm 2. Cells were submerged below liquid growth medium with height ranging from h = 0.5 to 3 mm. The temperature was kept constant at 22 °C. We observed the growth and aggregation of cells under this free liquid film for days. We also performed experiments where the liquid film is topped with a thin layer of oil. Because the product of solubility and diffusion coefficient of oxygen in oil is high, the presence of oil does not appreciably reduce the availability of oxygen and the final mean aggregate size is close to that observed without oil. The growth and aggregation of Dd cells were observed in transmission with three types of microscope: a TE2000-E inverted microscope controlled with Micromanager and equipped with a motorized stage, a 4X Plan Fluor objective lens and a Zyla camera using brightfield for most of the timelapse experiments lasting up to several days, a binocular MZ16 controlled with LAS X software and equipped with a TL3000 Ergo transmitted light base operated in the one-sided darkfield illumination mode and a Leica LC/DMC camera for large field experiments and finally a confocal microscope controlled with the LAS software and equipped with a 10X objective lens for larger magnification experiments and with a Tile Scan to create large field reconstituted mosaic images. Atmosphere with controlled oxygen level In several experiments, we varied the oxygen concentration in the atmosphere surrounding the liquid film. Plates were placed in a home-made environmental chamber fitting our microscope stage with a pair of top and bottom glass windows. A mixture with pure N 2 and air was prepared in a gas mixer and injected continuously in the chambers at about 300 mL/min, so that the oxygen level in the atmosphere can be maintained at a prescribed value. Medium height profile The medium height h in dish center was estimated as a function of time by dividing the corrected volume by the dish area, typically 9.6 cm 2 in 6-well plates. The corrected volume is the initial culture medium volume from which are subtracted the evaporated volume V evap and the meniscus volume V menis. The evaporated volume V evap was deduced by measuring the remaining sample volume in a precise serological pipet at the end of each experiment. It was extrapolated to any time assuming a constant evaporation rate. From the height profile in the small slope approximation h = h + δ h exp, the meniscus volume was computed as V menis = P δ h. Here L c = γ / ρ g is the capillary length 50, P is the dish perimeter, δ h = L c 2 is the meniscus height at the dish wall relative to the medium height h in the center and θ is the contact angle. The same small slope approximation was used to plot the meniscus profile of Fig. 2 a. The surface tension, measured with a Langmuir balance, is γ = 55 mN/m. The contact angle value θ = 48 ∘ was obtained for a 3-day sample and used for the remainder of the study. Its value was periodically verified by taking side view images of the meniscus. Image analysis Aggregates. A home-made algorithm in Python was used to detect the domains. A typical image is shown in Fig. 1 e of the main text, where the boundary of identified aggregates is drawn in red. We note that some clumps of cells, with small or moderate size and characterized by intermediate gray level, may or may not be identified as aggregates. The domains with large size, which are most often very dark, are detected unambiguously, i.e., they are not sensitive to the precise parameters used in the algorithm. They thus define a robust population of domains, which is the focus of our study. Once aggregates are detected, we compute their area A, their equivalent radius a ′ = A / π and identify the typical radius a from the maximum in the distribution P. We choose the maximum and not the mean of the distribution, because the former is independent of values found for small aggregates whereas the latter is not. For the same reason, we use the width at half maximum to characterize the dispersion around the most probable value. Finally, we compute for each aggregate the distance d ′ to the nearest neighbor. From the maximum in the distribution P, we obtain a typical inter-aggregate distance d, and from the width at half maximum, the characteristic dispersion. Cell density Average cell density. A the end of each experiment, cells were detached by thorough pipetting, the cell suspension in liquid medium was immediately collected with a serological pipet and part of it was used in a hemocytometer to obtain the average cell density ρ ¯. The counting was repeated twice with two different cell suspension sample volumes to estimate the counting error and the corresponding standard deviation. Background cell density. The background is defined as the area outside identified aggregates. The cell density ρ b in the background can be determined by automatic detection of individual cells on images using the Find-Maxima plugin in ImageJ. Simulations of a cell-based model Model definition and parameters We introduce a minimal model with two basic ingredients. The first is adhesion between cells that are in contact, which favors the formation of aggregates. The second is aerotaxis, which drives motion along the gradient of oxygen and opposes the growth of large domains. The model is lattice-based and represents each cell individually. A cell occupies a single site of a two-dimensional square lattice. To account in an effective manner for the three-dimensional structure of the aggregates, which may have several layers, a site can accommodate several cells. The number η m of cells at site m is limited to a maximum value η max, which reflects the limited height of aggregates. We define the neighbors of a site as the eight sites surrounding it. When located on the same site or on neighboring sites, two cells are in contact and each contact contributes an energy − ε. The adhesion energy of a cell at site m is therefore E m adh = − ε η m − 1 + ∑ m ′ η m ′, 5 where the sum runs over all neighboring sites m ′. Each cell l consumes oxygen with an individual rate Q l fixed by the local concentration c, Q l = q max tanh c c csm ≡ q max q l. 6 where q max is the maximal consumption, q l a rescaled consumption and c csm a characteristic concentration. The cell consumption is almost constant above c csm and approximately linear in c below c csm. The liquid film is not represented explicitly. Instead, the oxygen concentration field is evaluated from the cell positions by assuming it has reached a steady state. The method to do so relies on a Green function and is detailed below. Each cell is endowed with aerotactic behavior, which sets in below a characteristic concentration c aer. We assume logarithmic sensing 51 and a drift velocity v aer ~ ∇. To a move from site m to a neighboring site m ′, we associate an energy Δ E m → m ′ aer = − χ H m → m ′ c m, 7 where χ quantifies the strength of aerotaxis, c m is the oxygen concentration at site m, H is a smoothed Heaviside function and m → m ′ is the concentration gradient at site m in the direction of site m ′. The motion of cells is simulated using a basic Monte Carlo algorithm. MC moves are only local, i.e., the cell move only to one of the neighboring sites. The total energy change of a move from site m to site m ′ is Δ E m → m ′ = Δ E m → m ′ adh + Δ E m → m ′ aer + Δ E m → m ′ occ, 8 where Δ E m → m ′ adh is the variation in adhesion energy. Δ E m → m ′ occ is infinite if the new site m ′ is already maximally occupied and zero otherwise. A proposed move is accepted according to the Metropolis criterion, that is with probability p acc = min 1, exp − Δ E k B T, 9 with T the temperature and k B the Boltzmann constant. During a Monte Carlo step, each cell is subject to one proposed move. As regards the units and parameters, the lattice spacing or cell size b ¯ is taken as unit length and we fix b ¯ = 10 μ m. Accordingly, if each site is occupied on average by one cell, the dimensionless mean cell density is ρ ¯ = 1, which corresponds to a real density ρ ¯ = b ¯ − 2 = 1 0 6 cells/cm 2. The energy unit is k B T and concentrations are made dimensionless with respect to the saturation value c s. The parameters of the model are listed in Table 1, together with a default value which is justified below. Simulation units are understood when no unit is specified. Table 1 Units and parameters of the model Method Green function. We consider a liquid film of height h whose top surface is in contact with air. Assume a absorbing flux j is imposed at the bottom surface. What is the resulting oxygen concentration field in steady state? Here we give a partial response using a Green function. It is convenient to work with the shifted concentration f = 1 − c c s. 10 Choosing units here so that h, D and c s are all unity, the equation and boundary conditions are: Δ f = 0 for 0 < z < 1, f = 0 for z = 1 and ∂ z f = j for z = 0, with Δ the Laplacian and r = the position in the plane. Taking Fourier transforms with respect to x and y variables leads to − k 2 + ∂ z z 2 f = 0, k ≡ k x 2 + k y 2, 11 whose solution is a combination of exponential exp. Exploiting the boundary conditions gives f = j sinh ) k cosh. 12 Considering only the surface and putting back dimensions, we get f = j D c s / h tanh h k. 13 Note that this solution is valid only if the concentration remains positive everywhere. Given a site r l and a consumption q l for each cell l, the local flux at a position r of the bottom substrate is j = ∑ l Q l b ¯ 2 δ ≡ q max b ¯ 2 J, 14 where δ is 1 when r belong to the site occupied by cell l and 0 otherwise, and the sum runs over all cells. The shifted concentration field is then f = J tanh h k × κ × h, 15 where h is the film thickness expressed in millimeter for convenience and κ a parameter defined as κ ≡ q max b ¯ 2 c s D × 1 0 − 3. 16 With c s = 250 μM, D = 2 × 10 −5 cm 2 s −1 and q max = 4.2 × 1 0 − 17 mol s −1, we have κ = 0.85, a value of order unity. In practice, Fast Fourier transforms are used to switch between real and Fourier space representation of functions and obtain from Eq. the shifted concentration at the bottom surface f. The gradient of concentration is also computed in Fourier space. Concentration field and cell consumption. The oxygen concentration field and individual cell consumptions are coupled variables. For any cell l, at any time, they should verify q l = f csm ), 17 where the concentration c depends on the whole set of cell consumptions. To ensure that this constraint holds, we used an iteration algorithm, which converges toward a fixed point solution of Eq.. We observe numerically that concentrations can be small, down to a few percent, but always remain positive as required. In principle, the concentration field and cell consumptions should be updated each time a cell changes position. In practice however, this is exceedingly costly in computational resources as the concentration update is the limiting step in the simulation. Accordingly, we resort to a simple approximation where the field remains constant during one MC step and is updated after each MC step. Given that the MC moves considered are only local, that the oxygen concentration depends on many cells, and that aggregates evolve on time scale much longer than a single MC step, this approximation is well justified. As a side remark, we note that the transient decoupling between particles and field is similar to the methods used for simulations of block copolymers 52. Aggregate size. The size of aggregates is the main quantity of interest. In defining aggregates, only sites with occupation number η ⩾ 3 are considered. Using a connected component analysis, aggregates are identified and sorted in order of decreasing area A, defined as the number of sites composing the aggregate. We build a representative set by including aggregates, with larger ones coming first, until the sum of their areas exceeds 90% of the total number of aggregate sites. Such a definition allows to discard the small but potentially numerous aggregates and to focus on the larger aggregates that are of interest in this work. This definition is also suitable if there is a single or only a few aggregates. Finally, we compute the mean area ⟨ A ⟩ of the aggregates in the representative set and use the radius a = ⟨ A ⟩ / π as a simple measure for the typical aggregate size. Simulations Choice of parameters. Here we briefly explain how the parameters were chosen. First, the typical dimension of Dictyostelium discoideum cells is fixed to b ¯ = 10 μ m, a convenient value that is approximately consistent with the range of cell size observed. Since the thickest aggregates reach 40 μm, as shown in Section B of Supplementary Information, the maximum occupation number is set to η max = 4. As regards the adhesion energy ε, and for simulations when only adhesion is present, we note the following. For η max ε ≪ 1, aggregates are negligible in size. For η max ε ≫ 1, aggregation is irreversible: aggregates quickly form but remain frozen in size and do not coalesce further because cells are irreversibly stuck. The case η max ε ≃ 1 is the interesting regime: large aggregates appear and coexist with a “gas” of isolated cells, with constant exchange between them. Small ε values favor a dense gas and aggregates with branched, irregular shapes while larger values yield more compact shapes but a gas of vanishing density. We choose ε = 0.15, in k B T units, as a compromise that features both rather rounded aggregates and a significant gas around them. The typical concentration below which the individual consumption of cells becomes concentration-dependent is c csm = 0.02, which is consistent with the range given by our measurements. Aerotactic behavior sets in below c aer = 0.1 as found in ref. 29. The aerotactic strength is chosen so that when oxygen levels are everywhere below c aer, no sizeable aggregate form. A value χ = 2 is sufficient to enforce this requirement. Finally, the individual cell consumption was reduced by a factor 1.2, meaning that κ = 0.85/1.2 as indicated in Table 1. This choice allows for a quantitative comparison between simulations and experiments. Note that a reduction in consumption may be physically understood because our two-dimensional model can not accurately describe the effects within three-dimensional aggregates, such as limited oxygen availability for cells most underneath. As a side remark, we note that our model does not account for cell division. Even though our parameters may lead to oxygen concentrations above c div, the number of cells remains constant. Including cell division is far from straightforward because the very low concentrations involved require the constant adjustment of individual cell consumption and drastically increase the computation time. This is why we have have chosen to focus on the interplay between adhesion, consumption and aerotaxis, which allows for an efficient exploration of parameter space and is sufficient to understand the mechanism underlying aggregates. Shape of aggregates. A series of aggregate configurations are shown in Fig. 5. As regards the shape aggregate, several comments are in order. First, simulated aggregates are not always quasi-circular but can transiently adopt elongated shapes that are rarely seen in experiments. Second, the “gas” of cells outside the domains is rather homogeneous. This is somewhat different from experiments where the largest aggregates are surrounded by domains that are smaller and of lower density. These two differences indicate that our simulations provide only an idealized description of the phenomenon. Third, an aggregate can occasionally be seen with a hole, at least transiently. When too large with respect to its equilibrium size, a domain may nucleate a hole in its center and subsequently break into smaller pieces. While the hole is presumably an artifact of our two-dimensional description, it points to the aggregate interior as the location where the aerotactic effects are the strongest. Fig. 5 Aggregates in the cell-based simulations for various film height h. Steady state. For each film height, two initial conditions were considered: cells are placed at random, or cells are arranged on a single giant aggregate of circular shape within which η = η max. Though the relaxation may require a significant time—several millions of MC steps for the largest aggregates—, the typical aggregate size eventually reaches a plateau independent of the initial conditions, which indicates that a steady state has been attained. Nevertheless, it is clear from Fig. 5 that the aggregates never settle in a static configuration. Domains continually deform and rearrange, without any trend to further coarsening. This observation shows that domain growth is not kinetically limited and that a genuine steady state with a preferred domain size has been reached. Such a dynamic behavior of domains is also seen in experiments. Reporting summary Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Supplementary information Supplementary information Description for Additional Supplementary Files Supplementary Movie 1 Supplementary Movie 2 Supplementary Movie 3 Supplementary Movie 4 Supplementary Movie 5 Supplementary Movie 6 Reporting Summary Acknowledgements This research was funded by grants to J.-P.R., from CNRS, from ANR, and from International Human Frontier Science Program Organization. Source data Source Data Author contributions A.C. and J.d’A. contributed equally to this work. F.D. and J.-P.R. contributed equally to this work. J.-P.R. supervised the project. A.C., J.d’A., C.A., F.D., and J.-P.R. designed the research. A.C., J.d’A., J.H., N.G., C.A., and J.-P.R. performed the experiments. F.D., A.C., and O.C-E performed the mathematical modeling and numerical simulations. A.C., J.d’A., C.R., and J.-P.R. analyzed the data. A.C., J.d’A., F.D., and J.-P.R. wrote the manuscript. All authors helped to edit the manuscript. Peer review Peer review information Nature Communications thanks anonymous reviewer for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request. Source data are provided with this paper. Code availability The codes that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Footnotes Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. These authors contributed equally: F. Detcheverry, J.-P. Rieu. Contributor Information F. Detcheverry, Email: rf.1noyl-vinu@yrrevehcted.siocnarf. J.-P. Rieu, Email: rf.1noyl-vinu@ueir.luap-naej. Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41467-023-36395-2. Article information Nat Commun. 2023; 14: 796. Published online 2023 Feb 13. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-36395-2 PMCID: PMC9925768 PMID: 36781863 A. Carrère, J. d’Alessandro, O. Cochet-Escartin, J. Hesnard, N. Ghazi, C. Rivière, C. Anjard, F. Detcheverry, # and J.-P. Rieu # A. Carrère University of Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France Find articles by A. Carrère J. d’Alessandro University of Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France Find articles by J. d’Alessandro O. Cochet-Escartin University of Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France Find articles by O. Cochet-Escartin J. Hesnard University of Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France Find articles by J. Hesnard N. Ghazi University of Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France Find articles by N. Ghazi C. Rivière University of Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France Find articles by C. Rivière C. Anjard University of Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France Find articles by C. Anjard F. Detcheverry University of Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France Find articles by F. Detcheverry J.-P. Rieu University of Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France Find articles by J.-P. Rieu University of Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France F. Detcheverry, Email: rf.1noyl-vinu@yrrevehcted.siocnarf. Contributor Information. Corresponding author. # Contributed equally. Received 2022 Jun 2; Accepted 2023 Jan 30. Copyright © The Author 2023 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit. Articles from Nature Communications are provided here courtesy of Nature Publishing Group 