 Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae align in a head to tail manner during the process of streaming during fruiting body formation. The chemoattractant cAMP is the chemoattractant regulating cell migration during this process and is released from the rear of cells. The process by which this cAMP release occurs has eluded investigators for many decades, but new findings suggest that this release can occur through expulsion during contractile vacuole ejection. The CV is an organelle that performs several functions inside the cell including the regulation of osmolarity, and discharges its content via exocytosis. The CV localizes to the rear of the cell and appears to be part of the polarity network, with the localization under the influence of the plasma membrane lipids, including the phosphoinositides, among those is PIP2, the most abundant PI on the PM. Research on D. discoideum and neutrophils have shown that PIP2 is enriched at the rear of migrating cells. In several systems, it has been shown that the essential regulator of exocytosis is through the exocyst complex, mediated in part by PIP2-binding. This review features the role of the CV complex in D. discoideum signaling with a focus on the role of PIP2 in regulating CV exocytosis and localization. Many of the regulators of these processes are conserved during evolution, so the mechanisms controlling exocytosis and membrane trafficking in D. discoideum and mammalian cells will be discussed, highlighting their important functions in membrane trafficking and signaling in health and disease. Keywords: contractile vacuole, polarity, phosphoinositide -bisphosphate, signal relay, chemotaxis Introduction Chemotaxis is a form of migration where cells migrate directionally, typically towards a gradient of chemicals known as chemoattractants. During this process, cells often have asymmetric responses and develop a polarized morphology, where they have a distinct front and rear. In the model organism Dictyostelium discoideum, a soil-living amoeba, cells move towards one another in a head-to-tail fashion and align in streams. The cyclic adenosine monophosphate is the chemoattractant that leads to aggregation of the amoebas into multicellular structures during starvation conditions. Although many researchers have studied intracellular signaling in D. discoideum, the mechanism by which cAMP release occurs, setting up a gradient at the rear of individual cells, has remained elusive. How does signal relay produce an effective, localized chemotactic response from the rear of a cell? The enzyme that synthesizes cAMP, adenylyl cyclase, has been reported to be in a gradient along the periphery of the cell, with more accumulated in the rear. ACA also appears to be enriched in intracellular vesicles within the cell and multivesicular bodies left behind migrating cells. In this same study, Kriebel et al. suggested that cAMP is released from the rear of migrating cells via these extracellular vesicles. The main regulator of ACA, known as the Cytosolic Regulator of Adenylyl Cyclase, contains a pleckstrin homology domain which regulates the translocation to the leading edge of the cell during each transient activation of ACA. This PH domain of CRAC binds to PIP2 and PIP3, with these two PIs being synthesized at the very front of the cell. This PH domain is required for ACA function, suggesting that the membrane localization of CRAC brings the regulator in close proximity to ACA for activation. It is unclear how or if CRAC at the leading edge of the cell activates the ACA at the trailing edge. If it somehow leads to ACA activity at the rear, the cAMP will still need to be somehow released from the cell. Interestingly, another potential regulator of cAMP signaling from the rear of the cell has emerged. Fadil et al. discovered that the CV is redistributed to the rear of migrating cells and regulates cell streaming and cAMP secretion. In this mechanism, CRAC recruitment and ACA activity at the leading edge can synthesize cAMP, which then would diffuse through the cytosol and be pumped into the CV network. The mechanism controlling the CV redistribution is still under investigation, however evidence is emerging that higher levels of PIP2 and potentially other charged lipids may play a role in the CV localization. The CV appears to be part of the overall polarity network, localizing to areas of actomyosin contraction. In addition to being targeted to particular regions of the periphery of the cell, once there, the CV regulates the discharge of water by a kiss-and-run exocytic event. Exocytosis is an essential membrane trafficking process that can discharge soluble and insoluble intracellular protein contents including neurotransmitters, hormones, and cytokines, as well as many other small molecules and metabolites into the extracellular space. As described here, PIP2, plays a role in many of the PM-related cellular activities, including regulated vesicle exocytosis. PIP2 has been found to be critical for exocytosis in several mammalian cell types and is involved in neuronal function and disrupted in several human diseases. This review describes the importance of the polarity network regulating CV localization and highlights the important role PIP2 plays in mediating vesicle fusion and CV-PM interactions. Contractile Vacuoles and Exocytosis in Dictyostelium discoideum Freshwater protists like the amoeba, Heliozoans, and many Ciliates regulate water’s penetration by a complex organelle responsible for their osmoregulation. This organelle is known as the contractile vacuole. In D. discoideum, the CV organelle is composed of an extensive network of tubules and bladders linked to the PM. This is critical when the cell encounters hypotonic environments where maintaining osmoregulation is critical. The excess water accumulates in the tubules, filling the vacuoles, which then fuse with the PM to expel the water into the extracellular medium. After ejection of water through the vacuole, the tubules elongate again and collect water for resuming the cycle. Late in the cycle, the CV ejects its content in a focal kiss-and-run exocytic event where the CV and PM transiently interconnect. There are several critical proteins that control CV function, including calmodulin. In fact, antibodies against calmodulin were one of the first markers used to identify the CV in fixed cells. LvsA, a protein that binds to calmodulin, has been shown to localize to the CV and is required for osmoregulation. Mutant cells missing the LvsA protein are osmo-sensitive and impaired in the vacuole discharge. Another protein, Disgorgin, which is a GAP for Rab8a is also required for CV discharge mediated by fusion with the PM. Disgorgin and LvsA, together with GTP hydrolysis by Rab8a, are also essential for the CV detachment from the PM after discharging its contents while Rab2 and RabS have also been shown to be localize to the CV and be important for osmoregulation. The distribution of adaptor proteins AP 1 or AP 180 each caused disruption in osmoregulation. Proteins that govern this specialized organelle’s activities in D. discoideum have been conserved throughout evolution and many of their orthologs have been shown to regulate mammalian membrane trafficking. The connections between the CV and the PM are regulated by the exocyst complex, and contain Rab GTPases localized to the CV, which assist in regulating fusion with the PM. Exocytosis and vesicular transport are known to be regulated by PIs. In particular, PIP2 is involved in the priming of the vesicle to the targeted membrane and fusion step. The exocyst complex is an octameric complex of the subunits Sec3, Sec5, Sec6, Sec8, Sec10, Sec15, Exo70, and Exo84 and contains other components, including the SNARE attachment protein receptors)- associated protein SecA that have also been shown to be required for the CV discharge function. Among different Rab GTPase proteins, RabD, Rab4, Rab8a, and Rab11 are identified as regulators for discharge function. The Role of Rear Contractile Vacuole in cAMP Secretion During the process of polarization, the CV redistributes to the rear of D. discoideum cells and is critical for the streaming phenomena mediated by the chemoattractant cAMP. The cAMP binds to the serpentine cAMP receptors, triggering heterotrimeric G signaling with the cell. Downstream responses include the activation of PI3 Kinase, which leads to the recruitment of the CRAC protein, triggering the synthesis of cAMP from ATP by ACA. In this new model, cAMP diffuses within the cytosol and is pumped into the CV network by the AbcC8 transporter. The cell then discharges cAMP, likely along with Ca +2 from the cell’s rear through the CV vacuole tethered to PM. This provides the localized cAMP release from the back of the cells and supports the head to tail streaming characterized during early aggregation. The Dajumin-GFP labeled the CV vacuoles and tubules and was localized to the rear of migrating cells. The cAMP transporter AbcC8 has recently been identified as the main cAMP transporter, and when fluorescently tagged, its localization mirrored that of Dajumin, localizing throughout the CV and tubules. Thus, the presence of the AbcC8 transporter within the CV network provides a mechanism for cAMP to enter the CV tubules, with cAMP being released from the rear of the cell during the ejection phase of the CV cycle. FIGURE 1 The CV is localized at the rear of migrating cells. Phase contrast image of the CV at the rear of the polarized migrating cell. The same cell as in 1C expressing Dajumin-GFP moving toward a micropipette filled with chemoattractant cAMP. Arrow... To confirm the importance of a functional CV in cell streaming, two different mutant cell lines were tested that have major defects in assembling a functional CV, Huntingtin null and LvsA null cells. The exact function of both proteins is not known, with evidence suggesting they are involved in membrane trafficking. In mammals, the huntingtin protein is critical for neuronal function, but like its ortholog, the role of this protein is not clear. While still having the ability to chemotax, both D. discoideum cell lines displayed decreased stability of head-to-tail cell contacts and lacked the normal streaming behavior seen in wild-type cells. Additionally, the periodic cAMP waves seen during early aggregation were disrupted, as was visualized using the cytosolic cAMP indicator, Flamindo2. Thus, the ability of the cells to perform signal relay was dramatically inhibited in cells with defective CV function. Involvement of PIP2 in Polarity Network and Contractile Vacuole Localization PIP2 has been suggested to be elevated at the cell’s trailing edge in D. discoideum and in neutrophils. PIs are regulated by different phosphatases and kinases localized at distinct areas in the cell. Phosphoinositide 3-kinases are the enzymes that convert PIP and PIP2 into PIP2 and PIP3, respectively. PI3Ks localize to the leading edge of migrating cells, while the phosphatase and tensin homolog, the phosphatase that utilizes PIP3 has a substrate, and synthesizes PIP2, localizes to the rear of migrating cells. PTEN activity and the sharp localization at the rear of the polarized cell is, in part, regulated by PIP2 binding motif at the N terminus of PTEN. Similar morphology has been shown in cells during cytokinesis and in polarized neutrophils. The net charge of PIP2 is -4, which enables this lipid to contribute to the localization and the activity of various proteins by interacting with their polybasic clusters. During the process of aggregation, it is possible that SNARE proteins or other proteins with polybasic motifs, link the CV to the plasma membrane, as discussed below, and contribute to the rearward distribution of the CV to the back of D. discoideum cells. Interestingly, this polarized localization can occur in drug treated cells lacking an actin cytoskeleton or functional microtubule network, suggesting that the direct interaction with the PM is responsible for CV localization. CVs were still able to accumulate towards the low side of the chemoattractant gradient, when cells were in the presence of drugs that disrupted the actin cytoskeleton, similar to the movements that can be seen with the reciprocal regulation of PI3K and PTEN. The CV and PIP2 are elevated in areas of the cell where there are not membrane protrusions, which suggests a key role for this lipid in regulating the CV organelle’s localization. The CV disassembles at metaphase, when PIP2 levels reach an intermediate level across the entire periphery of the cell, and then begin to reassemble in the furrow during telophase and the initiation of cytokinesis, as PIP2 levels elevate. The CVs regenerate during the final stages of cytokinesis, with primordial CVs often formed on the trailing edge of the two daughter cells. In budding yeast, the exocyst components, specifically Sec3 and Exo70 have also been shown to localize to the cleavage furrow throughout cytokinesis. Interestingly, in mammalian cells, the exocyst is also enriched at the cleavage furrow and is under the control of Rab11 and RalA. The amplification of PIP2 in the back of the cell during migration and in the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis likely contributes to the CV localization and could provide the proper targeting of proteins needed for regulating exocytosis. This may also assist in the targeted release of smaller vesicles, sometimes termed exosomes, that have also have been postulated to play a role in the release of cAMP at the rear of the cell. Therefore, in addition to helping position the CV within the cell, elevated levels of PIP2 appear to regulate CV fusion with the PM during vegetative growth and at the rear of migrating cells. Involvement of PIP2 in Contractile Vacuole Exocytosis PIP2, which is the most abundant negatively charged PI on the PM, has multiple roles within a cell, coordinating actin dynamics, contributing to cell polarity and appears to be critical in exocytosis. PIP2 interacts with various positively charged proteins in the exocyst complex, suggesting a major role for this PI in regulating the CV organelle’s exocytosis. This binding of exocyst subunits to the PM delivers the vesicles to the targeted PIP2 within the PM for the tethering step. It has been demonstrated that the exocyst subunits Sec3 and Exo70 bind to PIP2 at the PM. Furthermore, it is well-established that polarized exocytosis, which is a multistep vesicular trafficking process, transfers signals and proteins to specific PM sites, and is mediated by PIP2. SecA, a D. discoideum homolog of the yeast Sec1p and the mammalian Munc18 protein, localizes to the CV. Cells with a defect in SecA cannot regulate their osmotic pressure and have a defect in CV discharge. Sec1p and Munc18 proteins are essential for different exocytosis steps as they interact with exocytic SNARE proteins during vesicle docking and fusion, also mediated by PIP2. SecA is therefore necessary for CV fusion to the PM and water discharge. A recent study suggested that PIP2 regulates the trafficking of the CV to the fusion site and cells with a defect in Dd5P4, the enzyme which uses the 5-phosphates of PIP2 as substrate, displayed inefficient CV fusion. Exocytosis associated with CV function is regulated by SNARE proteins. There are four homologs of mammalian SNAREs present in D. discoideum : vesicle-associated membrane protein 7, and three t-SNAREs, syntaxin 7, syntaxin 8 and Vti1. It has been reported that VAMP7 and syntaxin 7 are present in the bladder of the CV. The other two SNARE proteins, syntaxin 8 and Vti1 have been seen in both the CV’s bladders and tubular networks. Some of the SNARE proteins have also been identified as interactors with PIP2. Clathrin assembly proteins, such as AP180 and AP1, are also related to CV activity. AP180 null cells show unusual large CVs and are osmo-sensitive. Moreover, AP180 has been reported to interact with another SNARE, Vamp7B. AP180 also binds to PIP2, through the NH2-terminal homology domain known as ANTH and assists in clathrin assembly on lipid monolayers. The ANTH domain is conserved among all members of the AP180 family. Thus, PIP2 has been shown to be a critical regulator of exocytic events in both D. discoideum and many eukaryotes, including mammals. The General Role of PIP2 in Eukaryotic Exocytosis In addition to exocytosis being a critical component of CV dynamics, it is also essential for vesicles to eject their contents in metazoans. Exocytosis is a membrane trafficking process that can discharge soluble and insoluble protein contents including neurotransmitters, hormones, and cytokines, as well as many other small molecules and metabolites to the extracellular space. In eukaryotes, this process also mediates the polarized delivery of vesicular trafficking proteins and lipids to specific PM domains. As has been mentioned, several studies show that PIP2 and its effectors play critical roles in all steps of exocytosis. To perform this function, secretory vesicles undergo three defined trafficking steps during exocytosis : the docking process for recruiting vesicles to the PM, the priming process for maturing the vesicles, the fusion process to fuse with the PM, and the release of vesicle contents. PIP2 is capable of engaging in a multitude of cellular functions that are temporally and spatially controlled by the localized distribution of PIP2 along the PM. PIP2 has been shown to be enriched in domains at the PM and at the vesicle exocytosis sites. Furthermore, the recruitment of enzymes that hydrolyze PIP2 at the docking sites results in inefficient docking of the vesicles to the PM. This initial priming step of exocytosis is controlled by different proteins and their effectors such as the Ca 2+ -dependent activator protein for secretion and Munc13. These proteins are also regulated by PI2, with the PH domain of CAPS binding to PIP2 for activation. SNAREs also interact with PIP2 for vesicle fusion. FIGURE 2 Involvement of PIP2 in the exocytosis steps. PIP2 is required for mediating tethering of vesicles to the PM. In the priming step, PIP2 modulates the vesicles priming by interacting with Munc13 and CAPS. PIP2 controls vesicles fusion... Involvement of PIP2 With the Exocyst Complex The exocyst complex has been involved in various cellular processes including exocytosis, cell growth, cytokinesis, cell migration, primary ciliogenesis and tumorigenesis. Furthermore, the exocyst protein complex has a crucial role in polarized membrane protein trafficking. The exocyst complex consists of eight subunits that mediate the vesicles’ tethering to the PM and is conserved among the eukaryotic kingdom. Exocyst subunits interact with each other in pairs: such as Sec3–Sec5, Sec6–Sec8, and Sec10–Sec15. The exocyst complex mediates localization and tethering of vesicles to targeted membranes and enables the assembly of SNARE complexes before the fusion step. Exo70 is localized near cell-cell contacts on the PM, meaning that Exo70 can mediate PM interaction in these cells independently of the remaining exocyst components. Indeed, the exocyst needs to interact with the target membrane to achieve tethering function after the delivery of the vesicles. This process appears to be mediated by direct binding of Sec3 and Exo70 subunits with PIP2 enriched at the inner leaflet of the PM. Exo70 exhibits a positively charged surface domain at its C-terminus in mammalian cells which mediates the binding to PIP2. Interestingly, the C-terminal sequence of Exo70 is the most evolutionarily conserved region of the protein, suggesting this PIP2 is critical for many organisms. The same study has also revealed that Exo70 can recruit the other exocyst components to the PM. Furthermore, studies on yeast have shown that Exo70 is an effecter of the GTPase Rho3, which plays regulatory roles in actin organization and exocytosis. The disruption of the Exo70–lipid interaction resulted in exocyst mis-localization and ablation of the enzyme secretion responsible for yeast cell growth. On the other hand, disruption of Exo70–Rho3 interaction did not show any noticeable defects. The binding affinity of Exo70 for PIP2 is higher than PIP2, PIP or PIP. The other component that mediates the delivery of the vesicles to the targeted membrane is Sec3. The association between the amino-terminal PH domain of Sec3 and PIP2 mediates Sec3’s localization to the PM. It has been reported that the PH domain of Sec3 also interacts with small GTPases such as Cdc42 and Rho1. Small GTPases and PIP2 can synergistically influence the exocyst complex’s position and function at the PM. When both Exo70 and Sec3 are impaired, it is no longer possible to anchor the exocyst complex to the targeted membrane. Thus, Exo70 and Sec3 bind to PIP2 and function in concert to mediate the association of the exocyst complex with the PM. PIP2 is the Binding Site for CAPS and Munc-13 CAPS and Munc-13 are major contributors to the priming step in exocytosis of synaptic vesicles and dense-core vesicles. These synaptic vesicles and dense core vesicles play an essential role in neuronal communication and brain development. It has been reported that Munc-13 is critical for synaptic vesicle exocytosis, while CAPS plays a central role in dense-core vesicles. Moreover, CAPS and Munc-13 have been shown to regulate SNARE assembly with the vesicles and are crucial for exocytosis. CAPS and Munc13 proteins have interconnected C-terminal SNARE protein–binding domains. Deleterious mutations in the PH domain of CAPS result in controlled exocytosis failure. Also, CAPS interacts with syntaxin-1 near its PIP2 binding site, indicating that PIP2 is an essential co-factor for activating CAPS via binding to its PH domain. On the other hand, Munc13 binds to PIP2 in a Ca 2+ -dependent manner through its C2B domain. Moreover, a study on neuroendocrine cells has shown that Munc-13 is cytoplasmic and translocates to PIP2-rich PM domains in response to Ca 2+ influx. In line with this, Munc13-1-GFP translocation to microdomains was blocked by overexpression of the high-affinity PIP2-binding PH domain of PLCδ1, demonstrating their affinity for the same PM site. Indeed, both CAPS and Munc13 can promote the recruitment of vesicles to PIP2-rich membranes in a Ca2+-dependent manner. PIP2 interacts With SNARE Complex SNARE proteins are the central components of the fusion step, the final process in exocytosis vesicle trafficking. All SNARE family members have a distinctive preserved homolog stretch of 60–70 amino acids, known as the SNARE motif. Among a large number of SNARE proteins, three complexes were carefully studied and identified. These complexes are Syntaxin-1, synaptosome-associated protein, and synaptobrevin2/vesicle-associated membrane protein 2. It has been reported that PIP2 activates syntaxin-1 promoting assembly with SNAP-25. Furthermore, syntaxin interactions with PIP2 play a positive role in vesicle fusion with the membrane by localizing the protein on the membrane or promoting SNAP-25 interactions. Fusion-competent vesicles in PC12 have been suggested to localize preferentially to PM sites that contain either PIP2 domains or PIP2 domains co-localized with syntaxin-1 clusters. Other studies demonstrated that a subset of docked vesicles are actually present in PIP2-enriched areas where exocytosis occurs under optimal Ca 2+ influx conditions. Syntaxin-1 interacts with PIs through a membrane-proximal sequence of basic residues which includes K 260 ARRKK 265. Importantly, syntaxin-1 clusters were eliminated by treatment of PC12 cells with the 5-phosphatase synaptojanin-1. Synaptotagmin1, another calcium sensor for exocytosis, is anchored to the membrane of secretory organelles which is mediated by PIP2 clusters in plasma domains. Moreover, the interaction between PIP2 and Synaptotagmin increases the excitation-secretion in response to Ca 2+. SNARE proteins therefore play a critical role in the fusion step and are regulated by local PIP2 levels as they modulate vesicle exocytosis. Discussion The contractile vacuole is part of the polarity circuit and is enriched at the rear of migrating cells, with this localization being critical for cAMP secretion. PIP2 is the most abundant PIs in the PM and has been shown to be elevated at the rear of the cell and in areas reciprocally regulated with PIP3 and membrane protrusions. PIP2 has multiple roles in the cell, and is intimately involved in membrane trafficking, endocytosis and exocytosis. The regulatory factors governing exocytosis are highly conserved across species and as highlighted in this review are relevant to many mammalian cell trafficking pathways. The rear CV enrichment and exocytosis described here may be related to this migracytosis mechanism recently described which has been implicated in cell-cell communication in mammalian cells. Migrasomes exist in many cell types such as normal rat kidney cells, macrophages, primary neurons, human breast cancer cells, and embryonic stem cells. Migracytosis is a cell migration-dependent mechanism for releasing cellular contents by migrasome organelles which localize at the rear of the cell and play a potential role in cell-cell communication. PIP2 pathway dysregulation and failure of proper exocytosis has been identified in many different diseases such as Lowe syndrome, neuronal disorders and various forms of cancer. Lowe oculocerebrorenal syndrome, a congenital disease characterized by low IQ, and defective kidney proximal tubule resorption, is caused by a defect in the OCRL gene. OCRL is an inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase that hydrolyzes the 5-phosphate of PIP2 into PI4P. Interestingly, a recent study in D. discoideum has shown that OCRL-like protein of D. discoideum, Dd5P4, is recruited to the CV membrane upon the kiss-and-run exocytic event. Therefore, it is possible that the exocytic function of ORCL contributes to the pathological process of Lowe syndrome. Chediak-Higashi syndrome is an autosomal human disorder characterized by immunodeficiency and the formation of giant lysosomes or lysosome-related organelles. In D. discoideum, the homolog to one of the Chediak-Higashi syndrome proteins is LvsA, which interestingly enough labels the CV bladder and remains associated throughout the discharge phase until fusion with the PM. In addition, it also seems plausible that the localized fusion that occurs with CV discharge is correlated with the small extracellular vesicles documented during D. discoideum streaming. Extracellular vesicles are critical for many aspects in tumor progression, so studying these processes is of utmost importance. Given that PIP2 levels are critical to so many processes in the cell, there are certain to many critical roles and potential therapeutic interventions that can be performed by regulating PIP2 levels. Understanding the basic function of PIP2 in CV ejection or neurotransmitter release may even help with diseases of the brain. PIP2 levels are decreased in the brain of Alzheimer’s patients, for instance, although the exact role in Alzheimer’s disease has yet to be elucidated. There are many steps in CV localization and function where PIP2 seems to be required, so understanding the basic functions to their targeting and function should enhance our understating of exocytosis-related diseases. Author Contributions SF wrote the majority of the manuscript with editorial assistance from CJ. SF designed and made the figures. Conflict of Interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Publisher’s Note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Article information Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021; 9: 765316. Published online 2022 Jul 19. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.765316 PMCID: PMC9344532 PMID: 35928786 Sana A. Fadil 1, 2 and Chris Janetopoulos 1, 3, 4, * Sana A. Fadil 1 Department of Biological Sciences, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States 2 Department of Natural product, Faculty of Pharmacy, King Abdulaziz University, Saudia Arabia Find articles by Sana A. Fadil Chris Janetopoulos 1 Department of Biological Sciences, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States 3 The Science Research Institute, Albright College, Reading, PA, United States 4 The Department of Cell Biology at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States Find articles by Chris Janetopoulos 1 Department of Biological Sciences, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States 2 Department of Natural product, Faculty of Pharmacy, King Abdulaziz University, Saudia Arabia 3 The Science Research Institute, Albright College, Reading, PA, United States 4 The Department of Cell Biology at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States Corresponding author. Edited by: Robin S. B. Williams, University of London, United Kingdom Reviewed by: Richard McCann, Mercer University School of Medicine, United States Hua Su, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China *Correspondence: Chris Janetopoulos, ude.thgirbla@soluopotenajc This article was submitted to Molecular and Cellular Pathology, a section of the journal Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology Received 2021 Aug 26; Accepted 2021 Oct 20. Copyright © 2022 Fadil and Janetopoulos. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License. The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author and the copyright owner are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. Articles from Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology are provided here courtesy of Frontiers Media SA 