 The relationship between the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum and its endosymbiotic bacteria Paraburkholderia provides a model system for studying the development of symbiotic relationships. Laboratory experiments have shown that any of three species of the Paraburkholderia symbiont allow D. discoideum food bacteria to persist through the amoeba life cycle and survive in amoeba spores rather than being fully digested. This phenomenon is termed “farming,” as it potentially allows spores dispersed to food-poor locations to grow their own. The occurrence and impact of farming in natural populations, however, have been a challenge to measure. Here, we surveyed natural D. discoideum populations and found that only one of the three symbiont species, Paraburkholderia agricolaris, remained prevalent. We then explored the effect of Paraburkholderia on the amoeba microbiota, expecting that by facilitating bacterial food carriage, it would diversify the microbiota. Contrary to our expectations, Paraburkholderia tended to infectiously dominate the D. discoideum microbiota, in some cases decreasing diversity. Similarly, we found little evidence for Paraburkholderia facilitating the carriage of particular food bacteria. These findings highlight the complexities of inferring symbiont function in nature and suggest the possibility that Paraburkholderia could be playing multiple roles for its host. IMPORTANCE The functions of symbionts in natural populations can be difficult to completely discern. The three Paraburkholderia bacterial farming symbionts of the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum have been shown in the laboratory environment to allow the amoebas to carry, rather than fully digest, food bacteria. This potentially provides a fitness benefit to the amoebas upon dispersal to food-poor environments, as they could grow their food. We expected that meaningful food carriage would manifest as a more diverse microbiota. Surprisingly, we found that Paraburkholderia tended to infectiously dominate the D. discoideum microbiota rather than diversifying it. We determined that only one of the three Paraburkholderia symbionts has increased in prevalence in natural populations in the past 20 years, suggesting that this symbiont may be beneficial, however. These findings suggest that Paraburkholderia may have an alternative function for its host, which drives its prevalence in natural populations. KEYWORDS: farming, Paraburkholderia, Dictyostelium discoideum, amoeba, microbiota, symbiosis INTRODUCTION Bacterial symbionts have been found to associate with hosts across the tree of life, with often dramatic effects on their ecology and evolution. The roles of bacterial symbionts within their hosts can range from mutualism to parasitism and can vary based on host and environmental contexts, as well as on the length of the association and mode of transmission. Amoebae, a polyphyletic group of unicellular eukaryotes, serve as promising model systems for studying symbiotic relationships, particularly the bacterial transition from free-living to intracellular. When amoebae feed on bacteria, a selective pressure is exerted that favors bacteria with mechanisms to resist digestion. Hence, amoebae serve as intracellular training grounds for bacteria to evolve phagocytosis-resisting mechanisms, allowing certain bacteria to occupy amoebae as endosymbionts. Bacterial endosymbionts have been commonly identified in Acanthamoeba and Vermamoeba hosts, including lineages of Chlamydiae, Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Dependentiae, although the effects on their hosts are often unclear. For example, while some Chlamydiae symbionts live as energy parasites that are costly to their hosts, other Chlamydiae species provide benefits by protecting Acanthamoeba from the pathogenic Legionella bacteria and enhancing cell motility and growth.. The difficulty of studying the microbial community dynamics in natural environments dampens our understanding of the ecological contexts of amoeba-bacteria interactions, which makes inferring the function of a particular symbiont in its host a challenge. The social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum has gained traction as a model organism to study host cell-bacteria interactions in laboratory settings. Social amoebae are soil-dwelling protists that have unique life cycles that involve the transition from a single-cellular state to a multicellular state when their bacterial food source is depleted. Tens of thousands of amoeba cells aggregate to ultimately form a fruiting body, which consists of the following two primary structures: the sorus, a structure used to house spores, and the stalk, which is composed of dead cells that differentiated to support the sorus. It was previously thought that sentinel cells, which perform immune-like functions, cleared all bacteria from the amoeba fruiting body throughout the social cycle, as evidenced by the inability to culture bacteria from many laboratory-isolated D. discoideum clones. Recent studies, however, have shown that, in nature, D. discoideum harbors microbiota consisting of both transient and persistent bacterial symbionts, belonging to the phyla Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Chlamydiae, and Acidobacteria. This recent characterization of the D. discoideum microbiota has expanded its potential to serve as a model system for studies pertaining to microbiome formation and maintenance. Some evidence suggests that D. discoideum may play an active role in its microbiota formation by secreting lectin proteins that bind bacteria during the social cycle. In natural populations of D. discoideum, the most widespread and persistent bacterial symbionts are Paraburkholderia, Chlamydiae, and Amoebophilus. Although the functions of these symbionts in natural populations are largely unknown, the Paraburkholderia farming symbionts have been the best characterized. The phenomenon of farming was demonstrated primarily in laboratory experiments by comparing the ability of Paraburkholderia -infected and -uninfected D. discoideum to grow when a sorus was plated without food bacteria. Paraburkholderia bacteria are inedible, but they allow bacterial food carriage that is presumed to benefit the amoeba in nature if the spores are dispersed to an area that is scarce in food bacteria, as the soil could be seeded with the carried bacteria. There is, however, an infection cost, as Paraburkholderia -infected D. discoideum produce fewer spores in food-rich laboratory conditions. While many members of the Paraburkholderia and closely related Burkholderia genera form symbiotic interactions with a variety of plant, fungi, and insect hosts, only three Paraburkholderia species, Paraburkholderia agricolaris, Paraburkholderia bonniea, and Paraburkholderia hayleyella, have been found to confer farming and form persistent symbiotic relationships with D. discoideum. The variability in fitness costs and the extent of food carriage that each symbiont permits makes this Paraburkholderia - D. discoideum symbiosis context dependent, like many symbiotic relationships. Screenings for Paraburkholderia in natural D. discoideum populations have shown that P. agricolaris tends to be the most prevalent, followed by P. hayleyella and P. bonniea. Indeed, these differences in symbiotic potential likely translate to different host outcomes, which could be responsible for the differing levels of prevalence between each Paraburkholderia species. Measurements of fitness in laboratory settings have aided our understanding of the consequences of Paraburkholderia infection, but its role in natural populations is less clear. To better understand the occurrence and impact of this symbiosis, we used PCR-based screenings of D. discoideum populations to identify current symbiont prevalence, transmission patterns, and genetic diversity. Since symbiont transmission modes play a large role in determining whether a symbiont’s evolutionary trajectory will lead to mutualism, benign parasitism, or extreme pathogenicity, we looked for evidence showing whether P. agricolaris was environmentally acquired or vertically transmitted between social amoeba hosts. To investigate how Paraburkholderia might be conferring bacterial food carriage in a natural setting, we compared the microbiota of infected and uninfected D. discoideum. We hypothesized that if Paraburkholderia was indiscriminately facilitating the carriage of food bacteria, infected amoeba would possess more diverse microbiota. Alternatively, if Paraburkholderia was facilitating the carriage of certain food bacteria, perhaps indicative of D. discoideum feeding preferences, we hypothesized that Paraburkholderia -infected amoebae would have similar microbiota composition to each other. Inconsistent with our hypotheses, we found that Paraburkholderia tended to dominate the microbiota, often correlating with a decrease in microbiota diversity, and infected amoebae had no microbiota composition differences indicative of food carriage. Overall, our results provide insight into the natural history of the Paraburkholderia - D. discoideum relationship and further our understanding of the ecological relevance of the farming phenotype. RESULTS P. agricolaris remains prevalent in natural D. discoideum populations but does not coassociate with Chlamydiae or Amoebophilus endosymbionts. To identify the current prevalence of D. discoideum endosymbionts, we screened 244 D. discoideum isolates collected from the Mountain Lake area in 2019 for Paraburkholderia, Chlamydiae, and Amoebophilus. We then compared the prevalence of each endosymbiont in 2019 to that of a previous collection in 2000. P. agricolaris exhibited a prevalence of 35.1%, up from a 14.9% prevalence in 2000. P. bonniea was only found once in our sampling, resulting in a prevalence of 0.79%. P. hayleyella, which was previously identified to be 8% prevalent in 2000, was not found in our collection. P. agricolaris appeared to be stochastically distributed between each location and collection site, where prevalence varied from less than 15% at location 1 to greater than 60% at location 4. Chlamydiae, which was 19% prevalent in 2000, was found to be 58% prevalent in our collection. Amoebophilus, 37% prevalent in 2000, was found to be 18% prevalent in our collection. Pairwise Fisher’s exact tests were used to look for signs of positive or negative coassociations between P. agricolaris, Chlamydiae, and Amoebophilus at each location. No significant associations were found. FIG 1 Paraburkholderia and Chlamydiae are prevalent in natural D. discoideum populations. Pie charts indicate single and coinfection prevalence rates for each site sampled in the Mountain Lake, Virginia area. P. agricolaris is genetically diverse and shows evidence of recombination and environmental acquisition. To gain insight into the natural and coevolutionary history of P. agricolaris and D. discoideum, we investigated P. agricolaris haplotype diversity, genetic recombination tendencies, and transmission patterns. Phylogenetic analyses of LepA sequences revealed 10 distinct haplotypes, and placement of previous P. agricolaris sequences showed that 7 of these haplotypes had not been previously identified. Haplotype 7 was the only haplotype found in amoebae from multiple locations, and pairwise F ST comparisons showed that the locations harboring haplotype 7 were the most similar in terms of P. agricolaris genetic composition. Furthermore, up to 5 haplotypes were identified in amoebae from a single soil sample. Using concatenated 16S rRNA and LepA sequences, we identified two putative interlocus recombination events, both between haplotypes 2 and 9. We used the presence of a P. agricolaris haplotype infecting multiple amoebae species as evidence of environmental acquisition. In addition to infecting D. discoideum, haplotype 3 was identified in Dictyostelium purpureum, haplotype 4 was identified in Dictyostelium mucoroides, haplotype 8 was identified in Heterostelium pallidum, and haplotype 7 was identified in Dictyostelium giganteum, H. pallidum, Polysphondylium violaceum, and D. mucoroides. FIG 2 Phylogenetic evidence for environmental acquisition of P. agricolaris. Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of P. agricolaris haplotypes constructed from the LepA housekeeping gene. Colored boxes represent every amoeba species found to contain the corresponding... Paraburkholderia symbionts dominate the D. discoideum microbiota, and infection correlates with a general decrease in microbiota diversity. Our investigation of the impacts of Paraburkholderia on the natural D. discoideum microbiota was limited to P. agricolaris, as P. bonniea and P. hayleyella were not found. Overall, denoising of 16S rRNA sequences resulted in 130 amplicon sequence variants with a total frequency of 1,573,424 reads. These were represented by 6 phyla, 9 classes, 33 orders, 49 families, and 57 genera. The majority of sequences belonged to the group Burkholderia-Caballeronia-Paraburkholderia, which was identified to represent P. agricolaris based on Sanger sequences of the more variable LepA gene. Although we did not find P. hayleyella - or P. bonniea -infected D. discoideum in nature, we were able to gain insights on their impacts by culturing artificially infected D. discoideum on local soil. This yielded 168 ASVs with a total frequency of 2,135,808 reads. These were represented by 10 phyla, 15 classes, 49 orders, 77 families, and 140 genera. If Paraburkholderia infection somehow facilitated the carriage of random environmental bacteria, we posited that Paraburkholderia -infected D. discoideum would have a more diverse microbiota than uninfected ones. However, we found that P. agricolaris tended to dominate the D. discoideum microbiota, accounting for an average of 71.35% of bacterial community abundance, for greater than 90% of reads in the majority of infected samples, and for 76.86% of all reads. The D. discoideum microbiota evenness and richness were not significantly altered by P. agricolaris infection. However, D. discoideum infected with P. agricolaris did possess less phylogenetically diverse microbiota than uninfected D. discoideum. Laboratory inoculation of each Paraburkholderia species into D. discoideum yielded similar results. P. agricolaris, P. bonniea, and P. hayleyella each had abundances of greater than 90% in 13/19, 8/9, and 10/10 infected D. discoideum isolates, respectively. Consistent with the trend in Paraburkholderia abundance, laboratory inoculation with each of the Paraburkholderia species resulted in significant reductions in D. discoideum microbiota evenness, richness, and phylogenetic diversity, P ≤ 0.041061; Faith’s phylogenetic diversity, P ≤ 0.041759). P. hayleyella infection significantly reduced microbiota evenness when compared to P. agricolaris, but no other pairwise differences were observed between each Paraburkholderia species. FIG 3 Paraburkholderia infectiously dominates the D. discoideum microbiota. Bar plots show the members of the most abundant taxa within the microbiota of naturally infected D. discoideum isolates and artificially infected D. discoideum isolates. FIG 4 Paraburkholderia does not diversify the D. discoideum microbiota. Alpha-diversity box plots showing the Pielou’s evenness, observed ASVs, and Faith’s phylogenetic diversity for isolates naturally infected with Paraburkholderia and... Overabundance of Paraburkholderia alters the composition and structure of the D. discoideum microbiota. While Paraburkholderia infection did not diversify the D. discoideum microbiota, we thought it possible that Paraburkholderia might facilitate the carriage of specific food bacteria, altering the microbiota structure and/or composition. Beta-diversity comparisons using weighted UniFrac, which measures microbial community structure by considering the phylogenetic relatedness and relative abundances of each ASV, showed that the microbiota of infected D. discoideum were similar to each other and dissimilar to the microbiota of uninfected D. discoideum, F = 8.97892, P = 0.01; where significant PERMDISP results were negated by the clear grouping of P. agricolaris -infected microbiota in principal-coordinate analysis space). This is not surprising given the high relative abundance of Paraburkholderia. Beta-diversity comparisons using unweighted UniFrac, which measures microbial community composition by only considering phylogenetic relatedness and presence or absence of ASVs showed the effect of Paraburkholderia without directly considering its relative abundance. Here, we also saw significant differences between P. agricolaris and infected and uninfected amoebae. The impact, however, is unlikely due to carriage of specific food bacteria but rather to the high relative abundance of P. agricolaris corresponding with a reduction in microbiota phylogenetic diversity. FIG 5 High degrees of P. agricolaris abundance result in similar microbiota compositions among infected amoebae. Beta-diversity ordination plots comparing the microbiota of P. agricolaris -infected and -uninfected D. discoideum, where each point represents an... The contribution of P. agricolaris to the similarity between infected D. discoideum samples is more quantitatively highlighted via robust Aitchison analysis, which is a novel beta-diversity metric that is more adept at handling the sparsity of microbial community data. Here, Aitchison analysis uses centered log ratio transformations as opposed to relative abundances. Pairing log ratio transformation with the compositional Aitchison distances allows for better interpretations of microbiome composition and also yields insight into salient members of microbial communities that are responsible for sample clustering. Along with showing significant differences between P. agricolaris -infected and -uninfected D. discoideum microbiota. Robust Aitcheson principal-component analysis highlights the influence of P. agricolaris on the grouping of infected D. discoideum microbiota. D. discoideum inoculated with Paraburkholderia in the laboratory showed similar, yet more pronounced, differences when compared to uninfected D. discoideum. D. discoideum microbiota structure, determined using weighted UniFrac, was significantly altered by infection with P. agricolaris, P. hayleyella, or P. bonniea when compared to that of uninfected D. discoideum. Likewise, D. discoideum microbiota composition, evaluated using unweighted UniFrac, was altered by infection with either P. agricolaris, P. hayleyella, or P. bonniea. Microbiota compositional comparisons using Aitchison distances showed a clear distinction between the microbiota of Paraburkholderia -infected amoebae and uninfected amoebae. Furthermore, Aitchison PCA highlights the contribution of each Paraburkholderia species to microbiota composition. These results are consistent with the reduction in evenness, richness, and phylogenetic diversity observed in α-diversity comparisons. FIG 6 Overabundance of each Paraburkholderia species in the microbiota results in similar microbiota compositions among infected amoebae. Beta-diversity ordination plots comparing the microbiota of D. discoideum artificially infected with each Paraburkholderia... P. agricolaris positively associates with Rhizobiales in the natural D. discoideum microbiota. Although we did not find indication of an enhancement in bacterial food carriage by Paraburkholderia via compositional comparisons, we reasoned that food carriage could be indicated by specific coassociations with P. agricolaris. Therefore, we performed coassociation analyses using the SparCC method, which accounts for bacterial presence and abundance, and is adept at handling the sparsity of microbial community data. We identified only one positive association between P. agricolaris, represented by the order Burkholderiales and the order Rhizobiales, and no significant negative association. Overall, significant associations between other members of the amoeba microbiota were scarce. FIG 7 P. agricolaris positively associates with members of the order Rhizobiales. Heatmap showing significant coassociations between bacterial orders within the natural D. discoideum microbiota. P. agricolaris is represented by the order Burkholderiales. Chlamydiae is abundant in the natural D. discoideum microbiota but does not affect its diversity. Given the high prevalence of Chlamydiae in D. discoideum populations, we investigated how it might impact the natural D. discoideum microbiota. We found that the phylum Chlamydiae accounted for 21.57% of all sequence reads, making it the second most abundant group. The average abundance of Chlamydiae across infected samples was 43.34%, where Chlamydiae accounted for 36.86% of all reads in infected samples and for greater than 90% of reads in 8/25 infected samples. Chlamydiae infection was not correlated with microbiota evenness, richness, or phylogenetic diversity, P = 0.257608; Faith’s phylogenetic diversity, P = 0.213492). However, Chlamydiae -infected D. discoideum did have distinct microbiota compositions and structures, measured by weighted UniFrac and unweighted UniFrac, respectively. DISCUSSION While previous studies of the Paraburkholderia - D. discoideum symbiosis have worked with samples isolated from nature, exploration of the farming phenomenon has been primarily laboratory based. Therefore, we aimed to investigate this interaction as it might occur in a more natural context. It has been previously established that Paraburkholderia is prevalent in D. discoideum populations. Here, we expand upon these findings by quantifying Paraburkholderia prevalence nearly 20 years after an initial sampling. Our recent survey of natural D. discoideum populations showed little to no incidences of P. bonniea and P. hayleyella infection, yet P. agricolaris remained prevalent. Furthermore, we found evidence that P. agricolaris is environmentally acquired in nature, which is supported by its high degree of genetic diversity. While the presumed benefit of farming could drive this symbionts’ persistence, overall, we did not find support for our hypothesis that the Paraburkholderia farming symbiont would increase the diversity of D. discoideum microbiota. Rather, P. agricolaris tended to infectiously dominate the D. discoideum microbiota in nature. Artificial inoculation of each farming symbiont recapitulated this pattern, where P. bonniea and P. hayleyella also infectiously dominated the D. discoideum microbiota, making it unclear if food carriage is ecologically relevant. It is a challenge to quantify the farming phenotype in nature, as measurement of the phenotype has primarily been done in the lab. Laboratory tests of farming are generally in a controlled environment, starting with D. discoideum clones being passaged and cleared of natural transient bacteria and then provided with an ample supply of specific types of food bacteria. Paraburkholderia confers secondary food carriage under these conditions, increasing the microbial diversity. This food carriage is mostly extracellular and varies by Paraburkholderia genotype and food bacterial species. Recent work has shown that Paraburkholderia symbionts inhibit phagosome acidification, suggesting that food carriage could be mediated by the creation of a more hospitable environment for other bacteria that get ingested. In the soil environment, however, many fruiting bodies contain microbiota, both with and without Paraburkholderia, and in our study, Paraburkholderia did not increase the diversity of this microbiota. In fact, in our lab infection assay, where fruiting bodies were collected directly from the microbially diverse soil environment, Paraburkholderia significantly decreased overall diversity. Although PCR bias due to the presence of a highly dominant taxa could have influenced our diversity estimates if rare taxa are missed, the low overall diversity of the amoebae microbiota and the similarity in evenness between infected and uninfected samples likely reduces this issue. Other effects that Paraburkholderia have on the microbiota are less clear. Although Paraburkholderia does not increase the diversity of the microbiome, we cannot rule out the possibility that it causes an increase in overall microbial load, which could allow an increase in other edible bacteria. We did observe that Paraburkholderia -infected amoebae had compositionally similar microbiota, which could be consistent with farming if Paraburkholderia favored the carriage of particular bacteria more likely to be food. These compositional changes, however, were most likely due to a decrease in phylogenetic diversity correlated with Paraburkholderia infection. Given the abundant natural microbiota of D. discoideum and other social amoeba species in the absence of Paraburkholderia infection, the potential benefits of food carriage are likely not specific to Paraburkholderia -infected amoebas. The only other significant effect of Paraburkholderia on the microbiota was its positive coassociation with Rhizobiales. While the implications of this association are unclear, it merits further investigation, given observations of similar patterns in experimental studies and the importance of Rhizobiales in the soil environment. Paraburkholderia may have alternative benefits that increase host fitness. A previous study has demonstrated that D. discoideum spore production is significantly reduced when exposed to the toxin ethidium bromide but is not impacted under the same conditions when harboring Paraburkholderia. While this study suggested that farming-associated bacteria overcompensated for fewer sentinel cells produced by Paraburkholderia -infected hosts, the dominance of Paraburkholderia in the amoeba microbiota could suggest Paraburkholderia itself plays a role in detoxification. Such roles are often assumed by Burkholderia symbionts of both insects and fungi. For example, the bean bug Riptortus pedestris harbors Burkholderia symbionts that protect their host from the harmful effects of the insecticide fenitrothion, and other Burkholderia symbionts protect their fungal hosts from a variety of antifungal agents. Alternatively, it is possible that P. agricolaris competitively excludes other potentially detrimental bacteria from infecting the amoeba fruiting body, just as certain Burkholderia symbionts outcompete nonnative symbionts in the crypt of the bean bug Riptortus pedestris. One limitation to this study is that sequencing of the 16S amplicon does not allow for in-depth classification or functional potential of the Paraburkholderia symbionts or the rest of the microbiota. Future studies should employ metagenomic and/or metatranscriptomic approaches to test these hypotheses. There is conflicting evidence as to whether these Paraburkholderia - D. discoideum symbioses are coevolved mutualisms. The prevalence of P. agricolaris in nature is consistent with beneficial effects that outweighs any cost of infection, as would be seen in a mutualism. However, this high degree of prevalence could also be attributed to a more parasitic relationship. Likewise, finding almost no incidence of P. bonniea or P. hayleyella infection could indicate their detriment or lack of relevance to host fitness. More time points would be needed to establish this trend ecologically. Indeed, some P. hayleyella have a demonstrably large fitness cost in laboratory assays, though P. bonniea has not been reported to significantly impact D. discoideum spore production. Many long-term coevolved mutualisms lack horizontal transmission, and the symbiont genomes degrade as they adapt to living solely inside their host and vertical transmission. However, P. agricolaris possesses a larger genome than both P. bonniea and P. hayleyella. Due to this larger genome, P. agricolaris can utilize a wider diversity of carbon sources than its counterparts, which makes it more similar to other free-living Paraburkholderia and Burkholderia relatives. It also infects a smaller proportion of spores than the other Paraburkholderia symbiont species, suggesting that it is not strongly dependent on vertical transmission. P. bonniea and P. hayleyella, which infect a larger proportion of spores in laboratory experiments, may be more reliant on vertical transmission in nature, as their smaller genomes suggest that they may not be as capable of living freely in the soil. It is also possible that P. agricolaris is simply prevalent in D. discoideum populations because it is prevalent in, and subsequently acquired from, the soil environment. This is supported by the findings of Sallinger et al., where P. agricolaris was detectable in relatively high frequency in bulk soil sample from which amoebae were cultured. Environmental acquisition could explain the high genetic diversity of P. agricolaris in natural populations, which differs from the pattern of a single beneficial haplotype sweeping through a population after initial infection, as often occurs in insect symbionts. Here, P. agricolaris would not be subjected to the population bottleneck and subsequent loss of genetic diversity elicited by vertical transmission. Additionally, a wider diversity of P. agricolaris haplotypes could be acquired from the soil upon initial infection. The intracellular and extracellular occupation of P. agricolaris makes it both horizontally and vertically transmissible, a pattern that has been observed in insects, where the oriental chinch bug obtains its Burkholderia symbiont from both parent and environment. It is also consistent with the observation of these same Paraburkholderia haplotypes infecting other, distantly related co-occurring species of social amoebae. This acquisition could be driven by either the host or bacteria. The ease of environmental acquisition of P. agricolaris may ultimately lessen the pressure to develop and maintain vertical transmission and limit coevolution. Such patterns have also been observed in symbioses between Burkholderia and broad-headed insects, where acquisition of Burkholderia from the environment dampens coevolutionary dynamics. Recent evidence has also suggested that environmental factors could impact Paraburkholderia prevalence, where P. hayleyella infection provided additional detriment to D. discoideum under artificial warming conditions. Therefore, our findings regarding symbiont prevalence may not be generalizable to other D. discoideum populations occurring in different soil environments. However, the environmental parameters that impact this symbiosis merit further investigation. Even within our subsampling, the symbiont prevalence was highly variable, suggesting that differences in microhabitat may have large effects. Additional sampling of different geographic locations at different times of year may help to elucidate these patterns. Like Paraburkholderia, we found that Chlamydiae is highly prevalent in natural populations, though the reasons for this are less clear. Laboratory studies of Chlamydiae in D. discoideum found no fitness cost of infection, but potential benefits have yet to be explored. Like Paraburkholderia, Chlamydiae was overabundant in the microbiota that it occupied, resulting in compositional uniformity. Coassociation analyses within the microbiota showed positive associations between the order Chlamydiales and the orders Flavobacteriales and Peptostreptococcus, suggesting that this bacterium could be altering the social amoeba microbiota in meaningful ways. The high prevalence of Chlamydiae in natural populations suggests an ecological relevance for this symbiont that is worth further studying. Overall, the variability regarding P. agricolaris localization, prevalence, transmission patterns, genetic diversity, and costs of infection might indicate movement along the parasitism-mutualism spectrum. Such dynamics can be difficult to study in more complex systems. Thus, the D. discoideum - Paraburkholderia symbiosis, as well as the D. discoideum microbiota as a whole, offers a useful model for understanding symbiotic development. Future studies that aim to identify specific environmental parameters and soil conditions that either facilitate or hinder this association will be useful in providing further ecological contextualization. Furthermore, future studies that aim to investigate additional functions of Paraburkholderia will further our understanding of the context-dependent nature of symbiotic interactions in general. MATERIALS AND METHODS Soil collection and amoeba culturing. We resampled natural D. discoideum populations in the Virginia Mountain Lake area 19 years after the initial collection. Soil, sampled from below the leaf litter layer of the forest floor or rotting logs, was collected from 10 different sites at each of four separate locations and was plated on hay agar within 96 h. After 4 to 5 days of growth time, dictyostelid species were morphologically identified via stereomicroscopy, and 2 to 5 sori from each patch were collected with sterile pipette tips and suspended into 250 μL of KK2 spore buffer. A patch of morphologically similar fruiting bodies growing close together, separate from others, was assumed to be the result from the proliferation of a single amoeba cell and is considered an individual isolate. Every patch of D. discoideum, identified by the presence of a basal disc at the base of its stalk, was collected, as well as other social amoeba species, including D. mucoroides, D. giganteum, D. purpureum, Heterostelium pallidum, and Polysphondylium violaceum. We then used 100 μL of the suspended fruiting bodies for “passaging,” replating onto SM/5 agar with the addition of 200 μL of a 1.5 optical density at 600 nm suspension of Klebsiella pneumoniae food bacteria to increase the quantity of fruiting bodies per individual isolate to obtain enough DNA for next-generation sequencing. A portion of the 18S rRNA gene was sequenced for subsets of amoebae to confirm species identity. Symbiont screening. DNA from 15 to 20 fruiting bodies from passaged SM/5 plates was extracted using a Chelex/proteinaseK protocol. PCRs were conducted to screen each sample for Dictyostelium DNA by amplifying approximately 500 bp of the 18S rRNA gene. To screen for Paraburkholderia, we used the Paraburkholderia -specific primers that amplify 550 bp of the 16S rRNA gene. PCR primers and amplification conditions are listed in Table S3 in the supplemental material. Each PCR screen included a positive control, two negative PCR controls, and two negative DNA extraction controls to ensure there was no contamination. Positive samples were sent for Sanger sequencing at Eurofins Genomics. Sequences were trimmed using Geneious v8, and NCBI BLAST was used to classify Paraburkholderia species. In samples that were identified as either P. agricolaris, P. bonniea, or P. hayleyella, 780 bp of the LepA gene, which allows for better species level identification and haplotype resolution, was then amplified and sequenced. Additionally, we screened for Chlamydiae and Amoebophilus using symbiont-specific primers for each. P. agricolaris phylogeny, population genetics, and coinfection statistics. LepA sequences were used to construct a phylogenetic tree of P. agricolaris haplotypes. Overlapping peaks in the DNA chromatogram at a single site indicated coinfections with multiple haplotypes and were excluded from analysis because haplotype designations could not be resolved. A maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree was constructed in MEGA7 using the Tamura 3-parameter + G + I model with 1,000 bootstrap replicates. LepA haplotypes from Haselkorn et al. were also placed in the phylogeny to determine if the ones from our study had been previously identified. To examine P. agricolaris genetic differentiation between D. discoideum populations, pairwise F ST values were calculated in DNAsp using noncoinfected LepA sequences. Concatenated 16S rRNA and LepA sequences were then used to look for evidence of both inter- and intragenic recombination using the recombination detection program. Pairwise Fisher exact tests between P. agricolaris, Chlamydiae, and Amoebophilus were used to investigate ecological coinfection tendencies between symbionts, where alpha levels were adjusted using the Holm-Bonferroni method. Laboratory inoculations of D. discoideum with different Paraburkholderia species. D. discoideum was separately inoculated with each of the three symbionts, P. agricolaris, P. bonniea, and P. hayleyella to determine their impacts on the microbiome when grown and directly collected from local soil without the need for passaging. Bacterial symbiont solutions of these strains, which have been used in previous studies of the farming symbiosis, were made by resuspending stationary-phase bacterial colonies from SM/5 plates into KK2 buffer at a concentration of 1.5 OD 600 and combined with 1.5 OD 600 K. pneumoniae suspensions at a final volume of 95%/5% K. pneumoniae / Paraburkholderia. We then plated 10 5 D. discoideum spores with 200 μL of each Paraburkholderia solution onto SM/5 plates and incubated at room temperature. Amoebae were collected after 1 week of growth time, and Paraburkholderia was cultured from fruiting bodies to confirm infection. Ten fruiting bodies from each plate were resuspended in KK2 spore buffer and passaged again to confirm persistent Paraburkholderia infection. Paraburkholderia -infected D. discoideum lines were then inoculated into 2.5 g of local soil collected from a natural area maintained by the Department of Biology at the University of Central Arkansas. Soil contents were subsequently plated as described above, and D. discoideum fruiting bodies were collected directly from these soil pates after 1 week of growth. DNA extractions for microbiota analyses. A subset of natural samples that were infected with P. agricolaris and did not show evidence of coinfection were selected for microbiome sequencing. Approximately 50 sori were collected from passaged SM/5 plates or soil plates, placed into HyClone water, and stored at −80°C until DNA was extracted. DNA extractions were performed using the Qiagen DNeasy PowerSoil Pro kit and the Qiagen DNeasy UltraClean Pro kit according to manufacturer’s protocols. Samples were then sent for sequencing to Argonne National Laboratories. Here, samples were sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform using 250-bp paired-end cycles. Library preparation and sequencing were performed using the 799F-1115R primer set, which amplifies the V5-V6 region of the 16S rRNA gene, as the more commonly used primers for the V4 region preferentially amplify amoeba mitochondrial DNA. Sequences were returned as FASTQ files with adaptors removed. Illumina sequence processing. Illumina sequence files were demultiplexed and analyzed in QIIME2. Chimeric sequences were removed, primers were trimmed, and paired ends were joined using the q2-dada2 plugin. The q2-RESCRIPt plugin was used to curate the SSU SILVA NR99 database, and to train a custom V5-V6 amplicon-specific classifier. The classify-sklearn method was used in the q2-feature-classifier plugin to assign taxonomic names to amplicon sequence variants. ASVs classified as either mitochondria or chloroplast, as well as ASVs that did not classify to the phylum level were removed for downstream analysis. ASVs with a percent identity/alignment of less than 0.80/0.80 to the SILVA reference sequences were excluded using the q2-quality-control plugin. A phylogenetic tree for downstream analyses was created by inserting ASVs into the Silva 128 reference database using SATé-enabled phylogenetic placement, where all fragments were successfully inserted. Although the V5-V6 region of the 16S rRNA gene does not provide species-level resolution, in naturally infected samples, we identified the P. agricolaris ASV as the only ASV that was taxonomically classified to the group Burkholderia-Caballeronia-Paraburkholderia and was present in each of the samples that were predetermined to be infected with P. agricolaris. In laboratory-inoculated samples, symbiont ASVs were ascertained similarly. P. agricolaris and P. hayleyella ASVs were identified as the only ASVs that were classified to the group Burkholderia-Caballeronia-Paraburkholderia and that were present in each sample in their respective treatment groups. The ASV representing P. bonniea was classified to Pandoraea but was present in each sample in its treatment and showed relative abundance patterns that matched the other symbionts. Microbiota diversity analyses. After constructing alpha-rarefaction curves, natural samples were rarefied to a depth of 3,950, and laboratory-inoculated samples were rarefied to a depth of 4,000. This allowed us to retain 28 P. agricolaris -infected 16 uninfected natural samples and 19 P. agricolaris, 9 P. bonniea, and 10 P. hayleyella artificially infected samples. Alpha-diversity was evaluated by using the q2-diversity plugin to calculate average ASVs, Pielou’s evenness, and Faith’s phylogenetic diversity. Significance of each metric was evaluated using Kruskal-Wallis and pairwise Kruskal-Wallis tests. Beta-diversity was evaluated by using the q2-deicode plugin to calculate the Aitchison distances between nonrarefied sample groups. Weighted UniFrac and unweighted UniFrac were also used on rarefied data to evaluate beta-diversity using the q2-diversity plugin. Ordination plots were generated for each beta-diversity metric, and between group significance was evaluated using PERMANOVA and PERMDISP with 999 permutations and FDR-adjusted P values. When PERMAONVA and PERMDISP results were both significant, ordination plots were consulted to determine separation between groups. The feature table generated by QIIME2 was uploaded to to perform coassociation analyses using the SparCC method. Data availability. All sequences used to confirm Paraburkholderia infection and identity in natural D. discoideum populations have been uploaded to GenBank under accession numbers } MZ395652 to } MZ395810. Sequences used for P. agricolaris haplotype analyses have been uploaded under accession numbers } MZ399634 to } MZ399696. Next-generation 16S rRNA sequences obtained for microbiota comparisons have been uploaded as BioProject number PRJNA737516. Sequences used to confirm amoeba species identity were uploaded to GenBank under accession numbers } MZ396209 to } MZ396243. 